What is frustrating people, me included, is that democratic action affects elections, but what we get then from political leaders is greenwash.”
Although he doesn’t tell us what the second or third action is, he has turned up in a British court to defend six activists who damaged a coal power station. He argues that we need “more people chaining themselves to coal plants,” a point repeated by Gore.
The Nobel laureate in economics Paul Krugman goes further.
After the narrow passage of the Waxman-Markey climate-change bill in the United States House of Representatives, Krugman said that there was no justification for a vote against it. He called virtually all of the members who voted against it, “climate deniers” who were committing “treason against the planet.”
Krugman said that the “irresponsibility and immorality” of the representatives’ democratic viewpoints were “unforgivable” and a “betrayal.”
He thus accused almost half of the democratically elected members of the House, from both parties, of treason for holding the views that they do – thereby essentially negating democracy.
Less well-known pundits make similar points, suggesting that people with “incorrect” views on global warming should face Nuremburg-style trials or be tried for crimes against humanity.
There is clearly a trend. The climate threat is so great – and democracies are doing so little about it – that people conclude that maybe democracy is part of the problem, and that perhaps people ought not to be allowed to express heterodox opinions on such an important topic.
This is scary, although not without historical precedent.
Much of the American McCarthyism of the 1940’s and 1950’s was driven by the same burning faith in the righteousness of the mission – a faith that saw fundamental rights abrogated.
We would be well served to go down a different path.
Gore and others often argue that if the science of climate change concludes that CO2 emissions are harmful, it follows that we should stop those harmful emissions – and that we are morally obliged to do so.
But this misses half the story. We could just as well point out that since science tells us that speeding cars kill many people, we should cut speed limits to almost nothing.
We do no such thing, because we recognize that the costs of high-speed cars must be weighed against the benefits of a mobile society.
Indeed, nobody emits CO2 for fun.
CO2 emissions result from other, generally beneficial acts, such as burning coal to keep warm, burning kerosene to cook, or burning gas to transport people.
The benefits of fossil fuels must be weighed against the costs of global warming.
Gore and Hansen want a moratorium on coal-fired power plants, but neglect the fact that the hundreds of new power plants that will be opened in China and India in the coming years could lift a billion people out of poverty.
Negating this outcome through a moratorium is clearly no unmitigated good.
Likewise, reasonable people can differ on their interpretation of the Waxman-Markey bill.
Even if we set aside its masses of pork-barrel spending, and analyses that show it may allow more emissions in the US for the first decades, there are more fundamental problems with this legislation.
Is it really treason against the planet to express some skepticism about whether this is the right way forward?
Is it treason to question throwing huge sums of money at a policy that will do virtually no good in a hundred years?
Is it unreasonable to point out that the inevitable creation of trade barriers that will ensue from Waxman-Markey could eventually cost the world ten times more than the damage climate change could ever have wrought?
Today’s focus on ineffective and costly climate policies shows poor judgment.
But I would never want to shut down discussion about these issues – whether it is with Gore, Hansen, or Krugman.
Everybody involved in this discussion should spend more time building and acknowledging good arguments, and less time telling others what they cannot say.
Wanting to shut down the discussion is simply treason against reason.
How Trees Make Cities Healthier
WASHINGTON, DC – Last May, I had the dubious fortune of visiting Mumbai, India during the city’s hottest month on record.
Temperatures remained at over 40°C (104°F) for days at time.
The difference between standing in the shade of a tree and standing in full sunlight was like night and day.
Such heat waves are not merely uncomfortable.
They pose a serious health threat – one that is often overlooked when addressing extreme weather.
In fact, heat waves account for more deaths than any other type of weather-related event, killing more than 12,000 people worldwide each year.
The danger is particularly pronounced in cities, where the “urban heat island” effect results in temperatures as much as 12°C higher than in less-developed areas nearby.
And the issue is not confined to tropical cities like Mumbai.
In August 2003, a devastating heat wave across Europe killed more than 3,000 people in Paris alone.
Making matters worse, cities tend to have higher rates of air pollution, especially fine particulate matter (PM) resulting from the combustion of fossil fuels and biomass, which contributes to up to three million deaths every year.
For many city residents, the greatest health and safety threat is the air around them.
Already, the World Health Organization estimates that 92% of the world’s population is exposed to dangerous air pollution.
Given rapid urbanization – up to 70% of all people will live in cities by 2050 – the rate of exposure to higher levels of pollution is rising rapidly.
But urbanization doesn’t have to create a health crisis.
In fact, there is a beautifully simple action that municipal leaders can take to reduce both extreme heat and air pollution: plant more trees.
Trees and other vegetation naturally cool the air around them by shading surfaces and releasing water vapor.
Moreover, their leaves act as filters, reducing PM levels in the surrounding 30 meters (nearly 100 feet) by as much as one-quarter.
It is a one-two punch of environmental action.
My organization, The Nature Conservancy, has carried out a study of 245 cities around the world that stand to benefit from tree-planting initiatives, estimating their potential return on investment in terms of both temperature and PM.
Given that the most significant effects of trees are highly localized, we found that densely populated megacities in Pakistan, India, and other parts of South and Southeast Asia would benefit most.
The highly localized effects of trees mean that planting them can provide highly targeted benefits, even in cities that ostensibly have plenty of green space.
Consider Louisville, Kentucky.
With its lush parks and shaded neighborhoods, it would appear to have little in common with Mumbai or Karachi.
Yet there are neighborhoods in Louisville with minimal tree cover, making the city one of the fastest-growing heat islands in the United States – and prompting The Nature Conservancy to initiate a targeted tree-planting effort.
Countless other neighborhoods worldwide could benefit from similar initiatives.
Areas with vulnerable populations – near schools and hospitals, for example – are particularly good candidates for such efforts.
Trees can even be used as a natural screen against pollution from highways or industrial areas.
Worldwide, $100 million of annual investment in tree-planting initiatives could provide as many as 68 million people with significant reductions in PM levels, while also providing 77 million people a reduction of 1°C in air temperature.
An investment equivalent to $4 per person could save 11,000-36,000 lives annually and reduce adverse health effects for tens of millions of people.
That return on investment is comparable to estimates for other strategies, such as industrial scrubbers, limits on automobile traffic, and use of light-colored building materials that absorb less heat.
All of these strategies have a part to play; trees alone won’t solve all of our heat and air-quality issues.
But only tree-planting addresses both urban heat and air pollution.
Trees also offer a host of other benefits for cities.
They provide habitat for wildlife, reduce storm-water runoff, and sequester carbon from the atmosphere, which helps to mitigate climate change.
There is also a growing body of research showing that exposure to trees and other vegetation has a positive effect on mental health, especially for children.
All of these co-benefits speak to the wisdom of greater investment in trees and urban green infrastructure such as parks and rain gardens.
The Sustainable Development Goals, which include a dedicated goal for sustainable cities, have established rising temperatures and urban air quality as urgent global issues.
Both will be discussed extensively at the annual United Nations Climate Change Conference, which starts next week in Marrakech, Morocco.
But these are also local issues, experienced very differently in each city – and even in each neighborhood.
As global action on climate change and sustainability moves forward, municipal leaders can take their own steps, starting with a targeted, localized, and replicable tree-planting strategy that improves the health and wellbeing of their residents.
Time to get planting.
Trends and Trendiness at Davos
The annual World Economic Forum is rightly perceived as a global “barometer.”
But the superb sunshine in Davos these days cannot avoid the shadows of the financial crisis that have enveloped the world, casting an atmosphere of gloom and doom on this year’s meeting.
Today, more than ever, the Forum’s proud motto, “Committed to the improvement of the world,” seems disconnected from reality.
It is not confidence that dominates Davos 2008, but rather a sense of impotence, if not bewilderment, at the world’s growing complexity.
In fact, Davos is less a barometer that helps us to understand the deep trends that are shaping the world than a mirror that reflects trendy ideas, worries, and perhaps gossip.
From formal debates and informal schmoozing with fellow members of the Davos crowd, one gets a sense of who the American establishment favors to win the next presidential election (Hillary Clinton), predictions for the upcoming referendum in Ireland on the European “simplified” treaty (it will be very close), and French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s international image (not good).
You do not need to go to Davos for this, but in the Swiss mountains these ideas acquire an aura of legitimacy – call it the “I was told in Davos” imprimatur – which explains why political and economic analysts and commentators keep coming back, despite the Forum’s combination of pomposity and intellectual vacuity.
The eminent people who pass through are given opportunities only for sound bites, developed thoughts.
As for business leaders, despite the hefty fees they must pay to become members of the “Davos Family,” they, too, keep coming because for them the Forum ultimately represents a time- and money-saving investment.
Where else in the world could they meet so many of their potential partners or customers, including heads of emerging states, in one place?
Of course, the danger of Davos lies in this concentrated commingling of the chattering classes and the real world of politics and business.
Conformism flows naturally from these encounters and creates a world in which everybody tends to think alike, as if a truly global community could create a global way of thinking, even if positions on how to address the current financial crisis are varied.
What is trendy at Davos this year is to view the crisis as reflecting two deep global trends – for example, the declining clout of the United States.
After the war in Iraq and the Bush administration’s slow reaction to Hurricane Katrina, America’s subprime mortgage crisis is perceived by many as simply accelerating the irresistible rise of Asia and the shift from a unipolar to a multipolar world, even if the wider financial crisis will equally affect Asia’s growth.
For countries like China or India, the scaling down of growth from 8% to 5% is nearly the equivalent of a recession in the West.
Yesterday, when America sneezed, the world caught a cold.
Today, when America catches pneumonia, can Asia only sneeze?
The second trend underlined at Davos is the return of the state.
In the latest issue of Foreign Affairs, Forum‘s founder and president, Klaus Schwab, asks “How can business help save the world?”
But, with the financial crisis hanging over Davos participants’ heads like the sword of Damocles, the question is becoming, “Can states and international institutions save business?”
The return of the state, even when it is the power of the European Commission to sanction Microsoft, is on everyone’s lips.
Such a return further underlines a growing skepticism about the market and its key actors’ infectious and dangerous greed.
This trend, if it is confirmed by reality, could signify the end of what Davos stands for: an open, global, and transparent world.
But is the world ready for a return to protectionist policies and nationalist reflexes?
Will today’s freedom and transparency, having led to undesired results, result in a return to restrictions on movements of goods, people, and capital?
In Davos this year, great hopes have given way to great apprehensions.
How can you pretend to be acting to change the world if you no longer understand it?
Trichet Takes Control At The ECB
The announcement by the President of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude Trichet, that interest rates would be raised at the next meeting of the bank’s Governing Council on December 1st,could be a defining moment in his presidency.
By pre-announcing the rate increase, which senior ECB officials call a move towards greater transparency, Trichet firmly demonstrated his leadership of the Governing Council.
Press leaks by dissident members had sowed confusion in the public’s mind as to the bank’s concerns and intentions before the announcement.
Even though a consensus had emerged in the Council that a December interest rate hike would be necessary, a handful of holdouts on the ECB Governing Council – some with their own very private agendas – leaked misleading and, in one instance, clearly false information to the press in a futile attempt to thwart the increase.
In an anonymous leak to a major financial news service, an ECB official falsely maintained that unanimity was needed for a rate hike, implying a single dove could stop it.
Infuriated by what he considered to be guerilla tactics, Trichet effectively silenced the mischief-makers by the bold stroke of pre-announcing the rate hike two weeks before the meeting.
This is not the first time communications has been a problem for the ECB.
On more than one occasion, under both Trichet and former ECB chairman Wim Duisenberg before him, press leaks and the tit-for-tat responses they engender, made the Governing Council sound more like a cacophony of discordant voices than a serious deliberative body.
Now, to his credit, Trichet has done something about this long-standing problem, although not without ruffling some feathers in the process.
The doves are furious about the pre-announcement, and some hawks – perhaps nostalgic for the more collegial style of Wim Duisenberg – regard Trichet’s move as “showing off” and “taking control.”
Indeed, a leading Dutch financial newspaper attacked the pre-announcement as a sign of Trichet’s weakness rather than strength, implying that he had lost control of the Governing Council.
This is unfair.
The recalcitrance of the holdouts against the consensus – a direct challenge to Trichet’s leadership – gave the ECB president little alternative.
What was he to do?
Let the holdouts undermine his personal credibility and that of the bank?
The unwillingness of frustrated minorities to accept consensus may well require the ECB president to take more control of the governing board than it has been used to in the past or, indeed, feel comfortable with in the future.
More than anything, the pre-announcement controversy demonstrates that a renewed spirit of consensus and collegiality in the ECB’s Governing Council is sorely needed.
Because Trichet’s pre-announcement of a moderate interest rate hike conjures up visions of a Fed-like series of small interest rate hikes over an extended period of time, the ECB president also pre-announced his disinclination to follow in US Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan’s footsteps in this regard.
Indeed, a case even can be made that with the new leadership at the Federal Reserve expected to embrace European-style “inflation targeting,” we may be entering a period in which the Fed follows the ECB on critical monetary matters rather than the other way round.
“Inflation targeting” means that a central bank puts the pursuit of price stability above all other objectives.
This is what the ECB does – and what the Fed’s Alan Greenspan does not do.
“Inflation targeting” also means the central bank follows certain specified rules.
This too is what the ECB does and Greenspan doesn’t do.
Ironically, the “inflation targeting” advocated by Greenspan’s nominated successor, Ben Bernanke, lies closer to ECB monetary policy than to the discretionary activism that the Fed has practiced during Greenspan’s long tenure.
Trick or Treat?
OXFORD – A new way of thinking about individual choice has taken the political landscape by storm.  America’s new president Barack Obama and the leader of the British Conservatives, David Cameron (just to drop a couple of names) have shown an interest in it.
Its intellectual and academic pedigree is impeccable.
It is said to be effective, evidence-based, and cheap to implement.
Most of all, it stakes a claim to a degree of philosophical coherence of which the various “third ways” of the last decade could only dream.
The novel idea, elucidated in Cass Sunstein’s and Richard Thaler’s book Nudge , is that skillfully controlling the way alternatives are presented to us can “nudge” us toward making the choices that our own “better selves” would make.
“Libertarian paternalists” like Sunstein and Thaler claim that we have two different ways of making decisions: one “from the gut” (called System I), and the other more deliberative and far more effective (called System II).
But, while System II choices may be more effective than System-I decisions, they are more “expensive” to make: one needs data, analysis, and concentration.
Only when the importance of the task warrants the effort do we shift gear and deploy the System-II heavy artillery.
This division of labor between the System-I and System-II mechanisms would work well were it not for the fact that our lazy and cheap decision-making mode tends to take over in situations that should command our fullest attention: choosing a pension plan or a health care scheme, for example.
As one can imagine, the results of this System-I coup d’etat are not pretty.
Old-fashioned paternalists have always been very well aware of this.
In these situations, liberal paternalists feel no qualms about taking control and forcing choices upon us (“Wear seat belts and enroll in the pension plan, and in the end you’ll thank me”).
The criticisms of this attitude boil down to a simple question: “Who is better equipped than I am to make choices about my welfare?”
Libertarian paternalists are different.
To make us choose what is good for us, they avoid fines, compulsion, and prohibition in favor of “nudges” – institutional arrangements that we could, in principle, easily override, but that, given our tendency to rely on System I, we end up going along with.
With a neat twist of logic, our cognitive imperfections are turned on their heads, and made to work to achieve System-II choices.
And, indeed, well-chosen nudges have been shown to be extremely effective in altering choices that make a substantive difference to the lives of many (say, enrollment in pension plans).
But here lies the rub: if the architecture of choice is truly so important in determining outcomes, does it really matter if manipulation rather than coercion is used to make us choose what someone else has decided is ultimately good for us?
What is gained by tricking rather than forcing people into making choices they wouldn’t have made?
Isn’t the power of the manipulator more insidious, and perhaps to be more greatly feared, than that of the policeman?
In short, what is so libertarian about “nudging”?
Libertarian paternalists offer a novel answer to these questions.
As long as choice engineering tricks us into making choices that our own more deliberate self would make , they say, manipulation is justifiable.
Nudges should be so chosen as to prod us toward those choices that we ourselves would make, if we would only sit down and think carefully about the matter at hand.
There are, unfortunately, some logical problems with this apparently elegant solution.
Is it really always so reasonable and effective to listen to System-II preferences?
According to neo-classical economists, the answer is a resounding “yes,” and, in many cases, they can point to substantial evidence to validate their claim.
Unfortunately, however, hyper-rationality does not always produce attractive outcomes when social , rather than individual , choices are concerned.
Indeed, sometimes it leads to results that are inefficient, “nasty,” or both.
The benefits of tax evasion may far outweigh the risk of getting caught, but imagine if everyone decided to evade taxes at the same time.
In these situations, the System-II decision maker has no tools to resort to in order to escape the sub-optimality (and social nastiness) of the rational decision.
It gets worse. Consider the following example.
I am an organ donor.
Thaler and Sunstein also believe that donating organs is a good thing.
Therefore, one of the “nudges” they recommend is to make organ donation as the default option in the case of a fatal accident.
But there is nothing irrational in having a very strong preference not to have one’s body used for spare parts after one’s death.
We cannot use System II to fault this preference.
How would we feel if we used the System-I decisional laziness about changing defaults to “trick” someone into a course of action to which she would have violently objected, perhaps on religious grounds?
Ultimately, there is a fundamental and unresolved accountability deficit in the way libertarian paternalists go about nudging us.
The Enlightenment idea that our System-II rationality can always point to an optimal choice about which every reasonable individual would agree clashes with the widely accepted modern idea that there is a plurality of reasonable choices.
If this is the case, who is to decide in what areas individuals can be fairly nudged by social engineers?
Whose and which choices are the nudgers suppose to encourage?
And who will nudge the nudgers?
These questions, I am afraid, still await a convincing answer.
America, the Balanced
CAMBRIDGE – When the United States’ current account fell into deficit in 1982, the US Council of Economic Advisers accurately predicted record deficits for years to come, owing to budget deficits, a low national saving rate, and an overvalued dollar.
If the US did not adjust, knowledgeable forecasters intoned, it would go from being the world’s largest creditor to its largest debtor.
Many of us worried that the imbalances were unsustainable, and might end in a “hard landing” for the dollar if and when global investors tired of holding it.
The indebtedness forecasts were correct.
Indeed, every year for more than three decades, the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has reported a current-account deficit.
And yet now we must ask whether the US current-account deficit is still a problem.
For starters, the world’s investors declared loud and clear in 2008 that they were not concerned about the sustainability of US deficits.
When the global financial crisis erupted, they flooded into dollar assets, even though the crisis originated in the United States.
Moreover, a substantial amount of US adjustment has taken place since 1982 – for example, the dollar depreciations of 1985-1987 and 2002-2007 and the fiscal retrenchments of 1992-2000 and 2009-2014.
The big increase in domestic output of shale oil and gas has also helped the trade balance recently.
As a result, the US current-account deficit in 2013 had narrowed by half in dollar terms from its 2006 peak, and from 5.8% of GDP to 2.4%.
This is a decline of two-thirds when expressed as a share of global output.
A symmetric adjustment has also occurred in China, via real appreciation of its currency and higher prices for labor and land.
China’s current-account surplus peaked in 2008 at more than 10% of GDP and has since narrowed dramatically, to 1.9% last year.
China’s trade adjustment in some respects followed that of Japan, the original focus of American trade anxieties in the 1980s.
I propose a third, more speculative reason why it may be time to stop worrying about the US current-account deficit.
It is possible that, properly measured, the true deficits were smaller than has been reported, and even that, in some years, they were not there at all.
Even for officials as highly competent as those at the BEA, it is impossible to keep track of all of the stocks and flows in the international economy.
Everyone knows that errors and omissions are large, especially when it comes to financial transactions.
Underfunding of statistical agencies exacerbates measurement problems, but it does not create them.
Less well known, however, is a particular pattern in the revisions of the US international investment position.
The currently available historical statistics show that in every year from 1982 to 2000, the initial estimate of the net international investment position was subsequently revised upward, as statisticians found overseas assets about which they previously had no way of knowing.
Since then, some subsequent revisions have been positive and some negative.
But, despite more frequent surveys of portfolio holdings in recent years, certain new asset acquisitions – for example, some held with foreign custodians – still most likely go unreported.
The numbers are potentially large.
The reported US current-account deficits from 1982 to 2013, based on subsequent revisions, total $9.5 trillion.
And yet the deterioration in the US international investment position over this period was not much more than half of that amount ($5.7 trillion if measured relative to the revised estimate for 1981).
Certainly a lot of the discrepancy is attributable to valuation effects: since 1982, the dollar value of overseas assets has increased repeatedly, owing to increases in the dollar value of foreign currency and increases in the assets’ foreign-currency value.
But part of the discrepancy also reflects the discovery of missing assets, some of which may have originated in the reinvestment of overseas income.
The missing credits also originally could have been earned in other ways.
For example, US multinational corporations sometimes over-invoice import bills or under-report export earnings to reduce their tax obligations.
Again, this would work to overstate the recorded current-account deficit.
Consider an (admittedly extreme) illustration.
If true investment income were double what is reported, the difference was reinvested abroad in the years 1982-2000, and those assets were discovered by 2014, that would explain about half of the upward revision in the US net international investment position.
If something like this under-reporting of reinvested earnings or other balance-of-payments credits has gone on in the past, it may still be going on today – especially with US firms becoming aggressive about arbitraging corporate income tax.
And if true investment income is indeed as large as double what is reported, the true US current-account balance entered the black in 2009 and has been in surplus ever since.
Is the Fed Playing Politics?
CAMBRIDGE – In his recent debate with his opponent Hillary Clinton, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump pressed his claim that US Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen is politically motivated.
The Fed, Trump claims, is applying overdoses of monetary stimulus to hypnotize voters into believing that economic recovery is underway.
It’s not a completely crazy idea, but I just don’t see it.
If Yellen is so determined to keep interest rates in a deep freeze, why has she been trying in recent months to talk up longer-term rates by insisting that the Fed is likely to hike rates faster than the market currently believes?
Central bankers have of course been known to help incumbents before elections, by allowing inflation to drift up and keep employment booming.
During US President Richard Nixon’s 1972 re-election campaign, he sternly lectured Fed chair Arthur Burns on the need for pump-priming the economy to help him defeat his Democratic challenger, George McGovern.
Nixon won resoundingly, but Burns’ policies helped set off the worldwide inflation of the 1970s and brought forward the breakup of the post-war system of fixed exchange rates.
The long-term effects were catastrophic.
Will Yellen launch a rerun of the bad old 1970s, when US inflation hit double digits?
I doubt it.
Although it is not hard to imagine that Yellen privately holds Trump in the same low regard he holds her, most observers see no signs that inflation is just around the corner.
True, some people still insist that if the Fed doesn’t urgently raise interest rates and rein in the money supply, the US economy will go the way of Zimbabwe (where inflation far exceeded 25,000% in late 2008).
But the argument that Fed balance-sheet expansion will translate into high inflation has been colossally wrong for the past six years.
Inflation in the US has been consistently below target and, even today, bond yields reflect deep skepticism about whether the Fed has the will or the capacity to sustain price growth at the official 2% target on a consistent basis.
Indeed, those central banks that have tried raising interest rates prematurely, including the European Central Bank and the Swedish National Bank, have been forced to reverse course, and the Fed wants to avoid that fate.
The US economy is performing far better these days, and the moment for raising rates further is likely near.
But to infer that an immediate start to further hikes is a no-brainer is ludicrous.
In fact, there is still a worldwide downward draft on interest rates, with the ECB and the Bank of Japan still very much in easing mode, as are many smaller central banks.
The Fed is already allowing some tightening simply by not playing along, and letting the US dollar appreciate.
To be fair, central banks are not immune to manipulation, and fighting off political pressures is an endless battle.
During the financial crisis, the monetary authorities were called on to assume temporary emergency powers, including massive purchases of government and private-sector bonds.
For most, including the Fed, there is still no clean exit in sight, and this has made the problem of political insulation more difficult, with or without an election.
Some believe the only salvation is a return to the gold standard era of the late 1800s, when governments fixed the price of their currency in gold, leaving little scope for political interference.
Unfortunately, gold bugs seem surprisingly – or perhaps willfully – ignorant of the chronic financial crises and deep recessions of that era.
Ultimately, the gold standard collapsed, after governments were forced to abandon it during World War I and thereafter were never able fully to re-establish public trust.
More forward-looking thinkers point to private cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin as the future of money, arguing that they take politics out of the equation entirely.
But this, too, is very naive.
Governments already can block cryptocurrencies from circulating in the legal economy by restricting bank access, imposing tax laws, and by also impeding retail stores’ ability to accept it.
(And, as I explain in my new book The Curse of Cash, Bitcoin can hardly be considered a long-term substitute for large-denomination bills.)
Yes, blockchain technology is very exciting and will likely have many applications in banking, finance, and across the economy.
But it is no guarantee against political influence on inflation.
In the long history of currency, from coinage to the advent of paper money, the private sector may innovate, but ultimately the public sector appropriates.
At the end of the day, the government will always be able to control the rules.
Ironically, the best way to insulate central banks from political pressure would be to expand their toolkit to allow for effective negative-interest-rate policy, though this will take time (as I also discuss in my book).
In the meantime, the Fed and other central banks will have to keep walking a tightrope that leaves them especially vulnerable to outside pressure.
Fortunately, the Fed has a chair right now who is able and willing to stand up to it.
Who Is President Trump?
CAMBRIDGE – Donald Trump’s stunning election victory has pushed the United States – and the world – into uncharted territory.
The US has never before had a president with no political or military experience, nor one who so routinely shirks the truth, embraces conspiracy theories, and contradicts himself.
All of this makes it almost impossible to know how he will govern.
But Trump’s looming presidency does have a precedent: George W. Bush’s.
Several parallels stand out.
For starters, like Bush, Trump did not win the popular vote, but may nonetheless assume that he has a mandate for sweeping change.
And the direction of that change may produce results that not even his supporters like.
Among Trump’s economic-policy promises, his fiscal proposals are most likely to be enacted: big tax cuts for the rich and increased spending on defense and other items.
The result will probably be the same as when Bush pursued similar policies: income inequality will widen, and budget deficits will grow.
Moreover, the stock market’s seven-year bullish streak may end.
And it is very likely that Trump, who attacked the US Federal Reserve’s easy monetary policy during his campaign, will quickly reverse that position and press the Fed not to raise interest rates.
Trump will probably be unable to fulfill his promise to increase the US economy’s export share.
And he certainly will not be able to bring back the manufacturing jobs that the US, like all industrialized countries, has lost in recent decades.
Income inequality will likely start widening again, despite striking improvements in median family income and the poverty rate last year.
A recession at some point during Trump’s presidency is probable, judging from Republican presidents’ remarkable historical track record.
Two recessions began during Bush’s administration; in fact, most of the recessions since the Great Depression began under Republican presidents.
Trump’s presidency is most worrisome on the foreign-policy front, where many potential disasters await.
We have reason to fear that miscalculations will lead to tragedies, just as Bush fumbled the response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack, failed to capture Osama bin Laden, and invaded Iraq.
America’s role as a global leader will surely suffer, as will the “soft power” that it previously derived from being a model of liberal democracy for others to emulate.
Meanwhile, Trump’s cluelessness will likely embolden traditional US adversaries, such as Russia, Syria, and North Korea.
The Republicans kept control of both the Senate and the House of Representatives, so Trump will be able to fulfill his promises to roll back Obama’s biggest legislative achievements, starting with the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare).
But this will be an interesting test.
How will Trump handle the backlash when people start losing their health insurance?
Trump and congressional Republicans will also try to roll back the Dodd-Frank financial regulations that were enacted after the 2008 financial crisis, thereby giving banks and other financial institutions freer rein.
And, beyond Wall Street, they will try to cut back on anti-trust and environmental regulations, especially those limiting greenhouse-gas emissions.
Finally, Trump will nominate conservative justices for the Supreme Court, which has had one vacancy since Justice Antonin Scalia died in February.
We should be thankful, however, that at least Trump’s more outrageous campaign proposals will likely never be enacted.
He will not build a “big, beautiful” new wall along the US-Mexico border, and Mexico certainly wouldn’t pay for it if he did.
Likewise, he will not ban Muslim immigrants, because doing so would violate bedrock American principles, and would be struck down even by a right-wing Supreme Court.
It is also unlikely that Trump will follow through on his proposal to deport 6-11 million undocumented immigrants.
But he will probably end President Barack Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which granted temporary work permits to many “Dreamers” (young people without legal status who grew up in the US).
Similarly, Trump may not actually tear up the North American Free Trade Agreement or raise tariffs dramatically.
Nor will he scrap NATO, other important alliances, or the Geneva Convention (authorizing the military and CIA to use torture).
Though Trump seemed to suggest during the campaign that he would do all of these things, he will inevitably be confronted with the far-reaching consequences of decisions that would destroy the global order.
The US is about to experience life under a fully Republican government led by a callow and mercurial populist tycoon.
Let us hope that voters hold the Trump administration and its congressional enablers accountable for the setbacks that Americans will suffer.
Америка экономикасына Трамптан не қажет?
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – АҚШ-та Дональд Трамптың таң қалдырарлық жеңіске жетуі бір нәрсені айқын аңғартты: америкалықтардың көпшілігі, солардың ішінде әсіресе ақ нәсілді ер кісілер өздерін керексіз болып қалғандай сезінеді.
Бұл жай ғана сезім емес, олар шынымен қажетсіз болып қалған.
Бұл олардың ашуланғанынан ғана емес, ресми мәліметтерден де анық байқалады.
Демек, бұрын да қайталап айтып жүренімдей, халықтың басым бөлігіне «қолы жетпейтін» экономикалық жүйені сәтсіз экономикалық жүйе деп санау керек.
Сонымен, сайланған президент Дональд Трамп бұл шаруа бойынша не істей алады?
Ғасырдың соңғы үштен бір бөлігінде Американың экономикалық жүйесі жоғарыдағы үркердей топқа қызмет етіп, жалпы экономикаға, әсіресе төмендегі 80 пайыз бұқараға зиянын тигізетіндей етіп қайта жазылды. Трамптың жеңісінің ирониясы мынада: ол өкілдік етіп отырған Республикалық партияның өзі жылдам жаһандануды қолдап, одан болатын жарақатты жеңілдететін саяси шектеулерге қарсы шыққан.
Бірақ тарих өз дегенін істейді: бұл күнде Қытай мен Үндістан ғаламдық экономикамен интеграцияланды.
Оның үстіне, технологияның жылдам дамып келе жатқаны сондай, бүкіл әлемнің фабрикаларындағы жұмыс орындарының саны кеміп барады.
Мұның мәнісі мынада: Трамптың жақсы ақша төленетін өндірістегі жұмыс орындарын қайтадан АҚШ-қа алып келетін еш мүмкіндігі жоқ.
Ол озық технология пайдаланатын өндірісті қайтара алады, бірақ онда жұмыс орындары аз болады.
Ол жұмыс орындарын да қайтара алады, бірақ онда жалақы 1950-жылдардағыдай жоғары емес, өте төмен болады. 
Егер Трамп теңсіздікті шынымен жойғысы келсе, онда ол өзі сияқты адамдарға емес, бүкіл қоғамға қызмет ететін жаңа ереже жазып шығуы керек.
Бизнестегі ең басты мақсат – инвестицияны арттыру, сол арқылы ұзақ мерзімді тұрақты дамуға жол ашу.
Трамп әсіресе инфрақұрылым мен зерттеуге көбірек қаржы бөлуі керек.
Таң қаларлық жағдай: экономикалық жетістігі технологиялық инновацияға негізделген елде зерттеуге салынатын инвестицияның ЖІӨ-дегі үлесі жарты ғасыр бұрынғы көрсеткіштен аз.
Инфрақұрылым жақсарса, бұл кенже қалып келе жатқан жеке инвестицияны арттырады.
Шағын және орта бизнеске, әсіресе әйелдер басқарған бизнеске көбірек қаржылық мүмкіндіктер берсе, бұл жеке инвестицияға серпін береді.
Реттеуші реформа қаржылық сектордың зиянын азайтатын шекарадан асып түсіп, бұл сектордың шынымен қоғамға қызмет ететініне көз жеткізуі керек.
Сәуір айында президент Барак Обаманың Экономикалық ақылдастар кеңесі біраз секторда нарық шамадан тыс шоғырланған деген қорытынды жасады.
Бұл – бәсеке аз, баға қымбат деген сөз, соның кесірінен халықтың таза кірісі азайып, жалақысы төмендейді.
АҚШ нарық күшінің бұлайша шоғырлануымен, соның ішінде ортақ экономиканың соңғы көріністерімен күресуі керек.
Американың байлардың (басқа ешкімнің емес) байи түсуіне жәрдемдесіп, теңсіздікке жол ашатын регрессивті салық жүйесі қайта реформалануы керек.
Ең алдымен капитал табыстары мен дивидендтерге ерекше қарауды доғару қажет.
Бұған қоса, Америкаға инвестиция салып, жұмыс орындарын ашатын компаниялардың корпоративтік салықтарын азайтып, бұлай істемейтін компаниялардың салықтарын көбейту, сол арқылы олардың салықты төлеп отырғанына көз жеткізу керек.
Өзі де осы жүйенің шапағатын көріп отырғандықтан, Трамптың қарапайым америкалықтарға пайдалы реформаларды жүзеге асырамын деуі сенім тудыра қоймайды, республикашылдардың дәстүрі бойынша, салық жүйесіндегі өзгерістерден көбіне байлар ғана жақсылық көрмек.
Бұған қоса Трамп мүмкіндіктерді теңестіруде де көп жетістікке жете алмайтын сияқты.
АҚШ-ты байлық пен кедейлік ұрпақтан ұрпаққа беріліп отыратын неофеодалдық елге айналдырмау үшін мектепке дейінгі білім беруді жалпыға ортақ ету, мемлекеттік мектептерге көп инвестиция салу өте маңызды.
Бірақ Трамп бұл тақырыпқа ләм-мим деген жоқ.
Баршаға ортақ өркендеуге қол жеткізу үшін қолжетімді баспана мен медициналық қызметті, адамның қадір-қасиетін кетірмейтін лайықты зейнетақы жүйесін қамтамасыз ететін, әрі отбасының табысына қарамастан әр америкалықтың өз қызығушылығы мен мүмкіндіктеріне сай жоғары білім алуына жағдай жасайтын саясат жүзеге асуы тиіс.
Бірақ, ірі тұрғын үй жобаларын қолдайтын (табыстың көбі өзі сияқты девелоперлерге түсетін) жылжымайтын мүлік магнаты Дональд Трампқа қарасам, оның «Қолжетімді медициналық қызмет» актісін (Obamacare) алып тастау туралы уәдесін еске алсам, миллиондаған америкалық медициналық сақтандырусыз қала ма деп қорқамын (Сайлаудан соң ол бұл салада абайлап шешім қабылдаймын дегендей айтты).
Ондаған жылдар бойы көзден таса қалып келген америкалықтардың наразылығы мәселесін қарапайым әдістермен тез арада шешу мүмкін емес.
Тиімді стратегия болуы үшін дәстүрлі емес әдістерді қолдану керек, ал мұны Республикалық партияның корпоративтік мүддесін ойлағандар жақтыра қоймайды.
Мәселен, америкалықтар әлеуметтік қамсыздандыру шоттарына (Social Security account) көбірек қаражат салу арқылы алаңсыз қарттығын қамтамасыз ете алады. Ал ауырғаны, бала күтімі, т.с.с. бойынша жан-жақты ойластырылған саясат америкалықтардың жұмыс пен жеке өмірдің арасында лайықты тепе-теңдікті қалыптастыруына мүмкіндік береді.
Сол сияқты, салықты уақтылы төлеп жүргендер ипотекалық несиенің 20 пайызын жинаған жағдайда қарызды қайтару мүмкіндіктеріне қарай үкімет берген қарыздан сәл де болса жоғары пайыздық үстемемен тұрғын үй құрылысын қаржыландыра алады.
Бұл төлемдерді табыс салығы арқылы бақылап отыруға болады.
Президент Рональд Рейган орта тапты азайтып, жоғарыдағылардың табысын көбейткелі бері АҚШ-та көп нәрсе өзгерді, АҚШ-тың саясаты мен мекемелері бұл өзгерістердің соңынан ілесе алмай келеді.
Жұмыс күшіндегі әйелдің орнынан бастап, Интернеттің дамуы мен мәдени алуандықтың артуына дейін қарасақ, ХХІ ғасырдағы Америка 1980-жылдардағы Америкадан мүлде өзгеше.
Егер Трамп артта қалғандарға шынымен көмектескісі келсе, өткеннің идеологиялық күресінен жоғары тұруы керек.
Мен сөз етіп отырған бұл жайттар тек экономикаға ғана қатысты емес, бұл – америкалықтардың ең көп қадірлейтін құндылықтарына сәйкес келетін, динамикалық, ашық әрі әділетті қоғам құру мәселесі.
Бірақ, бұлар бір жағынан Трамптың сайлау алдындағы уәделерімен үндес болып жатса, екінші жағынан оларға антитезис болып шығады.
Менің болжауым бойынша, артына көп нәрсе қалдырған лас жолдың ең шешуші тұсы – Рейган революциясының ауыр қателіктерін түзетудің орнына ережелерді қайта жазып шығуымыз керек.
Әйтпесе, жаңа ережелер жағдайды тіпті қиындатып, «Америка арманынан» бұрынғыдан да көп адам шет қалуы ықтимал.
America and the World in Transition
NEW YORK – In less than two months, the American political transition will be over.
The 45th president of the United States will settle into the Oval Office.
President-elect Donald Trump will become President Trump; President Barack Obama will join Jimmy Carter, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush as a living former president.
Speculation about Trump’s likely foreign and domestic policies is rampant, but little if any of it is meaningful.
Campaigning and governing are two very different activities, and there is no reason to assume that how Trump conducted the former will dictate how he approaches the latter.
We also do not yet know who all the principal advisers will be and how (and how well) they will work together.
But amidst this uncertainty, there are some things we do know.
The first is that Trump will be greeted by an inbox piled high with difficult international challenges.
To be sure, no single problem compares with the Cold War at its height, but the sheer number and complexity of difficult issues is without precedent in modern times.
Topping the list will be the Middle East, a region in an advanced stage of unraveling.
Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and Libya are all dealing with a mix of civil and proxy wars.
The Iran nuclear pact at best manages one aspect of Iranian power, and only for a limited duration.
The Islamic State (ISIS) may lose its territorial dimension; but it, along with other groups, will continue to pose a terrorist threat for years to come.
The plight of millions of refugees constitutes not just a humanitarian tragedy, but also an economic and strategic burden to countries in the region and in Europe.
And Europe is already confronting many significant challenges, including Russian aggression against Ukraine, Brexit, the rise of populism and nationalism, and low rates of economic growth.
Turkey poses a special problem given its increasing illiberalism at home and mercurial behavior abroad.
The fact that Syria’s Kurds have proven to be America’s best partner against ISIS adds to the complexity of the foreign policy choices that await.
East Asia’s stability is jeopardized by China’s rise and strategic ambitions, North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile advances, and a host of contested maritime and territorial claims.
In South Asia, there is renewed tension between India and Pakistan, two nuclear-armed rivals with a history of conflict.
Just as uncertain is the future of Afghanistan, where more than a decade of international involvement and assistance has failed to bring about a capable government or quell the Taliban and other armed opposition groups.
Closer to home, oil-rich Venezuela has many of the characteristics of a failed state.
In Africa, too, a mix of poor governance, low economic growth, and terrorism, civil war, or both is overwhelming many countries.
And at the global level, few if any rules or penalties for reckless behavior apply in important domains (cyberspace being paramount among them).
While campaigning isn’t the same as governing, Trump’s campaign has added to the difficulties he will face.
By running on a platform of “America first,” Trump has raised questions among America’s allies about the wisdom of continued reliance on the US.
The apparent demise of the Trans-Pacific Partnership has created unease in Asia and South America about US predictability and about whether the US will remain a champion of global trade or embrace something closer to protectionism.
Mexico, singled out for criticism by Trump during the campaign, faces a unique set of issues concerning both trade and immigration.
The incoming president and those around him will come under pressure to address all these issues and concerns quickly, but they would be well advised to take their time.
The priority for now and for months to come ought to be to staff up the new administration.
Some 4,000 positions must be filled.
The new administration will also need to learn to work together and review existing policies before it can decide on new ones.
There will be considerable focus on – and expectations built up about –the administration’s first hundred days.
But there is nothing magical about the first hundred days of a 1,460-day presidency.
It’s better to get things done right than to get them done by Tuesday.
Other governments would be smart to do more than watch and wait for the new US administration to sort itself out.
Allies need to consider what more they might do on behalf of common defense.
They can develop and share their ideas about how best to deal with Russia, China, ISIS, North Korea, and Iran.
Similarly, they can begin to think about how to protect and promote global trade in the absence of new US-led accords.
In this new era, the balance between global order and disorder will be determined not just by US actions, but also and increasingly by what others long aligned with America are prepared to do.
Preparing Asia for Trump
CANBERRA – Whether or not US President-elect Donald Trump behaves better once in office than he did on the campaign trail, America’s global authority has already taken a battering, not least among its allies and partners in Asia.
Exercising soft power – leading by democratic and moral example – will not be easy for Trump, given the disdain he showed for truth, rational argument, basic human decency, and racial, religious, and gender differences, not to mention the fact that he was not actually elected by a majority of voters.
And when it comes to exercising harder power – doing what it takes to counter serious challenges to peace and security – there will be little confidence in Trump’s judgment, given that almost every statement he made during his campaign was either wildly contradictory or downright alarming.
Maintaining security, stability, and prosperity in Asia requires a cooperative environment, in which countries secure their national interests through partnerships – not rivalries – and trade freely with one another.
The only grounds for confidence on this front after Trump’s victory is that he may actually do none of the things he said he would, such as starting a trade war with China, walking away from alliance commitments, and supporting Japan and South Korea going nuclear.
With little or no hard knowledge of international affairs, Trump is relying on instincts that are all over the map.
He combines “America first” isolationist rhetoric with muscular talk of “making America great again.”
Staking out impossibly extreme positions that you can readily abandon may work in negotiating property deals; but it is not a sound basis for conducting foreign policy.
Trump’s dangerous instincts may be bridled if he is capable of assembling an experienced and sophisticated team of foreign-policy advisers.
But this remains to be seen, and the US Constitution grants him extraordinary personal power as Commander-in-Chief, if he chooses to exercise it.
US leadership in Asia is a double-edged sword.
Noisy assertions of continued primacy are counterproductive.
China’s legitimate demand to be accepted as a joint rule-maker, not just a rule-follower, has to be recognized.
But when China overreaches, as it has done with its territorial assertions in the South China Sea, there does need to be pushback.
On that front, a quiet but firm US role remains necessary and welcome.
Shortly after former President Bill Clinton left office, I heard him say privately (though never publicly) that the US could choose to use its “great and unrivaled economic and military power to try to stay top dog on the global block in perpetuity.”
A better choice, however, would be “to try to create a world in which we will be comfortable living, when we are no longer top dog on the global block.”
That kind of language seems to be anathema for anyone holding high office in the US, at least publicly.
But it is what Asia wants to hear.
For Australia and other US allies and partners in the region, this presidential election makes it clear that we can no longer – assuming we ever could – take coherent, smart American leadership for granted.
We must do more for ourselves and work together more, while relying less on the US.
Trump will probably have more instinctive sympathy for Australia than he will for many other US allies.
We are seen as paying our alliance dues, not least by having fought alongside the US in every one of its foreign wars – for better or worse – over the past century.
And, as cohabitants in the Anglosphere, we are in Trump’s cultural comfort zone.
But Australia will be anything but comfortable if the larger regional dynamics go off the rails.
We should have learned by now that the US, under administrations with far more prima facie credibility than Trump’s, is perfectly capable of making terrible mistakes, such as the wars in Vietnam and Iraq.
We now have to be ready for American blunders as bad as, or worse than, in the past.
We will have to make our own judgments about how to react to events, based on our own national interests.
This does not mean that Australia should walk away from its alliance with the US.
But we will need to be more skeptical of American policies and actions than in recent decades.
Australia should become much more self-consciously independent, and assign much higher priority to building closer trade and security ties with Japan, South Korea, India, and especially Indonesia, our huge near-neighbor.
No one should give ground if China overreaches, and Australia should, now more than ever, work closely with our Asian neighbors to ensure that it does not.
But we must also recognize the legitimacy of China’s new great-power aspirations, and engage with it non-confrontationally.
We will all benefit from a common regional-security framework based on mutual respect and reciprocity, not least when confronting regional threats such as North Korea’s nuclear chest-beating.
We can only hope that Trump will dispel our worst fears when he is in office.
But in the meantime, Australian and other regional policymakers should adhere to a simple mantra: More self-reliance.
More Asia.
Less US.
The Trump Boom?
CAMBRIDGE – After years of hibernation, will the US economy rouse itself for a big comeback over the next couple of years?
With an incoming Republican administration hell-bent on reflating an economy already near full employment, and with promised trade restrictions driving up the price of import-competing goods, and with central-bank independence likely to come under attack, higher inflation – likely exceeding 3% at times – is a near-certainty.
And output growth could surprise as well, possibly reaching 4%, at least temporarily.
Impossible you say?
Not at all.
The economy already seems to be growing at a 3% annual clip.
And even steadfast opponents of President-elect Trump’s economic policies would have to admit they are staunchly pro-business (with the notable exception of trade).
Consider regulation.
Under President Barack Obama, labor regulation expanded significantly, not to mention the dramatic increase in environmental legislation.
And that is not even counting the huge shadow Obamacare casts on the health-care system, which alone accounts for 17% of the economy.
I am certainly not saying that repealing Obama-era regulation will improve the average American’s wellbeing.
Far from it.
But businesses will be ecstatic, maybe enough to start really investing again.
The boost to confidence is already palpable.
Then there is the prospect of a massive stimulus, featuring a huge expansion of badly needed infrastructure spending.
(Trump will presumably bulldoze Congressional opposition to higher deficits.)
Ever since the 2008 financial crisis, economists across the political spectrum have argued for taking advantage of ultra-low interest rates to finance productive infrastructure investment, even at the cost of higher debt.
High-return projects pay for themselves.
Far more controversial is Trump’s plan for a massive across-the-board income-tax cut that disproportionately benefits the rich.
True, putting cash in the pockets of rich savers hardly seems as effective as giving cash to poor people who live hand to mouth.
Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton, memorably spoke of “Trumped-up trickle-down economics.”
But, Trumped-up or not, tax cuts can be very good for business confidence.
It is hard to know just how much extra debt Trump’s stimulus program will add, but estimates of $5 trillion over ten years – a 25% increase – seem sober.
Many left-wing economics commentators, having insisted for eight years under Obama that there is never any risk to US borrowing, now warn that greater borrowing by the Trump administration will pave the road to financial Armageddon.
Their hypocrisy is breathtaking, even if they are now closer to being right.
Exactly how much Trump’s policies will raise output and inflation is hard to know.
The closer the US economy is to full capacity, the more inflation there will be.
If US productivity really has collapsed as much as many scholars believe, additional stimulus is likely to raise prices a lot more than output; demand will not induce new supply.
On the other hand, if the US economy really does have massive quantities of underutilized and unemployed resources, the effect of Trump’s policies on growth could be considerable.
In Keynesian jargon, there is still a large multiplier on fiscal policy.
It is easy to forget the biggest missing piece of the global recovery is business investment, and if it starts kicking in finally, both output and productivity could begin to rise very sharply.
Those who are deeply wedded to the idea of “secular stagnation” would say high growth under Trump is well-nigh impossible.
But if one believes, as I do, that the slow growth of the last eight years was mainly due to the overhang of debt and fear from the 2008 crisis, then it is not so hard to believe that normalization could be much closer than we realize.
After all, so far virtually every financial crisis has eventually come to an end.
Of course, all of this is an optimistic spin on a Trump economy.
If the new administration proves erratic and incompetent (a real possibility), dejection will quickly overwhelm confidence.
But beware of pundits who are certain that Trump will bring economic catastrophe.
On election eve, New York Times columnist Paul Krugman unequivocally insisted that a Trump victory would lead to a stock-market collapse, with no recovery in sight.
Investors who relied on his insights lost a lot of money.
At the risk of hyperbole, it’s wise to remember that you don’t have to be a nice guy to get the economy going.
In many ways, Germany was as successful as America at using stimulus to lift the economy out of the Great Depression.
Yes, it still could all end very badly.
The world is a risky place.
If global growth collapses, US growth could suffer severely.
Still, it is far more likely that after years of slow recovery, the US economy might at last be ready to move significantly faster, at least for a while.
Will Trump Get Trumped?
WASHINGTON, DC – This is not a city overflowing with the holiday spirit.
As the US Congress heads home for the holidays, there’s a sense that something ominous lies over the horizon.
People might try to avoid discussing the pending inauguration, on January 20, of President-elect Donald Trump but the topic rarely stays out of conversations for long.
At last week’s White House Christmas party for the press, reporters speculated about whether this might be the last such party for years to come.
It’s difficult to imagine that Trump, no fan of the press, would host such an event, much less stand stoically with his wife Melania greeting each individual guest, as Barack and Michelle Obama did for eight years.
One reporter joked that the next press Christmas party would be held at the recently opened Trump International Hotel down the street from the White House, and there would be a cash bar.
Of course, if the press Christmas party was the only precedent Trump and his team broke, no one would be too distraught.
But Trump has so far shown such indifference to rules and norms, such a disregard for limits, and such unpredictability, that the prevailing mood among Democrats and Republicans alike is one of uncertainty and unease.
But the concern goes beyond Washington: many ordinary citizens in the US and elsewhere genuinely fear the consequences of a Trump administration.
Given Trump’s capriciousness, many are looking to his cabinet for clues about the country’s direction over the next four years.
The results thus far aren’t comforting, not least because he’s shown a predilection for choosing generals to run civilian agencies – three thus far – and even more so because several of Trump’s nominees will, if the Senate confirms them, be heading agencies whose missions they have opposed.
Trump’s choice for Secretary of Education, Betsy DeVos, is an ultra-wealthy heiress whose résumé includes a disastrous effort to privatize Michigan’s schools.
Trump’s pick for Labor Secretary, Andy Puzder, is a fast-food chain owner who opposes raising the minimum wage to livable levels or expanding overtime pay; indeed, his company has run afoul of overtime laws.
Trump’s pick for Attorney General, Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions, cares little for civil-rights laws or immigration.
Then there is Trump’s choice to head the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Ben Carson – the retired neurosurgeon who endorsed Trump after bowing out of the Republican primary – is no fan of social programs or fair-housing initiatives.
Perhaps Trump thought that naming a black man to lead the dismantling of public housing, which largely supports African Americans, would be good cover.
To lead the Environmental Protection Agency, Trump has nominated Scott Pruitt – the Attorney General of Oklahoma, an oil- and gas-producing state, and an avid climate-change denier, who has brought several suits against the EPA.
Pruitt’s selection was announced soon after Trump’s transition team delivered a questionnaire to employees of the Department of Energy, asking whether they had attended meetings where climate change was discussed.
More recently came the stunning news that, after a protracted search, Trump has settled on Rex Tillerson, CEO of Exxon-Mobil, to serve as Secretary of State.
In his extensive international deal-making – which isn’t the same as diplomacy – Tillerson has developed a close relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin, toward whom Trump has been notably soft.
More worrying, the news of Trump’s intention to nominate Tillerson emerged on the same day that the Washington Post reported the CIA’s disturbing conclusion that Russia had interfered in the presidential election to help Trump win.
Trump also looks likely to name John Bolton – a bombastic neo-conservative who still defends the Iraq war and thinks the US should bomb Iran – to be Tillerson’s deputy.
Trump’s highly conservative cabinet choices – who include an uncommon number of billionaires – are not at all consonant with his campaign, during which he presented himself as the champion of blue-collar workers, the non-ideological businessman who would make the government work.
But his choices place him firmly in the camp of plutocrats with little concern for workers and the middle class.
Trump seems to think that if he offers enough bread and circuses, he can distract his supporters from the real direction his administration is taking.
He’s taken time off from managing his transition to hold a few rallies – which he apparently enjoys more than the chores of governing – and to pull off stunts, such as lauding his deal with Carrier, which manufactures furnaces and air conditioners, to keep jobs in the US.
But it took only a couple of days for the public to learn that Trump had saved far fewer jobs than he had claimed.
When the local United Steelworkers union president complained publicly, the famously thin-skinned Trump responded by getting into a Twitter spat, blaming the union president for the lost jobs.
That sort of thing won’t go over well with many of the white blue-collar workers Trump so assiduously courted during his campaign.
And his uncontrolled use of Twitter as his literal bully pulpit may wear thin.
Trump may also run up against more opposition than he expects in other areas.
As his administration proceeds to dismantle environmental rules, he’s likely to find that there’s a much stronger constituency for clean air and clean water than he apparently thinks.
The Democrats, in the minority in the Senate, will give Trump’s Cabinet nominees a tough grilling, potentially defeating one or two.
But the Republicans are the ones to watch.
Leading Republicans have already dissented from Trump’s threats to start trade wars.
If he pushes them too far, Trump may be a general with few troops.
Republicans’ disaffection could be enhanced if – as now appears likely – Trump’s private interests are not sufficiently disentangled from his public responsibilities, making him something of an embarrassment.
There’s nothing like a good scandal or two to discourage already unenthusiastic followers.
Trump’s campaign against Hillary Clinton should have taught him that.
Trump’s Train Wreck
WASHINGTON, DC – Donald Trump, the US Republican Party’s presidential nominee, has again shaken up his campaign organization.
In doing so, he is revealing more about himself and his so-called management style than he may want people to see.
Few presidential campaigns have featured such evident chaos and churn in personnel.
Two people who have never run a presidential campaign, and whose political instincts contradict each other’s, are now running Trump’s operation.
Kellyanne Conway, his new campaign manager, is a pollster who has been mining survey data from the mainstream Republican right for years (the party’s right wing is its “mainstream,” because its center is essentially gone).
During the Republican primary, she worked for the “super PAC” that backed Trump’s bitter rival, Ted Cruz.
Conway is a smart, tough partisan who is expected to be a steady and sensible influence in the campaign.
If she prevails – and Trump can stick to a theme – we’ll see a more reasonable Republican candidate.
On the other hand, Trump’s decision to appoint Steven Bannon as his campaign CEO foretells anything but steadiness and sensibility.
Prior to his appointment, Bannon was the executive chairman of Breitbart News, a far-right, hyper-nationalist – indeed white supremacist – online publication.
He is known to be a combative nihilist who will stoop to any depth to win.