And the rise of Kurdish military forces against them raises the possibility that a full-fledged Kurdish state will eventually emerge.
Meanwhile, the tenuous status quo in Israel and Palestine is crumbling.
With a two-state solution less likely than ever, the area is likely to experience the creeping consolidation of a one-state reality.
In the Persian Gulf, ongoing international negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program are but the latest chapter in a struggle over strategic hegemony, security, and economic interests.
And, though the world’s appetite for energy resources from the Gulf will not diminish anytime soon, the structure of influence may be set to change again.
When it comes to external power brokers, the United States plays the largest role, having replaced Great Britain by the 1970s.
It now must learn to cope with the growing influence of India and China, as well.
But it is the leading regional powers – Iran and Saudi Arabia – that have the greatest potential to transform the Middle East.
The question is whether they will continue their competition for regional dominance, regardless of its destabilizing impact, or become pillars of a new regional security structure.
Such a structure has become all the more important as the major external powers’ appetite for sustained involvement in Middle Eastern conflicts wanes.
Having learned the hard way that they cannot dictate regional political outcomes, Western powers – as well as Russia, China, and India – will likely limit their involvement to protecting their direct interests and, if necessary, containing regional threats.
Wherever the political and socioeconomic conditions of the short- and medium-term timelines fail to provide order and stability, the confessional, ethnic, or tribal identities that emerged over the longue durée gain prominence.
The extent to which identities are invented matters little, as long as their invocation helps to appropriate elements of history and harness them to current political goals.
Episodes from this timeline thus become as relevant as recent events.
The conflict over the succession of religious leadership following the death of the Prophet Muhammad nearly 1,400 years ago is the origin of the split between Sunni and Shia Islam.
The battles between the Fatimids and the Abbasids, the Crusades, the Mongol invasion, the Ottoman conquest, and, of course, Western imperialism all serve as points of reference for today’s struggles.
But these events provide more than explanation; they often provoke powerful responses.
Consider the Islamic State’s recent declaration of a caliphate in parts of Iraq and Syria.
Most Sunnis are outraged by the brutal behavior of the Islamic State’s self-appointed caliph, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, and consider his claim that he will eventually “conquer Rome” ridiculous.
Nonetheless, the symbols and “memories” from the longue durée that Baghdadi uses – such as the black flag of the Abbasids and the glorious stories of a time when the caliphate constituted a great power and a lodestar for all Sunnis – have an enduring impact.
Of course, these ideas would amount to little were they not backed by modern weaponry, and had the countries whose territory the Islamic State is seizing not failed to create inclusive social contracts.
But they imbue the Islamic State’s project with a powerful historical narrative that cannot be dismissed.
Navigating this narrative can be tricky for external actors.
They must neither ignore the longue durée nor believe misleading claims that the struggle is really over the legitimacy of opposing interpretations of the faith.
More generally, these actors’ actions in the region must never be shaped by the delusion that the Sunnis, Shia, or any other ethnic or religious minority is on their side.
One lesson common to all of the Middle Eastern timelines is that all local actors are on their own side – and more than willing to draw foreigners into their wars if doing so fortifies them against their enemies.
Syria’s No-Solution Solution
BERLIN – The Russian-American plan to eliminate Syria’s chemical weapons – now embodied in the United Nations Security Council Resolution 2118 – may open a more constructive approach to ending the country’s civil war, because the Security Council is also demanding that the long-planned Geneva II conference on Syria convene as soon as possible.
Rightly so: elimination of Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpiles and a political process to end the war must occur simultaneously.
As a practical matter, efforts to verify, secure, and eventually destroy Syria’s huge supply of chemical weapons cannot be implemented without at least a lasting ceasefire.
But synchronizing the two processes is necessary for other reasons, too.
Aside from the human suffering caused by Syria’s ongoing war, we should be aware of the potentially dire regional consequences.
Some people now warn of a “Lebanonization” of Syria – partition of the country into rival fiefdoms and quasi-independent regions.
But Syria’s fragmentation is not the only plausible scenario.
Indeed, the Lebanon metaphor is too benign.
Unlike Lebanon during its 15-year civil war, no regional power today would be able to contain Syria’s war within its borders.
As a result, it is much more likely that Syria’s disintegration would call the entire post-World War I (or post-Ottoman) Middle Eastern state system – also called the “Sykes-Picot” system – into question.
Such region-wide instability is not just a theoretical scenario; it follows from developments on the ground.
Lebanon’s established political contours already are beginning to blur under the relentless pressure of the Syrian conflict.
A zone of de facto control by Lebanon’s Hezbollah and Syrian regime forces has emerged between Baalbek and Homs, straddling the Lebanese-Syrian border.
Likewise, the fighting has created highly fluid conditions in the Kurdish-majority areas of Iraq and Syria.
Since the fall of Saddam Hussein, the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) in northern Iraq has effectively established de facto autonomy vis-à-vis the central government in Baghdad.
Regional and domestic developments could push the Kurdish authorities in Erbil, their capital, toward declaring formal independence.
With its oil income and good neighborly relations with Turkey, such a state would be viable.
Indeed, the KRG government has long made clear that it respects Turkish sovereignty and will not interfere with relations between Turkey’s government and its own Kurdish population.
And, if only for its own security, the KRG is attempting to extend its power, formally or informally, into northern Syria.
Regional acceptance of a Kurdish state-building project that transcends today’s KRG-controlled borders would depend, among other things, on the scale of the Kurds’ national ambitions.
From Turkey’s perspective, a confederation of Syria’s northeastern region with the KRG might be favorable to continuing domestic Kurdish unrest, much less rule by the anti-Turkish Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) along its border with Syria.
In contrast, any attempt by the KRG to establish a Kurdish corridor to the Mediterranean would certainly meet resistance, not only from Turkey, but also from other warring factions in Syria.
What, however, would Kurdish independence mean for the rest of Iraq?
This is not only a question of territory, borders, and oil, but also one that concerns the domestic balance of power.
With a Kurdish exit removing the third constituent element – besides Shia and Sunni Arabs – of Iraqi politics, the country’s sectarian polarization would most likely deepen.
Moreover, Kurdish independence could encourage demands for autonomy in the Sunni-majority provinces bordering Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia – a third region where Syria’s civil war is blurring international borders.
Social, tribal, and economic ties between the provinces of Deir al-Zour in Syria and Anbar in Iraq are strong and have strengthened further as control by the Syrian and Iraqi governments has loosened.
It is astonishing how many regional observers seem to expect, hope, or fear that such developments will somehow lead, almost automatically, to a “new Sykes-Picot” – that is, to the establishment of a new regional order in the Middle East created by today’s great powers.
(A Google search for “new Sykes Picot” in Arabic brings 52,600 hits.)
Such expectations are patently unrealistic.
Europeans and Americans have learned – and China, Russia, and others have learned from Western experience – that external powers cannot successfully engineer political arrangements or regional order in the Middle East.
Rather than pondering or devising new borders, regional and external powers need to focus their efforts on holding Syria together.
The planned Geneva II conference is a necessary first step.
To be sure, there are many reasons to be pessimistic about the willingness of Syria’s warring parties to engage in serious negotiations.
Indeed, no one – not Russia, the US, Iran, Saudi Arabia, or other external patrons of either the regime or the opposition – can guarantee that Geneva II will succeed.
But all of them could improve conditions for negotiations by sending the same message to their respective Syrian clients, namely that they henceforth exclude a military victory by one side over the other.
Thus, Russia and Iran will have to tell Syrian President Bashar al-Assad that they will not support his effort to seek a military victory.
Saudi Arabia, the US, Turkey, and others will have to tell the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces that it will not win on the battlefield; the Salafists must hear this message from Saudi Arabia, too.
And Turkey and Qatar, for their part, will have to pass the same message to the Muslim Brotherhood.
The message to all of these groups should be consistent: We will continue to support you politically, financially, and in negotiations with the Syrian regime, but we will no longer support a military solution.
This would be a strong incentive to go to Geneva.
Warring parties start to negotiate seriously only if and when they know that other alternatives are out of reach.
Europe in a Multipolar World
BERLIN – One aspect of the Ukraine crisis that both Russia and the West need to understand is that the rest of the world appears to be relatively unconcerned about it.
Though the West, along with Japan, may view the crisis as a challenge to the global order, most other states do not feel threatened by Russia’s annexation of Crimea or designs it may have elsewhere in Ukraine. Instead, many view this crisis as being largely about Europe’s inability to resolve its own regional disputes – though a successful outcome could bolster Europe’s global influence as a peacemaker.
As the Ukraine crisis unfolded, Russian policymakers and commentators talked about “the end of the Post-Cold War era,” while Russian Deputy Prime Minister Dimitri Rogozin even appeared to welcome the start of a New Cold War.
Such wishful thinking is predicated on the notion that conflict between Russia and the West would once again come to define the entire international system, thereby returning Russia to its former superpower status.
That is not going to happen.
As emerging powers’ reactions to the Ukraine crisis demonstrate, world politics is no longer defined by what happens in Europe, even when a major conflict is brewing there.
The international system has become so multi-polar that non-European states can now choose to follow their own interests rather than feel obliged to side with the East or the West.
Few world leaders doubt that Russia’s use of force to compromise Ukraine’s territorial integrity, change its borders, and annex Crimea violated international law.
China’s abstention in the subsequent United Nations Security Council vote clearly signaled its leaders’ displeasure with Kremlin policy.
But nearly one-third of the UN’s members sent an equally emphatic message by abstaining or not participating in a General Assembly vote condemning Russia’s actions.
Even Western-friendly governments – including Brazil, India, South Africa, and Israel – were not prepared to take sides.
The Indian journalist Indrani Bagchi referred to the abstentions as a new form of non-alignment.
Cynicism and schadenfreude may also be playing a role.
Raja Mohan, a prominent Indian strategist, notes that Europe “has never ceased to lecture Asia on the virtues of regionalism,” but now seems unable to cope with its own regional security challenges.
The implicit message from the new non-aligned is straightforward: Why should we care about a territorial conflict in Europe when you Europeans fail to act decisively on Palestine, Kashmir, or territorial disputes in the East and South China Seas?
Instead, many of these countries are calling on the West to de-escalate the crisis and, as an official Chinese foreign-ministry statement advocated, to “exercise restraint and refrain from raising tensions.”
That is good advice – and no different from what Europeans tell others in similar situations.
Unlike other regions of the world, however, Europe, including Russia, can be proud of its regional security organizations, such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); Europe needs to make them work.
The OSCE, for example, would be greatly strengthened if, using its wide range of diplomatic mechanisms (such as roundtable discussions and support for constitutional reforms), it succeeded in defusing the Ukraine crisis and thereby bolstered European security.
Doing so would also provide a powerful example of institutionalized regionalism that might serve as a conflict-resolution model for other countries.
Alternatively, if Europe is unable to resolve the Ukraine crisis with diplomacy, its global influence, and that of Russia, will surely fade.
Russia has reminded the world that it is possible to bully one’s neighbors and steal their territory using brute force; but, in a globalized, multi-polar system, this alone will not be enough to rally other countries to its cause.
And the EU, as a highly sophisticated paper tiger, would be no more attractive.
EU member states have no interest in letting their continent slip back into ethnic nationalism and power politics.
The Ukraine crisis is therefore both a challenge and an opportunity.
If Europe wants to remain a pole in a multi-polar international system, it must prove that it can pursue a common foreign and security policy, particularly in times of crisis and conflict.
That means that the EU must emerge from the Ukraine crisis with a stronger commitment to common defense and joint contingency planning, and a unified energy policy that can secure independence from Russian oil and gas.
But Europe must also show that it can, and will, defend the principles of rules-based international relations.
Maintaining and strengthening the pillars of Europe’s common defense is not a simple task; but multilateral security organizations like the OSCE are not made for easy times.
They are intended to protect members from manipulation and aggression, and in a way that can garner global support.
In this sense, Europe’s main task now is to leverage its already considerable strategic assets.
A Syrian Farewell to Arms
BERLIN – The Geneva II conference on Syria, set to begin in Montreux, Switzerland, on January 22, is unlikely to achieve its goal of forming a transitional governing authority with full executive powers.
But what it can do is launch a much-needed political process and, more important, produce a ceasefire agreement between government and opposition forces.
Only when the fighting has stopped can Syria make genuine progress toward a political transition.
Of course, Al Qaeda-linked jihadist groups like the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), which has become a potent force on the ground, and the Nusra Front will not and should not be represented in Montreux – not least because they will not feel bound by any agreement.
But this should not serve as an excuse not to pursue a ceasefire.
After all, even stopping the fighting between regime forces and some armed groups – that is, those that associate themselves with the Syrian National Coalition, or are at least willing to coordinate with the Free Syrian Army (FSA) and the partly Saudi-sponsored Islamic Front – would be a major achievement.
A ceasefire is critical, because the fighting serves the interests of the most brutal elements on both sides of the conflict.
This includes the core leadership of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, which is now supported by Hezbollah and Iraqi militias, as much as the ISIS, which is composed largely of non-Syrian fighters who are unconcerned about rebuilding the country or safeguarding its people’s future.
As in any civil war, such entrepreneurs of violence become increasingly likely to carry the day the longer the conflict endures.
They feed on their own atrocities or on those of their opponents to win support through fear rather than conviction – using videos to raise funds and recruit new members.
With skilled fighters and plenty of money and arms, the ISIS and the Nusra Front thrive amid persistent war and anarchy.
Meanwhile, the Assad regime benefits from the fact that parts of the country that it no longer controls cannot be called “liberated zones,” given the prevailing chaos and extremism in these areas.
A ceasefire would initiate a shift in this dynamic, allowing humanitarian supplies to reach the areas where they are needed most urgently, while halting the country’s gradual “Somalization.”
This would help to stem the flow of refugees – and the spillover of violence – to neighboring countries, particularly Lebanon and Iraq.
Furthermore, if the ceasefire held, it would facilitate economic reconstruction, while enabling moderate political actors and civil society to win back some power from the extremists – a shift that ordinary Syrians would welcome.
Indeed, people in jihadist-controlled areas are deeply unhappy with Al Qaeda thugs terrorizing them and trying to enforce their version of Islamic mores – so much so that the Assad regime increasingly appears to be a better alternative to continued warfare or an Al Qaeda takeover.
The problem is that, as long as violence prevents moderate forces from restoring local services and administrative structures, people’s capacity for resistance will remain weak.
International organizations could treat such structures as de facto authorities, supplying them directly with aid and also giving NGOs or United Nations investigators an opportunity to collect evidence of war crimes for future judicial or truth-commission proceedings.
To be sure, fears that a ceasefire could lead to a stabilization of the conflict’s frontlines, turning them into semi-permanent lines of division, are not without merit.
After all, a ceasefire is not a peace agreement; it would, for the time being, leave regime and opposition forces in their respective positions.
But having different authorities administer different parts of Syria is preferable to the absence of any responsible governance across large swaths of the country.
Moreover, a ceasefire would enable the FSA and its allies to coordinate action with units of the regular army against Al Qaeda bands, which would undoubtedly try to sustain the violence.
Even such limited cooperation would advance the “Geneva process” – especially negotiations aimed at establishing a transitional authority that would command the armed forces.
Given that the Assad regime has overwhelming firepower, its consent is vital to achieving a ceasefire agreement.
Responsibility for convincing Assad to stop bombing and shelling opposition-held areas would fall primarily on his international allies, Russia and Iran.
In doing so, they should bear in mind that it was Assad who led the country into civil war by choosing a military solution when high-level members of his own government and political party argued for a negotiated settlement.
Neither Russia nor Iran has an interest in prolonging a war that is destabilizing the Middle East and fostering the spread of Al Qaeda-style extremism.
Indeed, both have already helped to bring the Syrian regime to Geneva.
Now, they must make their support for Assad’s delegation conditional upon his acceptance of a ceasefire.
Otherwise, prospects for an outcome that leaves Syria intact and viable will only become bleaker.
Pensioners and Populism
NEW YORK – If Donald Trump loses the US election, will the tide of populism that threatened to overwhelm the world after the Brexit vote in June begin to wane?
Or will the revolt against globalization and immigration simply take another form?
The rise of protectionism and anti-immigrant sentiment in Britain, America, and Europe is widely believed to reflect stagnant incomes, widening inequality, structural unemployment, and even excessive monetary easing.
But there are several reasons to question the link between populist politics and economic distress.
For starters, most populist voters are neither poor nor unemployed; they are not victims of globalization, immigration, and free trade.
The main demographic groups behind the anti-establishment upsurge have been people outside the workforce: pensioners, middle-aged homemakers, and men with low educational qualifications receiving disability payments.
In Britain, where detailed analyses of the votes actually cast in the Brexit referendum are now available, the group most directly affected by low-wage competition from immigrants and Chinese imports – young people under 35 – voted against Brexit by a wide margin, 65% to 35%.
Meanwhile, 60% of pensioners who voted backed the “Leave” campaign, as did 59% of voters with disabilities.
By contrast, 53% of full-time workers who participated wanted Britain to remain in Europe, as did 51% of part-time workers.
The British data suggest that cultural and ethnic attitudes, not direct economic motivations, are the real distinguishing features of anti-globalization voting.
Asked whether “social liberalism” is a “force for good” or a “force for ill,” 87% of “Remain” voters said it was a force for good, while 53% of Leave voters called liberalism a “force for ill.”
On “multiculturalism,” the difference was even starker – 65% of Leave voters were against it, while 86% of Remainers approved.
Another analysis published by the BBC after the referendum found one of the strongest predictors of a Leave vote to be support for capital punishment.
In America, polls suggest that gender is an even more important indicator of support for Trump than age or education.
Early this month, when Trump was only a few points behind Clinton in overall support, a Washington Post/ABC poll compared voting intentions with the 2012 election.
It found not only that white men backed Trump by a margin of 40 percentage points, but also that their support for Trump was 13 points higher that it was for Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee.
White women, by contrast, marginally supported Clinton and had swung by 15 percentage points against the Republicans.
Among voters without a college education, the gender difference was even starker: less-educated white men favored Trump by a 60% margin and had swung in favor of the Republicans by 28 percentage points, while women had swung by ten percentage points in the opposite direction and only marginally supported Trump.
It seems, therefore, that the conflicts generally ascribed to economic grievances and globalization are actually the latest battles in the culture wars that have split Western societies since the late 1960s.
The main relevance of economics is that the 2008 financial crisis created conditions for a political backlash by older, more conservative voters, who have been losing the cultural battles over race, gender, and social identity.
The dominance of free-market ideology before the crisis allowed many controversial social changes, ranging from income inequality and intensified wage competition to greater gender equality and affirmative action, to go almost unchallenged.
“Progressive” social liberalism and “conservative” free-market economics seemed to be two sides of the same coin.
But when free-market economic liberalism failed in the 2008 crisis, political challenges to social liberalism could no longer be deflected by invoking impersonal economic laws.
But if social change can no longer be legitimized as the necessary condition for economic progress, it seems unlikely that democracies will now vote to reinstate the social conditions before the ascendancy of economic liberalism and globalization.
Racial and gender equality are now backed by clear majorities in the US, Britain, and most European countries, and even apparently popular policies such as trade protectionism and strict immigration controls rarely muster more than 30-40% support in opinion surveys.
Why, then, did Brexit win, and why is it still possible that Donald Trump will be the next US President?
Both Brexit and Trump were powered by an unstable alliance between two very different, even contradictory, movements.
The bulk of their supporters were indeed social conservatives and protectionists who wanted to undo the social changes that began in the late 1960s.
Two of the most effective slogans of the Brexit and Trump campaigns have been “Take back control” and “I want my country back.”
But the social conservatives inspired by such atavistic and authoritarian sentiments do not make up majorities in any Western country.
On its own, social conservatism could never mobilize more than 30-40% of voters.
To achieve majorities, the socially conservative protectionists had to unite with the remnants of the Thatcher-Reagan laissez faire movement, who resent the interventionist economic management of the post-2008 period and want to intensify the competition, deregulation, and globalization that social conservatives resent.
This unstable political compound is now dissolving in the US, and also in Britain, where Prime Minister Theresa May’s government is divided between ideological nationalists and economic liberals.
If the US election on November 8 confirms Trump’s failure to bind social conservatives and economic liberals into a winning coalition, similar disintegration is likely among European populists, too.
In that case, the Brexit vote will begin to look like an aberration – not the start of a powerful new trend toward nationalism, protectionism, and de-globalization, but the end of a backlash against modernity by an unstable alliance of social authoritarians and laissez faire market liberals.
It will be the last gasp of an aging generation that tried to impose its nostalgic parochialism on an increasingly cosmopolitan younger generation, but succeeded in only one unfortunate country.
Waiting for Obama
This is the season for Asian gatherings. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) summit in Thailand in late October brought all the key players of Asia together.
Come mid-November, almost all of them will meet again in Singapore at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, which will include other Pacific leaders, plus US President Barack Obama.
Summits are a circus with many rings and acronyms.
At the ASEAN summit, the 10 Southeast Asian leaders met counterparts from China, Japan, and South Korea.  These 13 countries then met again with India, Australia, and New Zealand.
Some 42 agreements were reportedly penned at the meeting, on issues ranging from outstanding trade and economic matters to the launch of a human rights commission.
Not bad for a summit that some feared would not happen at all: an earlier meeting planned for April in Bangkok had been disrupted by protesters – “red shirts” who support ousted Thai premier Thaksin Shinawatra.
As for Obama, he will first visit Japan, and, while at APEC, will also attend the first US-ASEAN Summit.
Afterwards, he will go to China and South Korea. What additional dimension might America’s president bring on his first visit to the region?
Obama is still fighting back home for his healthcare initiative, and is hamstrung from acting on climate change in time for the Copenhagen summit, which is to agree on a successor treaty to the Kyoto Protocol.
So there is a risk that he will come to Asia for just a star turn and photo opportunities while reserving his strength for other battles.
But more is needed and should be expected of him.
Starting with Japan, Obama needs to ensure a good working relationship with Yukio Hatoyama, the new premier.
Japan has voiced support for an East Asian community that includes India, Australia, and New Zealand, while the Chinese and others question widening the circle.
The US should welcome the Japanese initiative and engage with Asia as a whole.
Keeping Japan close is a starting point.
Moving onto ASEAN, much attention will be on how Obama interacts with Myanmar’s leader, who will also be present.
Obama should stand for democracy and help push for a clean vote in the elections that the junta has promised for 2010.
But there are other, broader opportunities.
ASEAN has been the hub for Asian regionalism, but some in Australia have proposed focusing only on the larger countries.
Southeast Asians have a renewed openness towards American leadership, and meaningful initiatives can be started that would resonate with regional aspirations.
One such initiative is for freer trade.
While the US has stood on the sidelines, intra-Asian agreements have run ahead.
US Senator Richard Lugar has floated the idea of a free-trade agreement between the US and ASEAN.
But, with Myanmar included, this may be too difficult politically, and an ASEAN sub-grouping may be more realistic.
Another option is for the US to press for a Trans-Pacific Partnership.
This was proposed late in the Bush administration in order to forge links with some ASEAN members – Singapore, Vietnam, and Brunei – as well as others across the Pacific.
This could be built up to include other open Southeast Asian economies – Malaysia and Thailand – with the eventual aim being an APEC-wide agreement, which would be an impressive achievement if realized by the end of 2011, when it will be Obama’s turn to play host to all the leaders.
In this time of crisis and unemployment, the American public may question freer trade.
But more and more American businesses realize that still-growing Asian markets are vital for their future profits and overall economic recovery.
Most economic frameworks are among Asians only, but an American initiative could trump them and ensure that the region remains open and engaged with the US.
It could also help lessen the tendency of some governments to gravitate ever closer towards the booming Chinese economy.
Of course, when Obama arrives in Beijing, he must continue to strengthen cooperation with China.
On the economic crisis, climate change, and many other global issues, China and the US are potentially the decisive actors.
But the US must also engage in a more multilateral way to include Southeast Asia’s smaller countries.
China has been charming them over the past decade, and the US must offer an attractive alternative.
To cynics, APEC is a talking shop, while ASEAN is an arena for an ongoing contest between China and Japan, with India on the side.
But, despite the rivalries and all the chatter, it is clear that Asians are coming closer together.
And, while Asian regionalism is messy and rife with tensions and flash points, the US has been the stabilizing power in the region.
Obama has the opportunity to ensure that the region continues to see the US as the essential actor – now more open and helpful than before.
If he achieves this, Obama’s long trip will be valuable for Americans, and Asians will realize that it was worth waiting for him.
Europe’s Wake-Up Call
BRUSSELS – There’s a silver lining to the dark clouds of populist Euroskepticism crowding in on the European Union.
In Brussels and a number of Europe’s capitals, leaders know that the EU must respond to mounting discontent, and that – at long last – there is political capital to be gained in doing so.
The catalyst has been the United Kingdom’s often-nonsensical “Brexit” debate.
The arguments of “Leave” campaigners are frequently inaccurate, when they are not outright lies; but the furious debate in Britain over whether to remain in Europe has laid bare the EU’s deep-seated weaknesses – and has forced European leaders to stop ignoring them.
The rise of Europe’s populist parties is exerting similar pressure across the continent.
And yet, though feared, they have scant political credibility; the UK’s Brexiteers, by contrast, include government ministers who count the EU’s supposedly undemocratic decision-making among its main shortcomings.
In fact, the EU’s chief failures have little to do with democracy.
The chaos of the refugee and migrant crisis, Europe’s inadequate response to the Arab Spring of 2011, the Ukraine crisis three years later, and Russia’s assertiveness cannot be blamed on how the EU reaches decisions.
But they do underscore its inability to react quickly and decisively.
Worse still, they highlight its failure to head off trouble by agreeing on clear economic and security strategies.
Nonetheless, democracy is key to the EU’s future.
For years, critics have pointed to Europe’s “democratic deficit.”
The Council of Ministers – which, together with the European Parliament, makes up the EU’s legislature – is as impenetrably secretive as that of North Korea; indeed, it operates behind closed doors, without any public record of who said what.
There have been modest moves to increase the European Parliament’s powers, but they have not been recognized sufficiently by the European public to quiet complaints.
Mollifying voters’ antipathy to the EU will require substantial change, and that uncomfortable truth is beginning to dawn on Europe’s mainstream politicians.
EU governments’ main fear has been that a vote for Brexit on June 23 will unleash a stream of copycat referendums elsewhere.
It certainly would deal a devastating blow to the EU’s credibility, both in its member states and abroad.
But a British decision to remain would be almost as bad, if the EU institutions in Brussels simply heaved a sigh of relief and returned to business-as-usual, leaving dysfunctional structures untouched.
In that case, the populists would use the bogeyman of the EU “superstate” to gnaw away at mainstream parties’ grassroots support.
What sort of democratic reform, then, might be envisaged?
The last time this question was asked was in 2005, when French and Dutch referendums torpedoed the EU’s proposed Constitutional Treaty.
The EU was at its apogee at the time, lifted by the new euro and the ambitious “Big Bang” eastward enlargement of 2004; so the chances of securing change today, when the EU is at its nadir of popularity, would at first sight seem even more unlikely.
In fact, the opposite could be true.
When the “European project” was thriving, only a few visionaries saw the need for centralizing more powers.
It may look counter-intuitive, but Europe's falling productivity and shrinking workforce signal even tougher times ahead and strengthen the case for an EU that is more efficient, as well as more democratically responsive.
And that's the trickiest question of all.
How can the EU transform ramshackle decision-making mechanisms that have been re-jigged and subject to makeshift additions for almost 40 years into an efficient, working democracy?
Standing in the way is the prized sovereignty of 28 countries with very different political cultures and a host of conflicting national and regional interests.
There are no obvious models to draw on.
Political scientists have suggested scores of ideas, ranging from the re-introduction of double mandates (giving national MPs a seat in the European Parliament) to the creation of an EU Senate in a bicameral system.
But the details of a more democratic EU, in which the Commission would be made truly accountable to the public, are less important than the political will to move forward.
Most of Europe’s national governments, whatever their political color, have long opposed a more streamlined and democratic EU.
Now, though, they must choose between being outflanked by Euroskeptic parties on both the far left and far right, or responding to that threat by creating a supra-national democracy that can satisfy voters’ legitimate concerns.
The 2003 European Convention that produced the ill-fated EU Constitution offers no blueprint for the future.
Its convoluted business was conducted largely out of sight.
To stem mounting criticism of “Europe,” the EU needs the coup de théâtre of an open debate involving civil society, not just a handful of political representatives.
Its premise must be that the EU is heading toward dissolution, and that only by becoming more responsive to Europe’s citizens can it reverse the trend.
Wall-to-Wall Wal-Mart?
Do you want to know which video clip will soon be scaring the daylights out of policymakers throughout the world?
In a scenario that looks uncannily like the spread of a global pandemic, the economist Thomas Holmes has prepared a dynamic map simulation showing the spread of Wal-Mart stores throughout the United States.
Starting at the epicenter in Bentonville, Arkansas, where Sam Walton opened his first store in 1962, giant boxy Wal-Mart stores have now multiplied to the point where the average American lives less than seven kilometers from an outlet.
Interestingly, the video shows how the stores spread out like petals of a flower, ever thickening and expanding.
Rather than jumping out to the coasts – 80% of all Americans live within 80 kilometers of the Pacific or Atlantic oceans – Wal-Marts have spread organically through an ever-expanding supply chain.
Even though each new store takes away business from Wal-Mart stores established nearby, ever-improving supply efficiencies help maintain the chain’s overall growth.
Love them or hate them, what is undeniable is that Wal-Mart is the quintessential example of the costs and benefits of modern globalization.
Consumers pay significantly less than at traditional outlets.
For example, economists estimate that the food section of Wal-Mart charges 25% less than a typical large supermarket chain.
The differences in price for many other consumer goods is even larger.
Consider the following stunning fact: together with a few sister “big box” stores (Target, Best Buy, and Home Depot), Wal-Mart accounts for roughly 50% of America’s much vaunted productivity growth edge over Europe during the last decade.
Fifty percent!
Similar advances in wholesaling supply chains account for another 25%!
The notion that Americans have gotten better at everything while other rich countries have stood still is thus wildly misleading.
The US productivity miracle and the emergence of Wal-Mart-style retailing are virtually synonymous.
I have nothing against big box stores.
They are an enormous boon to low-income consumers, partly compensating for the tepid wage growth that many of them have suffered during the past two decades.
And I don’t agree with friends of mine who turn their noses down at Wal-Mart stores, and claim never to have visited one.
As a consumer, I think big-box stores are great.
They have certainly been great for America’s trading partners; Wal-Mart alone accounts for over 10% of all US imports from China.
But I do have some reservations about the Wal-Mart model as a blueprint for global growth.
First, there is the matter of its effect on low-wage workers and smaller-scale retailers.
While completely legal, studies suggest that Wal-Mart’s labor policies exploit regulatory loopholes that, for example, allow it to sidestep the burden of healthcare costs for many workers (Wal-Mart provides healthcare coverage to less than half its workers).
And the entry of big-box stores into a community crushes long-established retailers, often traumatically transforming their character.
Yes, to some extent, such is the price of progress.
But the loss of aesthetics and community is not easily captured in simple income and price statistics.
Big-box stores are not exactly attractive – hence their name.
If they continue their explosive growth over the next 20 years, will Americans someday come to regard their proliferation as a spectacular example of the failure to adopt region-wide blueprints for balanced growth?
Indeed, many Europeans, and others, will view Holmes’s video simulation of Wal-Mart’s spread as a horror film.
The French may have invented the hyper mart – the forerunner of the big-box store – but they never intended to let their growth go unchecked.
The big question for Europeans is whether they can find ways to exploit some of the efficiency gains embodied by the Wal-Mart model without being overrun by it.
For Americans, there is the additional question of what to do when the big-box store phenomenon has run its course.
If so much of the US productivity edge really amounts to letting Wal-Mart and its big-box cousins run amok, what will happen after this source of growth tapers off?
The US economy has many other strengths, including its superior financial system and leading position in high-tech capital goods, but the fact remains that America’s advantage in these areas has so far not been nearly as striking as the Wal-Mart phenomenon.
It is curious how many people seem to think that the US will grow faster than Europe and Japan over the next ten years simply because it has done so for the past ten years.
Wal-Mart and its ilk are a central feature of the modern era of globalization.
They are not quite the pandemic that their explosive growth pattern resembles, but nor is their emergence completely benign.
Those who would aim to emulate US productivity trends must come to grips with how they feel about big-box stores sprouting across their countryside’s, driving down wages and plowing under smaller-scale retailers.
Americans, in turn, must think about where the proper balance lies between aesthetics, community, and low prices.
Shaking Up “Shaken Baby Syndrome”
OXFORD – The most tragic event that can befall new parents is the sudden, unexpected death of their baby.
Perhaps the only thing worse is the parents being wrongly accused of causing the death, and indeed prosecuted, owing to the medical community’s misinterpretation of the findings.
A small number of babies who collapse and die unexpectedly in their first year are found to have one or more of the following three symptoms in common: bleeding just outside the brain (subdural hemorrhage); bleeding at the back of the eye (retinal hemorrhage); and brain swelling.
These same features are also seen in some babies who have suffered trauma, such as falls or motor-vehicle accidents.
Yet many babies with these symptoms have no history or medical evidence of trauma (such as fractures, abrasions, or bruises), physical abuse, or neglect.
Pediatricians wrestled with this conundrum until the 1970’s, when it was proposed that shaking might induce rotational forces and cause the “triad” of symptoms without bruises or fractures.
Over the years, these findings evolved into “shaken baby syndrome” (SBS), a medico-legal hypothesis that remains contentious, and scientifically unproven, to this day.
The SBS hypothesis attributed the triad of symptoms to the physical rupture of blood vessels on the brain’s surface and in the retina, and the tearing of nerve fibers within the brain.
It was suggested that these outcomes required a force equivalent to a multi-story fall or major motor-vehicle accident, causing immediate symptoms or collapse.
Because violent shaking cannot be accidental, the hypothesis simultaneously established a criminal act and identified the perpetrator, typically the person with the baby at the time of collapse.
Though the SBS hypothesis was incorporated into medical training and judicial decisions worldwide, it remained untested for almost two decades.
In 1987, the first biomechanical experiments found that the force of shaking is much less than that of impact and concluded that shaking alone was unlikely to cause the triad of symptoms.
Subsequent research in my specialty, pediatric neuropathology, established that the medical basis for the SBS hypothesis was also flawed.
We learned that the brain damage in these children did not reflect trauma to nerve fibers, but rather a failure of blood supply.
We also learned that the typical subdural hemorrhages in these cases are too thin to result from the rupture of the large bridging veins on the brain’s surface.
And we learned that the same findings are seen in natural deaths.
In the last decade, the list of other causes – including accidental trauma, congenital causes, and natural illness – has continued to grow.
Perhaps the most compelling observation in recent years is that subdural hemorrhages are present in nearly half of normal, healthy newborns with no evidence of birth trauma.
These findings, combined with the immature anatomy of the infant dura, suggest that dural bleeding in young babies may be a natural protective device – a reservoir to prevent backflow into the brain’s blood vessels during the pressure fluctuations of normal labor and delivery.
Because these anatomical features persist into early childhood, the dura may remain similarly vulnerable to bleeding beyond the newborn period.
Indeed, both birth-related bleeds and those attributed to shaking are most often located in the folds of membranes covering the brain that have more and larger blood vessels at this age than later in life.
While scientific evidence over the last three decades has undermined the shaken baby hypothesis, no new evidence has emerged to support it.
Instead, several researchers have relied upon the data in older studies to calculate the statistical probability of inflicted brain injury when certain features (such as intracranial hemorrhage, retinal hemorrhage, brain swelling, and seizures) are present.
These probabilities are then offered as the basis for diagnosis and as evidence in court.
However, the reasoning behind the studies on which these researchers rely is circular, and based on assumptions now known to be unreliable.
For example, in some studies, the researchers decided arbitrarily that falls of less than one meter could not harm a baby, so that parents who described such a fall must be lying.
Other studies viewed the parents’ inability to explain the findings as evidence of abuse.
Given these flaws, reviews of old studies do not provide a reliable evidence base for diagnosing abuse.
They simply predict the likelihood that specific findings will be categorized as abusive, and that, consequently, the child’s caregiver at the time will be accused or convicted of abuse, regardless of the accuracy of the diagnosis.
Leading proponents of the SBS hypothesis now acknowledge that the triad is a “myth,” that SBS diagnoses consist of “informed speculation,” and that the hypothesis is supported solely by confessions.
Some courts are following suit, with one US federal judge describing the types of confessions obtained as “worthless as evidence,” and another noting that, given recent developments, claims of SBS may be “more an article of faith than a proposition of science.”
No one questions whether infants can be damaged or killed by violent shaking or abuse; of course they can.
The real issue is whether shaking or abuse can be inferred on the basis of a hypothesis that lacks scientific support.
In no other area of medicine and law would an unproved hypothesis provide a basis for diagnosis, let alone criminal prosecution.
Given the developments of the past decade, we now face the possibility that for the past 30 years we have been wrongly imprisoning parents on the basis of a flawed hypothesis.
China’s North Korean Pivot
BEIJING – After a spring of heightened tension on the Korean Peninsula, a flurry of diplomatic activity in recent weeks has brought some hope of a meeting of the minds, at least between China, South Korea, and the United States.
But the emergence of a viable consensus on how to minimize the security risks emanating from North Korea’s mercurial leadership remains to be found.
After a reportedly tough meeting between Chinese President Xi Jinping and Vice Marshall Choe Ryong-hae, one of the four members of North Korea’s ruling presidium, the US-China summit in California took place with North Korea as one of the central points of discussion.
This was quickly followed by a Beijing summit between Xi and South Korean President Park Geun-hye.
The fact that Xi participated in all three meetings underscores two truths: China’s policy toward North Korea is the key to a solution to the problems posed by North Korea, and China may be actively searching for a new approach to its wayward ally.
China’s interest in a new North Korea policy is not entirely new.
After all, China’s policy toward the country has been gradually moving in a more constructive direction for the past two decades, reflecting China’s growing international prominence, as well as its leaders’ cautious embrace of the global role that their country’s new economic might has provided.
In the immediate post-Cold War period, China cooperated with other concerned parties in the process of resolving the first North Korea nuclear crisis of 1993-1994; but it tended to regard the North’s nuclear ambitions mainly as a bilateral issue between North Korea and the US.
President Bill Clinton seemed to agree, and adopted a bilateral approach to the nuclear crisis, which resulted in the two countries’ Agreed Framework of 1994.
But China upgraded its role in the 2000’s.
After North Korea’s enriched uranium program triggered another crisis in late 2002, President George W. Bush wanted to mobilize China’s influence in a more systematic way.
But China’s leaders balked, circumscribing their role severely.
Though Chinese leaders became more active by hosting the six-party talks, they still regarded their role as that of mediator between the US and the North, rather than that of a party whose security interests were seriously affected by events on the Korean Peninsula.
Immediately after the North’s second nuclear test in 2009, Chinese officials undertook a review of their country’s North Korea policy and decided to separate the nuclear issue from the overall bilateral relationship.
Thus, former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao visited Pyongyang in October 2009 and promised generous economic aid.
Chinese leaders may have believed that inducing the North to adopt the Chinese model of economic opening would create a better political environment for denuclearization.
One result was a deepening of North Korea’s economic dependence on China.
But the big problem was that the North’s leadership apparently interpreted China’s policy as a sign of unwillingness to pressure the North on nuclear matters.
Indeed, North Korean behavior became much more provocative, including an attack in 2010 that sank the South Korean corvette Cheonan and another in which the South’s Yeonpyeong Island was shelled.
Following this spring’s round of North Korean provocations, Xi appears to have concluded that enough is enough.
As a result, China’s North Korea policy has entered a new stage.
Xi’s criticism of the North’s nuclear ambitions has become both unusually public and blunt.
Chinese leaders may still view North Korea as a strategic buffer state, but China’s status as a global power is pushing them to view the North in a new way.
Former State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan was even reported to have said recently that denuclearization is now a higher priority for China than stabilization of the Korean Peninsula.
This approach should favor China’s global strategy, which is premised upon Xi’s desire to build a new type of “major power” relationship between China and the US (the Chinese government prefers “major power” to “great power,” probably in order to highlight its stated renunciation of hegemonic ambition).
Indeed, among the myriad unresolved issues dividing the US and China, North Korea’s nuclear program is the one most likely to impede mutual trust.
If the US and China are to avoid being steered by North Korea onto a collision course, they probably have four or five years to pursue a joint strategy – a timetable established by the point at which North Korea could have the technology to load miniaturized nuclear warheads atop long-range missiles.
As the North approaches this point, the US will have to strengthen its missile defenses in the western Pacific – areas close to China – in order to deter the North Korean threat.
The result, invariably, will be heightened Sino-US tension.
China has no interest in such an outcome.
The long-term costs of a worsening security confrontation with the US would exceed the short-term tactical benefits to be derived from continuing to support the North as a buffer state, especially given China’s deepening relationship with South Korea.
Though Park’s visit to Beijing has not closed the gap between the Chinese and South Korean approaches to the North Korean nuclear issue, it does seem to have prepared the ground for closer coordination between the two governments.
Those improved ties matter, because the time has come for China to rebalance its traditional geostrategic interests with its role as a global leader.
That calls for a Chinese policy of disciplined engagement toward North Korea, without which an internationally coordinated solution to the nuclear problem – and, with it, the promise of more productive relations with the US and South Korea – will be impossible.
Wanted: An Arab Jean Monnet
The Middle East is beyond doubt one of the most dangerous crisis regions worldwide.
The next war, terrorist attack, or failed peace initiative may lurk just around the corner.
Compared to the politics of this region, a rollercoaster ride is downright calming.
And yet the Middle East is also a region that, throughout its innumerable conflicts, has hardly changed, languishing in a strange kind of standstill.
There must be an intrinsic correlation between the lack of developmental dynamism of most Middle Eastern societies and the fact that the region is so crisis-prone.
The conflict between Israel and the Palestinians stands out as an example of the static nature of this key geopolitical region, because it seems to be completely unaffected by any international upheaval.
The Ottomans, the British, decolonization, the Cold War, numerous American Presidents, and even more international mediators have come and gone, but the parameters of this conflict and the inability to find a solution never seem to change.
However, this impression – correct where the past is concerned – might prove deceptive in the future, because two global megatrends will subject the region to more profound change than all the many previous political crises and wars were able to bring about.
The first is globalization, by which ever-larger parts of the Arab world, beginning with the Persian Gulf and its oil countries, will be influenced, albeit slowly, both economically and culturally.
With the shift of wealth and power from the West to the East, the pressures of globalization will increasingly come from the East.
In Morocco, for instance, investment from the Arab oil countries has already significantly reduced Europe’s importance.
The inherent contradiction between a governance structure incapable of change and economic modernization, between cultural and religious conservatism and social and normative transformation, will therefore increase and bring about new, additional frictions if positive answers to these fundamental changes cannot be found.
The second megatrend is the global climate crisis.
Apart from those countries that are threatened – partly or completely –by rising sea levels, global warming will primarily affect the desert belts and their already precarious water supplies.
And, while the conflicts in the Middle East are primarily about territory, this includes the scarce water resources so essential for survival.
Rapid population growth, a dramatic increase in water consumption due to industrial, agricultural, and tourism growth, and rising standards of living will make the water issue even more important to the region’s political stability than it is already.
A sustainable answer to questions of such vital importance to the Middle East only makes sense if it is regional in character.
And the same applies to the increasing demand for energy: although the region as a whole is rich in energy resources, their uneven geographical distribution suggests that any viable solution must be built on cooperation.
Of course, resolving the political crises and conflicts remains the top priority.
To make regional peace and stability possible, however, the region’s very young and rapidly increasing populations require an economic perspective that makes their participation in globalization possible – in a dignified manner and grounded in their own culture and history.
The Middle East’s individual states won’t be able to manage this without regional cooperation.
The European Union’s successful track record could therefore provide an almost perfect model.
In fact, the preconditions for intra-regional cooperation – up to partial integration of the interests of the countries involved – look more auspicious than they did in Western Europe in the early 1950’s.
Europe had neither a common language, nor was it as religiously and culturally as homogeneous as the Middle East.
For Europe, the starting point was visionary leaders like Jean Monnet and the creation of new institutions like the Coal and Steel Community.
In the Middle East, the process of regional integration could begin with water and energy.
A common market for goods and services could follow, along with a regional security system.
This would, finally, give the Middle East – a region poor in growth and rich in conflicts – a distinct identity, making it a player in global economic terms as well, and thus enabling it to become the architect of its own future.
Europe, once the continent of war, has shown that this is possible.
And Europe can help the Middle East – its neighboring region – achieve this strategic objective.
An instrument for it already exists: the new Union for the Mediterranean.
In any case, the time of standstill in the Middle East is coming to an end.
Whether the consequences of this development will be good or bad depends on whether the region can muster the foresight and strength actively to shape this process.
Imagination, vision, and pragmatic perseverance will be necessary.
What is needed now is an Arabian Jean Monnet.
Washington and the Art of the Possible
CHICAGO – These days, the United States media are full of ordinary Americans venting their rage at the incompetence and immaturity of their politicians.
Even though the US government’s debt limit was raised in the nick of time, the process was – and remains – fraught with risk.
Why, the public asks, can’t politicians sit down together like sensible adults and come up with a timely agreement that commands broad consensus?
If we can balance our household budgets, they ask irately, why can’t our political leaders?
The reality, though, is that US politicians reflect the views of the American electorate – views that are fundamentally inconsistent. The absence of broad consensus is no wonder.
Indeed, the last-minute agreement to raise the debt ceiling is proof that the politicians did what they were sent to Washington to do: represent their constituencies and only compromise in the interests of the country as a whole.
The key question is whether the political gridlock exposed by the debt-ceiling debate will worsen in the run-up to the 2012 presidential and congressional elections – if not beyond.
That is possible, but we should not overlook cause for hope in what America’s politicians just accomplished.
Let’s start with why the electorate is so polarized.
There are two key divisive factors: income and age.
Income inequality has been growing in the US over the last three decades, largely because the labor market has increasingly demanded skills that the education system has been unable to supply.
The everyday consequence for the middle class is a stagnant paycheck and growing employment insecurity, as the old economy of well-paying low-skilled jobs with good benefits withers away.
Until the financial crisis, the easy availability of credit, especially against home equity, enabled the middle class to sustain higher consumption despite stagnant incomes.
With the collapse of the housing bubble, many people lost their jobs and health insurance, risked losing their homes, and suddenly had little reason for economic optimism.
The response from America’s Democratic Party, which has traditionally represented this constituency, was to promise affordable universal health care and more education spending, while also protecting government jobs and entitlement programs.
When added up, such spending is unaffordable, especially with current federal revenues at just 15% of GDP.
The solution for many Democrats is to raise revenues by taxing the rich.
But the rich are not the idle rich of the past; they are the working rich.
To balance the budget only by taxing the rich will require a significant increase in income taxes, to the point that it would lower incentives for work and entrepreneurial activity considerably.
This is not to say that taxes on the rich cannot be increased at all; but such increases cannot be the primary way of balancing the budget.
Republicans, trying to give voice to many working Americans’ ambient uneasiness with rising government expenditures, as well as to the growing anger of the working rich, find it easier to defend a principle than a particular constituency.
Hence their mantra: no additional taxes.
The neat divide based on income is muddled by the elderly.
It is understandable that older Americans who have few savings want to protect their Social Security and Medicare benefits.
However, even elderly Tea Party Republicans, who are typically against big government, defend these programs because they view them as a form of property right, paid for when they worked.
In truth, rising life expectancy and growing health-care costs mean that today’s elderly have contributed only a fraction of what they expect to receive from Social Security and Medicare.
The government made a mistake in the past by not raising taxes to finance these programs or reducing the benefits that they promised.
Unless the growth of these entitlement programs is curbed now, today’s young will pay dearly for that mistake, in the form of higher taxes now and lower benefits when they are old.
But the elderly are politically active and powerful.
Not only do many defend their entitlements strongly; some oppose growth in other types of public spending for fear that it will weaken the government’s ability to pay for the benefits that they believe they are owed.
These then are the roots of America fiscal impasse, which has produced passionate constituencies viscerally opposed to compromise.
Any political deal significantly before the debt-ceiling deadline would have exposed politicians to charges of betrayal from their constituents.
And, given that President Barack Obama would ultimately be held responsible for a default, he needed the deal more than the Republicans did.
So he had to coerce his party into accepting a deal full of spending cuts and devoid of tax increases.
Will the deal deliver what it promises?
A bipartisan committee has to propose $1.5 trillion in deficit reduction by the end of this year, and Congress must either accept that proposal, or see immediate, politically painful expenditure cuts, which would include defense spending – an area that America’s Republicans care about strongly.
If this structure works as advertised, Congress will be forced to reach a compromise, which can be sold once again by politicians to their polarized constituencies as being necessary to avoid a worse outcome.
This time, Obama’s Democrats will be on a level playing field, because both parties will be held equally responsible for a failure to reach a deal.
Ultimately, the big necessary decisions on curbing entitlement growth and reforming the tax code will probably have to wait until after the next election, giving the divided electorate an opportunity to reflect on its own inconsistency and send a clearer message.
In the meantime, US politicians might have done just about enough to convince debt markets that America’s credit is still good.
For that, Americans – and others around the world – should stop pillorying them and give them their due credit.
Was Killing Bin Laden a Mistake?
LONDON – “He lived a hero, he died a martyr...if they killed one Osama, a thousand others will be born,” says a comment on a Facebook group called “We are all Osama bin Laden.”
The group was formed one hour after US President Barack Obama’s announcement of the Al Qaeda leader’s death.
That Facebook group already has around 30,000 “likes.”
Moreover, there are more than 50 similar groups on Facebook.
Reaction to Bin Laden’s death on Al Jazeera and other Arabic news outlets has been mixed.
Some view the man considered a mass murderer in the West as an icon, and his death and burial at sea at the hands of American forces will not undermine that perception in the eyes of his sympathizers.
Indeed, Egypt’s former Mufti, Sheikh Nasr Farid Wasil, has already declared Bin Laden a martyr, “because he was killed by the hands of the enemy.”
(Sheikh Wasil, it should be made known, has no links or known sympathies for Al Qaeda and he represents a very different Islamic school of thought.)
Aside from the mixed signals online, in the virtual world, the critical question is whether eliminating Bin Laden marks the beginning of Al Qaeda’s demise in reality.
Some terrorist organizations have, of course, collapsed following the death of their charismatic leader.
The case of Shoko Asahara, the founder of Aum Shinrikyo (the Japanese group that organized the Sarin gas attack on Tokyo’s subway in 1995), comes to mind here.
But capturing and trying violent leaders is probably a better marker of the end of such organizations –&nbsp;the chances of such an outcome being higher when such leaders recant their views and call on their followers to lay down their arms.
Abimael Guzmán, the leader of the Maoist Shining Path in Peru, and Abdullah Ocalan, the leader of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in Turkey, are notable examples of this.
By contrast, far from causing the demise of an armed movement, the killing of a charismatic leader at the hands of his enemies can transform such a figure into a martyr.
Che Guevera was far more valuable to leftist militancy after his death than he was while alive.
Armed Islamism has its particularities, of course, but it also shares important characteristics with some of these groups, including the relationship between the physical elimination of a leader and organizational survival.
Decentralized organizations with relevant ideologies, operating in contexts full of conditions conducive to armed action, usually survive leadership losses, whereas hierarchical, cult-like organizations often do not.
Since 9/11, Al Qaeda has been far from a hierarchical, cult-like organization.
Abu Musab al-Zaraqawi’s Al Qaeda offshoot in Iraq demonstrates this well: the group was called Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia for recruitment and propaganda purposes, but it was quite autonomous organizationally and operationally.
When Bin Laden’s close collaborator Ayman al-Zawahiri asked al-Zaraqawi to avoid targeting Shiites, al-Zaraqawi instead escalated the violence against them.
Al Qaeda’s franchise model applies to Algeria, Yemen, North Mali, and Somalia as well.
And, like guerrilla movements of yore, Al Qaeda partakes of “ideological front” tactics: small urban cells and/or vulnerable individuals subscribe to the ideology and self-recruit or self-start an affiliated cell.
In all of its decentralized modes of operation, Bin Laden mainly played the role of inspirational guide and iconic figurehead – a role better played when dead by American guns than alive, hiding from them.
Consider Sayyid Qutb, the Islamist intellectual who influenced Bin Laden and others.
Qutb was executed by Gamel Abdel Nasser’s dictatorship in Egypt in August 1966, in an attempt to reduce his influence.
That tactic backfired badly.
Of the 98 fellow Muslim Brotherhood prisoners with whom Qutb discussed his new confrontational ideology in 1964, 35 were strongly supportive, 23 strongly opposed, and 50 hesitant.
Despite his intellectual status and prestige, Qutb had failed to persuade the majority of like-minded inmates under conditions of repression.
But, no sooner was Qutb the intellectual executed than Qutb the grand martyr was born.
His supporters soon numbered in the thousands, rather than the dozens, and he came to inspire generations, not just individual inmates.
Moreover, Qutb was executed by an Arab Nationalist Muslim leader, whereas Bin Laden was killed by US Navy Seals.
That makes a significant difference in the Muslim world.
Imprisonment, followed by recantation of violence, has become almost a trend in several jihadist groups, notably the 20,000-strong Egyptian Islamic Group, factions of the al-Jihad Organization in Egypt, and smaller groups like the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group.
Leading figures in armed Islamist movements have not only abandoned political violence, but have also de-legitimized it as a means for social and political change after spending periods in prison.
For example, Sayyid Imam al-Sharif (a.k.a. Dr. Fadl), an Al Qaeda ideologue for a decade, published several books denouncing armed activism, both theologically and on tactical grounds, after spending several years in prison.
The same applies to the Islamic Group, a movement implicated in violent acts in almost a dozen countries throughout the 1980’s and 1990’s, including armed insurgency in Egypt, bombings in the United States and Croatia, assassination attempts in Ethiopia, and training camps in Afghanistan.
In the 2000’s, the imprisoned leadership of the Group produced more than 25 books aimed at de-legitimizing political violence as a method for change.
Eliminating the “spiritual guide” (as opposed to the organizational leaders) of a militant group might be perceived as a political victory for a government in the short term, but it probably makes a comprehensive de-radicalization process less likely, and it will not necessarily mean the end of the organization in question.
For long-term results, capture is almost always more effective than killing.
Wasting Food in a Hungry World
OTTAWA – One-quarter of all the food in the world is lost each year, owing to inefficient harvesting, inadequate storage, and wastage in the kitchen.
Halve that waste, and the world could feed an extra billion people – and make hunger yesterday’s problem.
The extent of food loss is particularly galling in view of a new global study on food security from the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization.
According to the FAO, 57 developing countries have failed to achieve the Millennium Development Goal of halving the proportion of hungry people by this year.
One in every nine people on the planet – 795 million in all – still goes to sleep hungry.
Of course, there has also been remarkable progress: over the last 25 years, the world has fed an extra two billion people, and – for all the 57 failures – the developing world as a whole has almost halved its hunger rate.
But the challenge is to sustain the progress: by 2050, demand for food will have nearly doubled.
One reason is that by then the world will have added another two billion mouths to feed; a second reason will be the growing appetite of a surging new middle class.
At the moment, the UN is considering 169 new development targets to succeed the Millennium Development Goals (hunger is one target area, among many).
These targets are vitally important, because they will determine how more than $2.5 trillion in development money is spent on everything from climate change to malaria.
My think tank, the Copenhagen Consensus Center, therefore asked 60 teams of top economists to assess which proposed targets will do the most good – and which will not.
Our research on food security shows that there are smart ways to feed many more on the planet – but they have little to do with the campaigns against waste seen in most of the rich world.
In the rich world, the focus is on food wasted by the consumer.
This makes sense: more than half of the rich world’s losses take place in its kitchens (basically because we can afford it).
In Britain, for example, the greatest waste is in salads, vegetables, and fruits – luxuries when compared with the cheap calories contained in the grains and tubers consumed throughout the developing world.
Smaller households in rich countries waste more per person, because it is harder to put everything to use, while richer households add waste when they can afford to buy extra “just to be on the safe side.”
By contrast, the world’s hungry poor waste very little, simply because they cannot afford to.
In Africa, daily food waste averages 500 calories per person – but consumers account for only 5% of this loss.
More than three-quarters of the waste occurs well before the kitchen, in inefficient agriculture, because birds and rats eat crops during harvest, for example, or pests spoil grain stores.
There are many remedies for this kind of waste – from the “curing” of roots and tubers to minimize damage, to more expensive refrigeration.
So why aren’t these technologies – widely used in richer countries – adopted in the developing world?
The answer is a lack of infrastructure.