Globalization has not lifted all boats.
Many working families have been devastated by the impact of low-cost imports from China and elsewhere.
And the big winners have been the financiers and skilled professionals who can take advantage of expanded markets.
While globalization has not been the sole (or even the most important) force driving inequality in the advanced economies, it has been a contributor.
What gives trade particular political salience is that it often raises fairness concerns in ways that the other major contributor to inequality – technology – does not.
When I lose my job because my competitor innovates and introduces a better product, I have little cause to complain.
When he does so by outsourcing to firms abroad that do things that would be illegal here – for example, prevent their workers from organizing and bargaining collectively – I may have a real gripe.
Sanders has forcefully advocated the renegotiation of trade agreements to reflect better the interests of working people.
But such arguments immediately run up against the objection that any standstill or reversal on trade agreements would harm the world’s poorest, by diminishing their prospect of escaping poverty through export-led growth.
“If you’re poor in another country, this is the scariest thing Bernie Sanders has said,” ran a headline in the popular and normally sober Vox.com news site.
But trade rules that are more sensitive to social and equity concerns in the advanced countries are not inherently in conflict with economic growth in poor countries.
Globalization’s cheerleaders do considerable damage to their cause by framing the issue as a stark choice between existing trade arrangements and the persistence of global poverty.
And progressives needlessly force themselves into an undesirable tradeoff.
First, the standard narrative about how trade has benefited developing economies omits a crucial feature of their experience.
Countries that managed to leverage globalization, such as China and Vietnam, employed a mixed strategy of export promotion and a variety of policies that violate current trade rules.
Subsidies, domestic-content requirements, investment regulations, and, yes, often import barriers were critical to the creation of new, higher-value industries.
Countries that rely on free trade alone (Mexico comes immediately to mind) have languished.
That is why trade agreements that tighten the rules are in fact mixed blessings for developing countries.
China would not have been able to pursue its phenomenally successful industrialization strategy if the country had been constrained by WTO-type rules during the 1980s and 1990s.
With the TPP, Vietnam gets some assurance of continued access to the US market (existing barriers on the US side are already quite low), but in return must submit to restrictions on subsidies, patent rules, and investment regulations.
Second, there is nothing in the historical record to suggest that poor countries require very low or zero barriers in the advanced economies in order to benefit greatly from globalization.
In fact, the most phenomenal export-oriented growth experiences to date – Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and China – all occurred when import tariffs in the US and Europe were at moderate levels, and higher than where they are today.
So, for progressives who worry both about inequality in the rich countries and poverty in the rest of the world, the good news is that it is indeed possible to advance on both fronts.
But to do so, we must transform our approach to trade deals in some drastic ways.
The world’s trade regime is currently driven by a peculiarly mercantilist logic: You lower your barriers in return for me lowering mine.
This approach has been remarkably successful in promoting trade expansion, but it has little economic justification.
Now that the world economy is already very open, “exchange of market access” is causing more problems than it solves.
The time has come to embrace a different logic, that of “exchange of policy space.”
Poor and rich countries alike need to carve out greater space for pursuing their respective objectives.
The former need to restructure their economies and promote new industries, and the latter must address domestic concerns over inequality and distributive justice.
This requires placing some sand in the wheels of globalization.
The best way to bring about such institutional re-engineering would be to rewrite multilateral rules.
For example, the “safeguards” clause of the WTO could be broadened to allow the imposition of trade restrictions (subject to procedural disciplines) in instances where imports demonstrably conflict with domestic social norms. (I discuss the specifics in my book The Globalization Paradox.)
Similarly, trade agreements could incorporate a “development box” to provide poor countries with the autonomy they need to pursue economic diversification.
Progressives should not buy into a false and counter-productive narrative that sets the interests of the global poor against the interests of rich countries’ lower and middle classes.
With sufficient institutional imagination, the global trade regime can be reformed to the benefit of both.
The Changing Mood on Migration
LONDON – Headlines about migration can seem unbearably stark: attacks on foreigners by neo-fascists in Greece, dozens of domestic workers on death row in the Gulf, a crass and callous campaign by the British government to drive out migrants.
Yet, despite persistent and even rising anti-immigrant sentiment in much of the world, promising signs of a more enlightened approach to migration are emerging.
The United States is in the midst of an intense debate on a sweeping immigration overhaul.
After a quarter-century of near-paralysis, American legislators are close to agreeing on reforms that would allow 11 million undocumented migrants to earn citizenship.
The proposed changes also would make the US a magnet for talent and creativity from around the world.
The fiscal and economic arguments for a more liberal approach to migration have shaped the American debate.
According to the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office, the US Senate’s reform legislation, passed in June, would result in fiscal benefits worth almost $1 trillion over the next two decades.
Supporters also point out that immigrants launched 28% of all new American businesses in 2011, even though they accounted for just 13% of the population.
The voices of both grassroots and establishment advocates have been equally decisive.
“Dreamers” – children raised in the US but without legal status – have become the human face of reform.
Business leaders, long afraid to participate in such a polarized debate, have finally entered the fray, arguing forcefully that immigration is critical to American competitiveness.
Thanks in part to all this spirited work, 72% of Americans, according to a recent Gallup poll, now consider immigration a net benefit for the country.
Given its history, America’s leadership on immigration is natural.
Germany, on the other hand, is not widely considered progressive in this realm.
Yet, fairly quietly, Germany has done as much as any other country in recent years to court foreigners and refashion itself as a country of immigration.
One million people relocated to Germany in 2012 alone.
Today, one-fifth of Germany’s residents – and one-third of its schoolchildren – have a migrant background.
In July, Germany jettisoned 40% of its immigration rules, lowering barriers for mid-skilled workers like train drivers and machinists.
For the highly skilled, its immigration laws are among the OECD’s most liberal.
And yet the German government estimates that the country will face a shortfall of two million skilled workers by 2020.
Recent reforms not only seek to attract immigrants, but also to help them fulfill their potential.
Germany, for instance, is focused on helping foreigners get their qualifications recognized – so that, for example, doctors do not have to drive taxis.
Public institutions like the police are hiring more immigrants.
A “Diversity Charter,” launched in 2006 and originally endorsed by a mere four companies, now has more than 1,500 corporate signatories.
And 4% of candidates in September’s parliamentary election have a migrant background, the highest ratio ever.
Other countries have also gotten on the reform bandwagon.
The United Arab Emirates has been revamping its laws to improve migrants’ living conditions and strengthen protection of their rights.
Its activism is noteworthy, given the benighted approach to migrants typical in other Gulf countries, such as Saudi Arabia.
Brazil, meanwhile, aims to gain a competitive edge by making it easier for foreigners to immigrate with their families.
The list of reformers is growing.
Even more surprising, new international norms are being advanced.
The Domestic Workers Convention, adopted in 2011, enters into force on September 5, promising to extend labor protections to tens of millions of the most vulnerable migrant workers.
The treaty is quickly gaining momentum, having been ratified in recent months by Germany, Italy, Argentina, and South Africa, among others.
All this progress is coming at an opportune moment.
In October, for only the second time in its history, the United Nations General Assembly will address international migration.
The first such summit, in 2006, gave birth to an important new institution, the Global Forum on Migration and Development.
In the seven years since, the Forum has helped to foster trust, knowledge, and cooperation among states and other stakeholders.
Collaboration has led to some stunning gains.
Migrants used to pay a fee of almost 15% on average to send money back home; this has fallen to less than 9%, and in some cases nearly to zero, which should be the universal goal.
Given that migrants remitted $401 billion last year to developing countries alone, such progress is freeing up tens of billions of dollars for some of the world’s poorest households.
But even more ambitious action is needed.
When they gather at the UN in October, policymakers should take courage from the reform trailblazers in the US, Germany, the UAE, and elsewhere.
If profound change is possible at the national level in the face of toxic populism, it should come more easily at the international level, where cooperation produces mostly winners.
(The losers generally are bad actors: smugglers, traffickers, abusive recruiters, and exploitative employers.)
States need not agree on all aspects of migration in order to settle on an agenda for common action.
There is no shortage of problems to confront and opportunities to seize.
We need to rein in the bad actors; eliminate discrimination against migrants; sharply reduce human trafficking; increase the share of migrants working at their highest skill level; decriminalize migration violations; end the detention of migrant children; recast refugees as productive members of our communities; and lower the proportion of migrants lacking residency rights.
Some advocates of open borders estimate that unrestricted movement across borders could double global GDP.
While a borderless world is a political non-starter, that figure does point to the scale of the development gains that a truly well-managed system of global mobility might produce.
Migration reform is not for the faint-hearted.
But those who want to leave their mark on one of the twenty-first century’s most vital issues – and to create a world in which international migrants are treated equitably and with dignity – will embrace it.
The Tuberculosis Front
BERLIN – This has been a good decade in the fight against tuberculosis.
We are likely to achieve the United Nations Millennium Development Goal of cutting TB prevalence and mortality in half by 2015, from 1990 levels.
At least a dozen new vaccines and drug candidates are in clinical trials, and the World Health Organization has endorsed a new diagnostic test called the GeneXpert.
This progress is all the more important given the complacency that led to a complete standstill in research and development for new TB interventions toward the end of the twentieth century.
The TB drugs currently in use were developed between 1950 and 1970.
Indeed, the Bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine is almost 100 years old, while the most widely used diagnostic test, microscopic detection of bacilli in sputum, was developed 130 years ago.
No wonder that the efficacy of these tools has weakened.
The current vaccine prevents severe TB in infants, but not the most prevalent pulmonary TB in all age groups.
The microscopic test gives false results in nearly half of all cases.
We like to think of TB as a malady of the past.
In fact, nine million people develop the active disease every year, and one in five will die.
This places the tubercle bacillus second only to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) on the list of top microbial killers.
One-third of the world’s population is infected with the causative agent, though only one in ten develops the active disease.
The bad news is that infected individuals carry the agent with them for their entire lives.
When one’s immune system weakens, the disease may erupt.
With the emergence in the 1980’s of HIV, which compromises the immune system, TB reemerged, and is the number-one killer of HIV-infected individuals.
Roughly 15 million people suffer from co-infection of HIV and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the primary causative agent in most TB cases.
Moreover, the tubercle bacillus engages in trench warfare, gaining resistance to conventional antibiotics and canonical vaccination approaches, as well as delaying diagnosis and determination of drug sensitivity.
Whereas pandemics appear suddenly, spread rapidly, and raise enormous fears of an impending threat, TB has been spreading slowly but consistently for tens of thousands of years, patiently waiting for new opportunities.
Treatment of TB requires a minimum of three drugs administered over at least six months.
Compare this with antibiotic treatment of, say, a urogenital infection, which lasts a few weeks at most.
As a result, compliance with TB drug treatment is particularly weak, paving the way for the emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) TB, which can no longer be treated by conventional therapeutic regimes.
Some 50 million people are infected with tubercle bacilli that are MDR.
While treating MDR-TB remains possible, doing so is arduous, with a treatment time of roughly two years, using drugs that are neither as efficient nor as benign as canonical drugs – and at a cost that rises by a factor of 10-100.
While this additional cost can be borne by health-care systems in the rich world, it is excessive for poor countries, implying no, or insufficient, treatment.
Moreover, in 85 countries, extensively drug-resistant (XDR) TB, which is virtually untreatable, has been diagnosed.
Indeed, surgical resection of affected lungs has become the treatment of choice in many XDR-TB hotspots.
Welcome back to the pre-antibiotic era!
So, the question is not whether we need novel drugs, vaccines, and diagnostics, but when they will become available.
The new GeneXpert test diagnoses not only TB, but also, in the same step, MDR-TB, which means that it can rapidly direct adequate treatment and prevent infection of contacts – a true breakthrough.
Unfortunately, the test is expensive and sophisticated, putting it out of reach for many poor countries.
A number of other drugs – some new and some repurposed – are currently in the last stage of clinical trials, and one new drug has been approved by US regulators for treatment of MDR-TB even before such trials have been completed.
But the first potential vaccine to be tested for efficacy recently failed miserably.
So, the good news of the last decade is just a glimmer of hope.
We still have a long way to go, and accelerated R&D to develop new drugs and vaccines can be achieved only with increased funding.
Unfortunately, private-sector incentives for developing new TB interventions are too weak.
New approaches, such as partnerships between public research institutions and private industry, are needed.
While clinical trials of the most promising drugs and vaccines need to be pursued, we also need to go back to the drawing board and develop entirely new tactics.
Current annual funding for R&D devoted to TB is estimated to be $500 million.
But more than $2 billion is needed annually.
That amount may seem unrealistically high, but it is a negligible proportion of the estimated $160 billion spent on health-related R&D worldwide.
More important, the economic burden of TB has been put as high as $20 billion annually – and even higher if the losses in human capital are included.
If we choose to continue suffering these losses, we might save some money in the short term.
The wiser course, however, is to make the necessary investments today, thereby averting a much larger bill tomorrow.
Sustainable Development Economics
PARIS – Two schools of thought tend to dominate today’s economic debates.
According to free-market economists, governments should cut taxes, reduce regulations, reform labor laws, and then get out of the way to let consumers consume and producers create jobs.
According to Keynesian economics, governments should boost total demand through quantitative easing and fiscal stimulus.
Yet neither approach is delivering good results.
We need a new Sustainable Development Economics, with governments promoting new types of investments.
Free-market economics leads to great outcomes for the rich, but pretty miserable outcomes for everyone else.
Governments in the United States and parts of Europe are cutting back on social spending, job creation, infrastructure investment, and job training because the rich bosses who pay for politicians’ election campaigns are doing very well for themselves, even as the societies around them are crumbling.
Yet Keynesian solutions – easy money and large budget deficits – have also fallen far short of their promised results.
Many governments tried stimulus spending after the 2008 financial crisis.
After all, most politicians love to spend money they don’t have.
Yet the short-term boost failed in two big ways.
First, governments’ debt soared and their credit ratings plummeted.
Even the US lost its AAA standing.
Second, the private sector did not respond by increasing business investment and hiring enough new workers.
Instead, companies hoarded vast cash reserves, mainly in tax-free offshore accounts.
The problem with both free-market and Keynesian economics is that they misunderstand the nature of modern investment.
Both schools believe that investment is led by the private sector, either because taxes and regulations are low (in the free-market model) or because aggregate demand is high (in the Keynesian model).
Yet private-sector investment today depends on investment by the public sector.
Our age is defined by this complementarity.
Unless the public sector invests, and invests wisely, the private sector will continue to hoard its funds or return them to shareholders in the forms of dividends or buybacks.
The key is to reflect on six kinds of capital goods: business capital, infrastructure, human capital, intellectual capital, natural capital, and social capital.
All of these are productive, but each has a distinctive role.
Business capital includes private companies’ factories, machines, transport equipment, and information systems.
Infrastructure includes roads, railways, power and water systems, fiber optics, pipelines, and airports and seaports.
Human capital is the education, skills, and health of the workforce.
Intellectual capital includes society’s core scientific and technological know-how.
Natural capital is the ecosystems and primary resources that support agriculture, health, and cities.
And social capital is the communal trust that makes efficient trade, finance, and governance possible.
These six forms of capital work in a complementary way.
Business investment without infrastructure and human capital cannot be profitable.
Nor can financial markets work if social capital (trust) is depleted.
Without natural capital (including a safe climate, productive soils, available water, and protection against flooding), the other kinds of capital are easily lost. And without universal access to public investments in human capital, societies will succumb to extreme inequalities of income and wealth.
Investment used to be a far simpler matter.
The key to development was basic education, a network of roads and power, a functioning port, and access to world markets.
Today, however, basic public education is no longer enough; workers need highly specialized skills that come through vocational training, advanced degrees, and apprenticeship programs that combine public and private funding.
Transport must be smarter than mere government road building; power grids must reflect the urgent need for low-carbon electricity; and governments everywhere must invest in new kinds of intellectual capital to solve unprecedented problems of public health, climate change, environmental degradation, information systems management, and more.
Yet in most countries, governments are not leading, guiding, or even sharing in the investment process.
They are cutting back.
Free-market ideologues claim that governments are incapable of productive investment.
In short, governments need to learn to think ahead.
The US has no such institution, or indeed any agency that looks systematically at public-investment strategies.
But all countries now need more than five-year plans; they need 20-year, generation-long strategies to build the skills, infrastructure, and low-carbon economy of the twenty-first century.
The G-20 recently took a small step in the right direction, by placing new emphasis on increased infrastructure investment as a shared responsibility of both the public and private sectors.
We need much more of this kind of thinking in the year ahead, as governments negotiate new global agreements on financing for sustainable development (in Addis Ababa in July 2015); Sustainable Development Goals (at the United Nations in September 2015), and climate change (in Paris in December 2015).
These agreements promise to shape humanity’s future for the better.
If they are to succeed, the new Age of Sustainable Development should give rise to a new Economics of Sustainable Development as well.
The Enduring Egypt-Iran Divide
WASHINGTON, DC – Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi may look besieged at home, but by brokering a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas in November, he enhanced his diplomatic stature mightily across the entire Middle East.
Indeed, as 2012 comes to a close, Egypt’s centrality to regional diplomacy has been restored.
The big question for 2013 is whether Morsi will follow his achievement in Gaza by tackling another major diplomatic challenge: rebuilding relations with Iran after more than three decades of animosity.
Initially, the Muslim Brotherhood’s ascent to power in the aftermath of the massive popular protests that toppled Morsi’s predecessor, Hosni Mubarak, inspired hope of renewed diplomatic ties with Iran.
But, despite shared ideological principles, significant political obstacles continue to inhibit bilateral cooperation.
Relations between the two countries collapsed in 1980, after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini came to power in Iran’s Islamic Revolution and severed ties in response to Egypt’s formal recognition of Israel the previous year.
Egypt’s then-president, Anwar El Sadat, granted the exiled Shah of Iran permission to live in Egypt, and supported Iraq in its eight-year war with the Islamic Republic.
The Shah was ultimately buried in a mosque in Cairo.
After Mubarak’s ouster last year, Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei welcomed the prospect of Islamist rule, with delegations from both countries exchanging visits.
For Khamenei, the “Arab Spring” was in fact an “Islamic Awakening.”
Islamists in Iran and Egypt have a strong ideological connection.
They share anti-Israel sentiment, and support Hamas against the secular-nationalist Fatah in the Palestinians’ internecine struggle.
Committed to governance under Sharia (Islamic law), they both view Western culture as a threat.
Iran has made some efforts to establish stronger economic relations with Egypt’s Islamist government and, in turn, cement a powerful anti-Israel front in the region.
Iran’s attempt to strike a deal to sell Egypt crude oil would also help the Iranian government to cope with economic sanctions imposed by the United States and the European Union.
But, although Iran’s oil minister, Rostam Qassemi, said in October that negotiations were underway, Egypt’s minister of petroleum and mineral resources, Osama Kamal, quickly disavowed any such deal.
Beyond economics, Khamenei has an emotional attachment to Egypt.
A student of the Egyptian style of Koran recitation, he gathers Koran reciters from Egypt, as well as from other Islamic countries, in his home every Ramadan.
More important, his outlook has been heavily influenced by the writings of Sayyid Qutb, the Egyptian theoretician of the Muslim Brotherhood.
Prior to the revolution, Khamenei translated three of Qutb’s books into Farsi.
Despite these ideological affinities, political disagreements make a rapprochement unlikely.
The Muslim Brotherhood considers itself the bastion of modern political Islam, and believes that it should assume a leadership role for all Islamist groups and states.
For his part, Khamenei describes himself as the “leader of the Islamic world,” and calls Iran its “mother city” (Umm al Qora).
Moreover, the Sunni-Shia divide could pose a major challenge for Egypt-Iran relations.
The Muslim Brotherhood is working to strengthen ties with Sunni allies, such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and even Turkey, rather than with Iran’s Shia regime, which threatens Sunni regimes by exporting revolution and pitting Shia minorities against their governments.
In fact, since Mubarak’s ouster, anti-Shia propaganda has gained traction in the Egyptian public sphere, with books alleging Shia corruption of Islam’s true meaning filling the shelves of Cairo’s bookstores.
But this campaign largely reflects the growing influence of Egypt’s Sunni allies – particularly the Gulf monarchies, led by Saudi Arabia – rather than a genuine threat from Egypt’s small and quiescent Shia community.
In the Gulf States, Shia have led pro-democracy movements, challenging Sunni governments that have deprived them of their rights.
But these governments attribute the protests to Iranian agitation, not to legitimate domestic grievances.
For them, the conflict between Arabs and Iranians is fundamentally a Sunni-Shia struggle.
These countries then export their anti-Shia discourse to countries, like Egypt, that do not necessarily have a history of Sunni-Shia conflict.
Indeed, many of Cairo’s cultural landmarks, for example, were built under the Shia Fatimid Caliphate.
And, before last year’s revolution, Egypt was considered one of the most Shia-friendly Sunni countries in the Arab world.
But the Muslim Brotherhood remains financially dependent on the Gulf monarchies, which are using Egypt as a platform for their anti-Shia, anti-Iran agenda.
The most urgent dispute between Iran and Egypt, however, relates to Syria.
During its years in opposition, the Muslim Brotherhood considered Iran’s Islamic Revolution an example of how a transnational Islamist government might assume power.
But, in the face of a popular uprising in Syria, Iran has supported the brutal, repressive policies of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
As a result, Islamists in Egypt are beginning to view Iran as a status quo power, not an agent of revolutionary change.
Furthermore, the flow of military supplies from Iran, together with battlefield support for Assad’s regime from Iran’s Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah, reinforce the perception of a Sunni-Shia conflict in Syria.
In this context, the collapse of Assad’s regime would likely exacerbate tensions between Iran and Egypt – especially given that Syria’s Muslim Brotherhood, the leading opposition group, would likely play a strong, even dominant, role in a new Syrian order.
For now, Egypt’s government is putting national interests ahead of pan-Islamist aspirations.
Rather than inciting an escalation in fighting between Israel and Hamas in Gaza, Egypt worked with the US and other regional allies to broker a cease-fire.
By contrast, Iran’s military leaders boasted about their support for Hamas, offering no indication that they wanted the fighting to end.
Less than two years after Egypt’s revolution, Morsi’s government is struggling to address domestic challenges, including the proliferation of armed radical groups in Sinai.
But, as regional tensions continue to rise, the chances of an Egypt-Iran détente are likely to deteriorate.
A New Business Model for Cyprus
MADRID – Once again, Europe has peered into the abyss.
But the tentative agreement between Cyprus and the troika (the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund, and the European Central Bank) probably means that the worst has been avoided.
Big losses for large depositors in Cypriot banks will now be imposed, and the country’s second-largest bank will be shuttered.
Looking ahead, however, Cyprus has the means not only to recover, but even to heal its longstanding division with the Turkish-backed statelet in the north of the island.
Cyprus, of course, is just the latest country to be hit by the economic crisis surging through the Mediterranean.
For years, Cyprus had an immense banking bubble, with the sector’s assets estimated at roughly seven times the country’s GDP, as foreign money poured into a tax haven within the eurozone’s secure environment.
The design of the bailout has been shaped both by domestic pressures faced by eurozone leaders and by the exceptional nature of the Cypriot banking bubble: many European leaders suspect that the island had become a money-laundering center for Russian individuals and entities, which pumped an estimated one-third of the €68 billion into the country’s banks.
Regardless of the details of the ultimate deal, the risk is that the ghost of Russia’s bailout of Cyprus in 2011 could provoke severe side effects across Southern Europe, both for governments’ borrowing costs and for small savers.
Nevertheless, it is imperative not to lose sight of some very valuable assets that Cyprus holds – assets that could mean the country’s economic salvation.
In 2011, the American energy company Noble discovered some 200 billion cubic meters of gas in the Eastern Mediterranean – the value of this block, known as the Aphrodite gas field, has been estimated at some €80 billion.
Work has already begun on extraction, with production expected to commence in 2018.
Experts say that the reserves could provide some 100 years of energy for Cyprus – and an alternative supply source for energy-hungry Europe.
In fact, in the search for an acceptable bailout package, the future revenues from these assets were at one point considered as possible guarantees.
The United States Geological Survey has estimated that the Levant Basin, which extends across the Israeli, Cypriot, and Lebanese seabed, contains some 3.45 trillion cubic meters of recoverable natural gas and 1.7 billion barrels of oil.
Given their geographic location, however, these incredible reserves can be uncapped, extracted, and exported only on the basis of inter-state cooperation.
As with all marine gas and oil deposits, the rights to the waters and the riches below are critical.
And, given such riches, competition might appear lucrative at first sight.
But cooperation stands to enlarge the pie.
Moreover, economic agreements may promote closer cooperation in other realms.
Energy matters have already led to an unprecedented warming in relations between countries such as Israel and Cyprus in recent years, with an agreement signed in 2010 formally delimiting these states’ respective exclusive economic zones.
It is not unimaginable that this type of cooperation could be extended to include other neighbors around the Levant.
The good news is that Cyprus’s newly elected president, Nicos Anastasiades, may be open to such an agenda.
Naturally, much will depend on how he fares politically in the current turmoil surrounding the bailout package.
Anastasiades, a member of the pro-European Dimokratikós Sinayermós (Democratic Rally) party, won 57% of the popular vote on a platform that emphasized economic recovery, and this will naturally be his top priority.
Nevertheless, a cautious look beyond the current turbulence – and into Anastasiades’s history – provides grounds for optimism.
In 2004, Anastasiades and his party supported the Annan Plan, developed by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and supported by the European Union.
Annan’s reunification proposal provided the blueprint for a “United Republic of Cyprus” comprising a federation of two states.
When put to a referendum, roughly two-thirds of the island’s 250,000 Turkish Cypriots in the north supported the Annan Plan, but 76% of the 860,000 Greek Cypriots in the south rejected it.
It is not inconceivable, however, that Anastasiades’s victory could provide impetus for reopening the dialogue between the island’s north and south – that is, once the current crisis has passed.
Such an outcome would be a major breakthrough for Cyprus and the region.
Resolving the island’s longstanding division would nest Cyprus more comfortably in the EU, and the economic effects would be manifold, extending throughout the eastern Mediterranean.
For example, both Turkey and Greece could reduce their military spending (though naturally to varying degrees, given their respective geopolitical environments).
Greece is the second-largest defense spender, relative to GDP, in the EU; clearly, in today’s economic climate, savings here could provide hugely welcome budget relief.
And the Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Öcalan’s recent call for a ceasefire is an encouraging sign that Turkey, too, stands to benefit from a peace dividend.
Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras’s visit to Istanbul earlier this month was a heartening sign that tensions between Greece and Turkey are already beginning to ease.
A deepening of cooperation in the eastern Mediterranean would provide myriad economic opportunities, not least the many related to developing the region’s cross-border maritime gas reserves.
Anastasiades has endured a perfect economic storm during his first month in office, and the current crisis is certain to continue to dominate his agenda.
But, beyond today’s tempest, there is light on the horizon.
Cyprus, and its neighbors, must now pull together to reach it.
Mengoptimalkan Potensi Remaja Putri
LAGOS – Setiap kali seseorang bicara mengenai perempuan usia remaja, mungkin yang terlintas di pikiran anda adalah stereotip umum seperti “cewe gaul dan gemar merundung” atau tipikal anak SMA pemurung yang mengunci diri di kamarnya.
Meskipun pada kenyataannya remaja putri termasuk salah satu kelompok paling termarginalkan di dunia, mereka juga memiliki potensi besar yang bisa meningkatkan pembangunan.
Kini, para pemudi terus-menerus dikekang dan tidak mendapat kebebasan menentukan nasibnya sendiri.
Lebih dari 32 juta perempuan muda di negara-negara termiskin mengalami putus sekolah.
Setiap harinya 39.000 perempuan di bawah usia 18 tahun dijadikan istri.
Bagi sebagian besar perempuan, hak-hak reproduksi seperti impian belaka.
Kondisi ini tercela, berakibat fatal, dan ceroboh secara ekonomi.
Ketika ditanggulangi, kita akan melindungi jutaan anak-anak sekaligus memecahkan sejumlah tantangan besar yang tengah kita hadapi.
Tidak sedikit kesulitan yang disebabkan dari pertumbuhan penduduk dengan cepat.
Meskipun jumlah penduduk relatif stabil di banyak negara, ada beberapa kawasan yang mengalami kenaikan populasi cukup besar, terutama kawasan yang mana kesuksesan perempuan dibatasi oleh beragam tantangan.
Di Afrika, populasi penduduk diperkirakan akan berlipat ganda pada tahun 2050 dan naik 4 kali lipat di akhir tahun 2100.
Jika perempuan muda ditempa dan diberi pengetahuan, keterampilan, dan alat untuk menghindari kehamilan tidak diinginkan dan mengambil kendali atas masa depannya, tingkat fertilitas akan merosot tajam.
Kelompok perempuan terdidik dan berdaya akan menjadi agen-agen yang mengusung perubahan positif di dalam komunitasnya.
Melindungi segenap remaja putri di dunia memang tidak mudah.
Tapi secara global, negara telah mengikat janji melalui rumusan Tujuan-tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDGs) yang ambisius dan harus dipenuhi pada akhir tahun 2030, termasuk komitmen mengakhiri pernikahan anak di bawah umur dan menjamin pendidikan anak usia sekolah.
Bagaimanapun juga, agar setiap negara mampu melindungi dan memberdayakan perempuan, mereka harus merangkul pelaksanaan salah satu inisiatif pokok, yaitu perluasan akses pada vaksin human papillomavirus (HPV), penyebab utama kanker serviks.
Dikenal sebagai penemuan relatif baru, vaksin HPV bekerja paling efektif pada perempuan usia 9-13 tahun yang tidak pernah terinfeksi virus tersebut, yang berarti belum aktif secara seksual.
Syarat usia tersebut membedakan vaksin HPV dari jenis vaksin lain bagi anak-anak yang umumnya diberikan ketika masih bayi.
Sekilas penemuan ini tampak mengecewakan, karena vaksin HPV tidak serta-merta diterima sebagai imunisasi wajib layaknya jenis vaksin lain.
Faktanya, syarat usia memberi peluang besar untuk menjangkau perempuan usia remaja dan menyediakan layanan kesehatan penting lainnya, seperti pendidikan reproduksi, keberhasihan selama menstruasi, pencegahan atau pengobatan penyakit cacingan, pemeriksaan gizi, suntikan vitamin, dan pelayanan general check-up.
Untungnya, pemerintah di negara-negara berkembang semakin sadar dan menuntut pemberian vaksin HPV.
Ini sangat logis, terutama karena sebagian besar korban, yaitu 85% dari 266.000 perempuan yang meninggal dunia akibat kanker serviks setiap tahunnya – satu perempuan setiap dua menit – berasal dari negara-negara berkembang.
Apabila tidak dicegah, angka tersebut diperkirakan akan bertambah hingga 416.000 pada tahun 2035, bahkan melebihi angka kematian ibu.
Meskipun vaksin HPV bukanlah solusi efektif bagi sebagian negara berkembang (vaksin ini mencegah 1.500 kematian per 100.000 penerima vaksin), pada umumnya vaksin tersebut menjadi satu-satunya solusi, karena negara-negara termiskin di dunia memiliki keterbatasan dalam mendeteksi dan mengobati kanker serviks.
Ini juga salah satu alasan diselenggarakannya konferensiStop Cervical, Breast and Prostate Cancer di Afrika beberapa pekan lalu, yang dihadiri oleh dokter ahli kanker, pejabat pemerintah, pemimpin sektor swasta, dan perwakilan masyarakat sipil.
Ada kabar baik: landasan untuk inisiatif vaksin HPV sudah dibentuk.
Pada tahun 2013, sebelum SDGs disepakati, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, organisasi yang saya pimpin, menerapkan langkah-langkah untuk membuat vaksin HPV tersedia dan terjangkau bagi negara-negara miskin.
Sejak itu, 23 negara sudah memperkenalkan vaksin sebagai demonstration pilot projects, serta bantuan 5 set tambahan.
Tapi kita masih dihadapkan dengan beberapa tantangan besar.
Walaupun sesi vaksinasi yang dilakukan di sekolah-sekolah terbukti berhasil, upaya ini tidak cukup untuk menjangkau anak-anak perempuan yang hidup di negara dengan tingkat kehadirannya rendah, terutama di wilayah perkotaan.
Kecuali kita sanggup menemukan cara merangkul kelompok-kelompok paling rentan, tidak peduli besarnya kemauan politik atau jumlah dana yang dikucurkan, semua itu tidak akan cukup untuk memenuhi SDGs yang bisa melindungi perempuan dan anak-anak.
Sejauh ini hanya dua negara penerima bantuan Gavi dengan angka partisipasi relatif tinggi yang sudah memperkenalkan vaksin di tingkat nasional, dengan demikian belum diketahui seberapa sulit cara penanggulangan tantangan tersebut.
Seiring beralihnya kita dari demonstration projects menuju sistem scaling-up nasional secara bertahap yang lebih efisien dan hemat biaya, gambaran dan ekspektasi yang diperoleh akan lebih utuh.
Ada beberapa gagasan untuk menjemput remaja perempuan yang tidak bersekolah, salah satunya melalui pusat kesehatan masyarakat.
Sekarang, perempuan biasanya mendatangi klinik kesehatan ketika hamil atau membawa bayinya untuk diimunisasi.
Tapi dengan melibatkan pimpinan setempat dan orangtua untuk menaikkan kesadaran mengenai pencegahan kanker serviks dan mengatasi masalah kesehatan lainnya, kita bisa menghasilkan permintaan dan menambah jumlah pemeriksaan di puskemas atau klinik lokal.
Akses pada vaksin HPV bagi semua perempuan akan memperbaiki taraf hidup jutaan warga, tidak hanya dengan penurunan jumlah infeksi kanker serviks, tapi juga penyediaan layanan penting lainnya.
Peluang tersebut harus senantiasa diingat oleh dokter ahli kanker, pejabat pemerintah, dan perwakilan sektor swasta dan masyarakat sipil.
Ini adalah kewajiban bagi semua pemerintah di 193 negara yang menandatangi SDGs.
Jangan kecewakan mereka.
Penyuntingan Genetik dan Pencurian Benih
AUSTIN, TEXAS – Empat ratus tahun yang lalu, John Rolfe menggunakan benih tembakau yang dicuri dari West Indies untuk mengembangkan ekspor pertama yang menghasilkan laba untuk Virginia, merugikan perdagangan tembakau koloni Spanyol di Karibia.
Lebih dari 200 tahun kemudian, orang Inggris lainnya, Henry Wickham, mengambil benih pohon penghasil karet dari Brazil dan membawanya ke Asia – melalui institusi kolonial besar yaitu London’s Royal Botanic Gardens – yang mengakhiri kemajuan industri karet di Amazon.     
Di masa dimana tidak ada peraturan ekspor tanaman, satu koper penuh benih dapat menghancurkan penghidupan dan bahkan seluruh perekonomian.
Berkat kemajuan ilmu genetik, hal ini akan lebih mudah dilakukan dalam waktu dekat.
Yang pasti, dalam beberapa dekade terakhir, langkah besar telah diambil untuk mengatur pergerakan ke luar batas negara yang disengaja dari materi genetik hewan, tanaman, dan makhluk hidup lainnya.
Konvensi PBB mengenai Keanekaragaman Hayati pada tahun 1992, khususnya, telah membantu menjaga hak-hak penyedia sumber genetik – seperti (idealnya) petani dan masyarakat adat yang telah melindungi dan memelihara genetik yang berharga – dengan memasukan biodiversitas kedalam kedaulatan nasional.        
Walaupun ada beberapa orang yang berhasil menghindari peraturan, sistem hukum yang dikembangkan dengan susah payah akan memastikan hal ini sulit dilakukan.
Mayoritas pertukaran internasional benih, tumbuhan, hewan, mikroba, dan barang biologis lainnya harus memenuhi perizinan, termasuk perjanjian perpindahan material. 
Namun bagaimana jika pengiriman material tidak diperlukan sama sekali?
Bagaimana jika yang diperlukan untuk mengambil benih yang diinginkan hanya email?
Bagaimana jika, dengan pengurutan genetik, peneliti dapat “menghidupkan” materi genetik yang sesuai?
Pertukaran keanekaragaman hayati yang difasilitasi oleh internet tentunya akan lebih sulit untuk diatur.
Dan, dengan pengurutan genetik menjadi lebih cepat dan murah, serta teknologi penyuntingan genetik yang maju dengan pesat, pertukaran semacam ini dapat terjadi lebih cepat dibandingkan yang Anda kira.         
Faktanya, gen, bahkan keseluruhan organisme, sudah dapat berpindah secara virtual – makhluk biologis dalam dunia nyata, tapi tidak lebih dari rangkaian angka satu dan nol pada saat berpindah.
Virus kecil yang dapat menyebabkan influensa adalah contoh utama dari perkembangan teknologi.
Hari ini, ketika jenis influensa baru muncul di Asia, ilmuwan mengumpulkan usapan tenggorokan, melakukan isolasi virus, dan melakukan pengurutan genetik virus baru tersebut.
Jika kemudian mereka mengunggah urutan genetik tersebut di internet, laboratorium di Amerika dan Eropa bisa melakukan sintesa virus tersebut lebih cepat dengan mengunduh data dibandingkan menunggu kurir untuk mengantarkan contoh fisik virus.
Virus dapat lebih cepat menyebar secara elektronik dibandingkan di dunia nyata.   
Teknologi yang ada saat ini juga memungkinkan hal yang sama dilakukan pada virus dan bakteri yang lebih rumit, walaupun melakukan sintesa keseluruhan dari organisme lebih tinggi dengan genetik yang lebih rumit, seperti jagung, masih jauh di masa depan.
Tapi hal ini bukan masalah, karena teknologi penyuntingan genetik baru, seperti CRISPR-Cas9, memungkinkan ilmuwan untuk membuat organisme baru yang rumit, menggunakan informasi pengurutan genetik dari organisme yang secara fisik dapat mereka akses. 
Misalnya, sifat unggulan dari jagung yang tahan kemarau dari komunitas Zapotec di Oaxaca, Meksiko, dapat direproduksi dengan menyunting gen variasi jagung lain.
Tidak diperlukan teknologi canggih baru untuk melakukan hal ini. 
Yang diperlukan adalah pengurutan genetik dari ribuan jenis jagung.
Data-data tersebut bertindak sebagai roadmap dan pool sumber daya, sehingga memungkinkan ilmuwan untuk membandingkan pengurutan di layar komputer dan mengenali jenis-jenis jagung.
Penyesuaian yang dipilih dapat dilakukan, misalnya ke benih jagung hibrid baru Mosanto atau DuPont Pioneer.      
Pengelolaan akses database genetik yang besar menjadi sangat penting untuk mencegah versi virtual pencurian yang dilakukan oleh Rolfe dan Wickham.
Dan, tentunya, di surat elektronik yang dipublikasikan dalam Undang-undang Kebebasan Informasi Amerika Serikat, salah satu ilmuwan jagung terkemuka Departemen Pertanian Amerika Serikat, Edward Buckler, menyebut pengelolaan tersebut sebagai “masalah besar di masa kini” sehubungan dengan pembiakan tanaman.   
Jika perusahaan bioteknologi pertanian seperti Monsanto dan DuPont Pioneer – belum lagi firma lainnya yang bekerja dengan sumber daya genetik, termasuk perusahan obat dan biologi sintesis startup – mempunyai akses bebas ke database tersebut, penyedia genetik yang diperlukan sangat mungkin untuk dirugikan.
Perusahaan-perusahaan ini adalah kapitalis yang mempunyai inisiatif finansial kecil untuk berpihak pada yang lemah.
Dalam hal ini, “pihak yang lemah” bisa saja adalah petani sorghum Afrika, pelaku pengobatan tradisional, orang yang tinggal di hutan, atau komunitas tradisional lainnya – orang-orang yang telah menciptakan dan menjaga keanekaragaman hayati, tapi tidak pernah mempunyai keangkuhan atau keserakahan untuk menyatakan genetik sebagai hak milik, dan paten mereka.
Hanya perlu seseorang untuk mengurutkan kreasi mereka, dan membagi data terserbut di database yang terbuka bagi semua orang.  
Namun akses terbuka adalah mode du jour dalam berbagi data penelitian.
GenBank Pemerintah Amerika Serikat, misalnya, bahkan tidak mempunyai perjanjian yang melarang penyalahgunaan.
Hal ini harus diubah.
Lagipula, database yang terbuka ini tidak hanya memfasilitasi berbagi data, namun juga pencurian.   
Pertanyaan mengenai bagaimana mengatur akses data pengurutan genetik mulai bermunculan di diskusi internasional, termasuk di Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO) dan Organisasi Pangan dan Pertanian (FAO).
Mungkin forum terpenting bagi diskusi tersebut adalah Konferensi Anggota Konvensi Keanekaragaman Hayati, yaitu perjanjian utama yang mengatur akses terhadap keanekaragaman hayati.
Pertemuan berikutnya (COP 13) akan dilakukan di Cancun, Meksiko, pada awal Desember.
Peserta COP 13 harus fokus pada kebutuhan untuk melindungi hak penyedia sumber daya.
Dalam hal ini, mereka harus melakukan pemeriksanaan hati-hati terhadap kebijakan yang ada dan menciptakan perubahan yang diperlukan – sebelum biologi sintetik mendahului sistem hukum dan menjadikanya tidak berguna. 
Persiapan harus dilakukan untuk mengawasi akses terhadap pengurutan genetik yang menjamin pembagian yang adil dan merata dari penggunaannya.
Jika tidak, hal ini akan merusak upaya mendorong konservasi dan mencegah pembajakan, membahayakan konvensi keanekaragaman hayati – dan hal-hal yang dilindungi konvensi ini.        
Taking Safety Littorally
PASADENA – In 2011, the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami devastated Japan’s coastal region.
Last year, Hurricane Sandy caused a wall of water to engulf low-lying coastal areas on the East Coast of the United States, particularly in New York and New Jersey.
Such catastrophic events underscore the vulnerability of coastal regions worldwide to extreme weather events that produce intense storm surges (increased water depth at the coast) and large, powerful waves.
Although Sandy, at its peak, was only a post-tropical cyclone when it hit the US, its winds spanned an area of 1,800 kilometers (1,100 miles), leading to extreme storm surges and waves that decimated the Jersey Shore, flattening communities and destroying the casinos and boardwalks on which the local economy largely depends.
At Battery Park, on Manhattan’s south end, the surge height reached 4.2 meters, flooding homes and businesses and plunging millions into darkness.
Waves also reached extreme heights, with a buoy near the entrance to New York Harbor measuring a peak wave ten meters high, from crest to trough.
Seven years earlier, Hurricane Katrina struck the coast of the Gulf of Mexico in the US as a Category 3 storm.
With a surge height of 7-10 meters, and flooding at some locations extending 20 kilometers inland, Katrina caused catastrophic damage to the Gulf Coast, which has yet to be fully repaired.
In 1989, Hurricane Hugo struck near Charleston, South Carolina, with a surge height of nearly four meters.
The list goes on.
When coastal areas were not heavily inhabited, such storms, while violent, did not cause significant, lasting damage to people’s livelihoods and lifestyles.
But now, with commerce and recreation dominating coastlines worldwide, the “let it be” approach of the past is no longer practical.
Moreover, as climate change causes sea levels to rise, extreme storms’ destructive potential is being significantly enhanced.
Although this rise may seem small in the short run, especially when compared to the immediate increase caused by major storms, its long-term effects must not be ignored.
Clearly, the combination of storm surges and large waves causes major devastation in coastal areas.
But these challenges are not insurmountable.
In fact, engineering approaches have been developed that can protect coastal residents from the consequences of extreme storms.
Previous efforts to enhance coastal protection can provide a roadmap to reconstruction that will help to avert future damage.
One suggested approach is to leave an uninhabited buffer zone extending shoreward from the water.
In Hilo, Hawaii, after devastating tsunamis struck in 1946, 1960, and 1964, the vulnerable area near the city was declared a municipal park, where no structures were allowed to be built.
By contrast, Japan relied almost exclusively on an extensive series of seawalls and offshore breakwaters along the east coast of the island of Honshu.
But, in many areas, the Tohoku tsunami overflowed and even destroyed these protective structures – including the seawall at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in northern Honshu.
As a result, the plant’s three active reactors suffered near-meltdowns, leading to a buildup of hydrogen gas, a series of explosions and fires, and leakage of radioactive material into the atmosphere.
To be sure, such coastal defenses could help to protect crucial structures.
But they should be combined with shoreward buffer zones, where homes, schools, and hospitals would not be permitted.
Defensive barriers would not necessarily require heavy investment; they could be mounds of sand several meters high located along and near the shoreline.
In fact, in some areas of the US and other countries, only extensive dune fields and vegetated areas are used to separate buildings from the seashore.
Sand mounds are particularly advantageous, given coastal areas’ economic value.
They provide immediate protection during storm season, but can be removed at times of year when extreme storms are unlikely and recreational beach use is most important.
In order to protect the local economy further, beaches should be repaired after major storms through “beach nourishment” (replacement of lost sand from external sources).
Protecting urban areas that are located near the ocean, but lack buffer beaches, requires a different approach.
One option would be to construct seawalls and/or rock revetments high enough to prevent shoreward inundation.
But local residents may protest such structures, given that they could make the area less attractive.
And, as Japan’s recent experience demonstrated, protecting against the most powerful threats – such as the 9.0-magnitude Tohoku earthquake and the subsequent three-meter tsunami – would require massive, costly construction projects.
For one such area, New York City, an alternative has been proposed: massive storm-surge barriers across the entrance to the harbor region that could be closed when a major storm approaches.
Such structures have been built across the River Thames in London, and a similar barrier project is underway in Venice, Italy.
But, in addition to requiring substantial investment, this approach raises serious questions, reflecting uncertainty about the effects that river flows can have on harbors, the environmental consequences of closing a bay, and the impact on shipping.
In any case, stricter building codes are crucial for structures built in coastal areas.
This could include designing the ground levels of seaside buildings to permit storm-induced surges to pass through without flooding the lower floors, thus minimizing potential damage to offices and homes.
In addition, construction in coastal areas damaged by extreme events could be prohibited, as has been done in Hilo, Hawaii.
Coastal regions are the most vulnerable to many kinds of extreme weather events.
But measures can be taken to protect these communities.
By considering safety, economics, and aesthetics, the right approach for a particular area can be developed – and local citizens, businesses, and the environment can be defended.
Underinvesting in Resilience
NEW YORK – The hurricane on America’s eastern seaboard last week (which I experienced in lower Manhattan) adds to a growing collection of extreme weather events from which lessons should be drawn.
Climate experts have long argued that the frequency and magnitude of such events are increasing, and evidence of this should certainly influence precautionary steps – and cause us to review such measures regularly.
There are two distinct and crucial components of disaster preparedness.
The one that understandably gets the most attention is the capacity to mount a rapid and effective response.
Such a capacity will always be necessary, and few doubt its importance.
When it is absent or deficient, the loss of life and livelihoods can be horrific – witness Hurricane Katrina, which ravaged Haiti and New Orleans in 2005.
The second component comprises investments that minimize the expected damage to the economy.
This aspect of preparedness typically receives far less attention.
Indeed, in the United States, lessons from the Katrina experience appear to have strengthened response capacity, as shown by the rapid and effective intervention following Hurricane Sandy.
But investments designed to control the extent of damage seem to be persistently neglected.
Redressing this imbalance requires a focus on key infrastructure.
Of course, one cannot at reasonable cost prevent all possible damage from calamities, which strike randomly and in locations that cannot always be predicted.
But certain kinds of damage have large multiplier effects.
This includes damage to critical systems like the electricity grid and the information, communication, and transport networks that constitute the platform on which modern economies run.
Relatively modest investments in the resilience, redundancy, and integrity of these systems pay high dividends, albeit at random intervals.
Redundancy is the key.&#160;
The case of New York City is instructive.
The southern part of Manhattan was without power for almost a full workweek, apparently because a major substation hub in the electrical grid, located beside the East River, was knocked out in a fiery display when Hurricane Sandy and a tidal surge caused it to flood.
There was no pre-built workaround to deliver power by an alternate route.
The cost of this power failure, though difficult to calculate, is surely huge.
Unlike the economic boost that may occur from recovery spending to restore damaged physical assets, this is a deadweight loss.
Local power outages may be unavoidable, but one can create grids that are less vulnerable – and less prone to bringing large parts of the economy to a halt – by building in redundancy.
Similar lessons were learned with respect to global supply chains, following the earthquake and tsunami that hit northeast Japan in 2011.
Global supply chains are now becoming more resilient, owing to the duplication of singular bottlenecks that can bring much larger systems down.
Cyber security experts rightly worry about the possibility of bringing an entire economy to a halt by attacking and disabling the control systems in its electrical, communication, and transportation networks.
Admittedly, the impact of natural disasters is less systemic; but if a calamity takes out key components of networks that lack redundancy and backup, the effects are similar.
Even rapid response is more effective if key networks and systems – particularly the electricity grid – are resilient.
Why do we tend to underinvest in the resilience of our economies’ key systems?
One argument is that redundancy looks like waste in normal times, with cost-benefit calculations ruling out higher investment.
That seems clearly wrong: Numerous expert estimates indicate that built-in redundancy pays off unless one assigns unrealistically low probabilities to disruptive events.
That leads to a second and more plausible explanation, which is psychological and behavioral in character.
We have a tendency to underestimate both the probabilities and consequences of what in the investment world are called “left-tailed events.”
Compounding this pattern are poor incentives.
Principals, be they investors or voters, determine the incentives of agents, be they asset managers or elected officials and policymakers.
If principals misunderstand systemic risk, their agents, even if they do understand it, may not be able to respond without losing support, whether in the form of votes or assets under management.
Another line of reasoning is that businesses that depend heavily on continuity – for example, hospitals, outsourcing firms in India, and stock exchanges – will invest in their own backup systems.
In fact, they do.
But that ignores a host of issues concerning the mobility, safety, and housing of employees.
A broad pattern of self-insurance caused by underinvestment in resilient infrastructure is an inefficient and distinctly inferior option.
Underinvestment in infrastructure (including deferred maintenance) is widespread where the consequences are uncertain and/or not immediate.
In reality, underinvestment and investment with debt financing are equivalent in one crucial respect: they both transfer costs to a future cohort.
But even debt financing would be better than no investment at all, given the deadweight losses.
Cities and countries that aspire to be hubs or critical components in national or global financial and economic systems need to be predictable, reliable, and resilient.
That implies a transparent rule of law, and competent, conservative, and countercyclical macroeconomic management.
But it also includes physical resilience and the ability to withstand shocks.
Hubs that lack resilience create cascades of collateral damage when they fail.
Over time, they will be bypassed and replaced by more resilient alternatives.
Protecting Education in Conflict Zones
DOHA, LONDON – In conflict zones, it is children who often bear the brunt of the violence.
Last month, repeated air strikes on a school compound in Idlib, Syria, killed at least 22 children; and children in the besieged Syrian city of Aleppo have, for months, had no way to escape near-constant bombardments.
As the New York Times reported in September, “They cannot play, sleep or attend school.
Increasingly, they cannot eat.”
Just a few weeks before that report, a bomb was detonated outside a school in Southern Thailand, just as parents were dropping off their children.
The blast instantly killed a father and his four-year-old daughter, and injured ten others.
Brad Adams of Human Rights Watch described the bombing as an act of “incomprehensible brutality”: “Calling this a war crime does not fully convey the harm done to the victims, or the far-reaching impact such attacks have on children in the region.”
And just weeks before the Thailand bombing, on August 13, air strikes on a school in Yemen’s northwestern Saada region killed ten children and injured about 30 more.
Given these recent examples, there is clearly a need to prevent attacks – by state and armed non-state actors alike – on educational institutions and facilities.
That is why Education Above All (EAA) has established its advocacy program, Protect Education in Insecurity and Conflict (PEIC).
The rationale underpinning PEIC is straightforward: education provides critical opportunities for children and young people, and this is especially true for those living in conflict zones.
Schools and universities give students a vital link to normality, while encouraging them to maintain hope and pursue their aspirations.
They not only train the next generation of doctors, journalists, lawyers, and community leaders; they also furnish children with mentors, food, water, and knowledge about basic health and sanitation.
And yet, as the attacks on schools in countries such as Syria, Yemen, and Sudan show, what are supposed to be safe havens often are under direct threat.
If children can still attend school during conflicts, they will be the green shoots that emerge to re-rebuild their war-torn societies when the fighting is over.
To protect students’ basic human right to education, universities and schools in conflict zones should be shielded in the same way that health-care facilities are.
Indeed, like hospitals, schools concentrate one of the most vulnerable populations in any society.
Attacks on children and schools often draw international condemnation, but words alone are clearly not an effective deterrent.
Thus, PEIC’s mission is to use the enforcement mechanisms available under international law to strengthen our collective political will to prevent attacks on educational facilities.
EAA wants to ensure that education is recognized as being fundamental to human development – and thus is accorded the fullest protection.
We should be creating a world where everyone who wishes to learn, teach, or conduct academic research can do so in peace and with dignity.
But this shared ambition requires shared action, because it will take collaboration, cooperation, and mutual trust to develop the new international arrangements needed to protect educational institutions in conflicts.
Toward that end, and in partnership with the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack, PEIC has taken a leading role in promoting the Safe Schools Declaration, which includes a promise to protect “schools and universities from military use during armed conflict.”
This clause is essential for safeguarding schoolchildren, teachers, and facilities during times of war.
We hope that, in time, the Declaration in its entirety will become a universally recognized international standard.
In September, Albania became the 56th country to sign the Declaration, and the Albanian government has now publicly committed to protecting education during periods of armed conflict.
In making this pledge, Albania has joined countries such as Iraq, where there is a pressing need to safeguard children’s futures, as well as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy, Kenya, Nigeria, New Zealand, Norway, Qatar, and South Sudan.
EAA is committed to preventing schools from becoming battlegrounds, and it is calling on all countries that have not yet signed the Declaration to do so.
Signing the Declaration amounts to a political commitment to protect education, even during the most savage conflicts – which is to say that it is a commitment to protect the world’s children.
It is in every country’s interest to guarantee that today’s students will have the opportunity to serve as tomorrow’s leaders.
As the world watches schools being destroyed in Syria, Yemen, and other conflict zones the Safe Schools Declaration is more important than ever.
Protecting Zimbabwe
JOHANNESBURG – Although the Chinese ship that was carrying arms to Zimbabwe, the An Yue Jiang, has reportedly turned back, we don’t know where else President Robert Mugabe’s military and paramilitary forces may be acquiring weapons.
In light of the escalating violent repression of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change – and of those whose support apparently helped the MDC to prevail in the presidential election, the results of which have still not been announced after four weeks – an international arms embargo on Zimbabwe is urgently needed.
In addition, we call on the African Union, with the support of the United Nations, to send an investigative mission to Zimbabwe to determine what additional measures may be required to carry out the internationally accepted “responsibility to protect.”
The concept of the “responsibility to protect” was adopted unanimously by the UN World Summit in 2005.
Yet, it remains controversial because it is often assumed that it implies the use of military force for purposes of humanitarian intervention.
We believe, as was recognized at the UN World Summit, that military force should only be a last resort when needed to prevent or halt large-scale loss of life.
The first step is to gather reliable information so that it is possible to know what international measures are required to prevent a disaster.
In the case of Zimbabwe, it is extremely difficult to obtain such information.
Mugabe’s regime has systematically shut down independent media, attacked independent civil society organizations, denied visas to foreign journalists, and has arrested and beaten journalists who nevertheless enter the country.
Foreign observers were present when the voting took place in Zimbabwe on March 29, and their presence helped to ensure that the election itself was peaceful.
The observers have long since left the country, however, and the reports that have filtered out suggest that in some parts of the country, Mugabe’s opponents are now experiencing a reign of terror.
The Constitutive Act of the African Union provides in Article 4 the “right of the Union to intervene in a Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of grave circumstances, namely: war crimes, genocide, and crimes against humanity [as well as a serious threat to legitimate order].”  
Here too, however, actual military intervention should only be a last resort.
In the case of Zimbabwe, for example, it is possible that sending in unarmed observers from other African countries would be sufficient.
Their presence and ability to provide objective information might prevent continuation or further escalation of the violence of the last few weeks to the point where it would require military intervention.
Unarmed observers could also help to ensure that emergency international food assistance, on which much of Zimbabwe’s population now depends for survival, is distributed equitably, without regard to the political leanings of those requiring it.
Earlier this year, the African Union, through the good work of former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, averted a calamity in Kenya after a disputed election led to widespread violence.
The danger in Zimbabwe appears to be comparable.
Once again, the African Union, with the support of the UN, should provide the leadership that would demonstrate that Africa has the capacity and the will to resolve a great crisis in a manner that mitigates the suffering of African people.
No Time for Trade Fundamentalism
CAMBRIDGE – “One of the crucial challenges” of our era “is to maintain an open and expanding international trade system.”
In fact, they were written 35 years ago, in 1981.
The problem then was stagflation in the advanced countries.
And it was Japan, rather than China, that was the trade bogeyman, stalking – and taking over – global markets.
The United States and Europe had responded by erecting trade barriers and imposing “voluntary export restrictions” (VERs) on Japanese cars and steel.