Coca-Cola, General Mills, Kellogg, Kraft, Nestlé, and Groupe Danone all have market shares ranging from 4% to 7%.
These companies’ control of this market makes sense if you think about what they are selling.
The most popular functional foods are soft drinks, sports drinks, breakfast cereals, snacks, energy bars, and juice drinks.
About three-quarters of breakfast cereals make health claims for the whole grain or fiber that has been added to make them “functional.”
Moreover, as Nancy Childs, a business school professor, wrote in 
 Nutrition Business Journal
 in 2004, functional foods for obesity, for example, promise their manufacturers “a double reward”: eligibility for qualified health claims and possible reimbursement under Medicare as a disease treatment.
They also provide “balance to food company product portfolios, thereby limiting corporate liability on both legal and stock valuation fronts” – a reference to potential claims against companies that their products might cause obesity or poor health.
But many of these products are basically sugar water or sugary foods that might as well be cookies, with ingredients added or removed to appeal to LOHAS customers who would otherwise not buy them.
A private testing laboratory, ConsumerLab.com, found that hardly any of the “vitamin waters” it tested contained what their labels said they did, and some had only 20% to 50% of the amounts of nutrients listed.
Likewise, half the fat in most power and energy bars – which bring in $2 billion in annual sales – is saturated and some is trans.
Many bars targeted to low-carbohydrate dieters have misleading “net carb” calculations.
Some do not disclose their content of sugar alcohols, and some have so much of these additives that they are almost certain to produce laxative effects or gas.
Well, I do.
I can’t see the point of eating indigestible vitamin-and-fiber supplemented carbohydrates flavored with artificial sweeteners. If I think I need more vitamins, I prefer to take a multivitamin supplement.
If I need a hundred or so calories in a hurry, I prefer a banana, a handful of nuts, or, for that matter, a delicious candy bar.
This is not to diminish the value of some of the lesser evils – low-fat milk and yogurt, for example.
Gerakan imunisasi massal sukses memberantas penyakit, namun kematian anak di sejumlah negara seperti Haiti dan Bangladesh akibat penyakit mudah disembuhkan yang disebabkan patogen-patogen umum tak kunjung hilang.
Globalisasi berhasil mengangkat jutaan orang keluar dari kemiskinan ekstrem, namun tidak menyelamatkan mereka dari ancaman penyakit tidak menular di era pasca-industrial – mulai dari diabetes hingga jantung – yang marak di negara-negara yang kekurangan sumber daya untuk mengobati.
Di balik paradoks ini masih hangat isu lain: mayoritas riset kesehatan berlangsung di negara-negara maju, sementara kebanyakan beban kesehatan masyarakat secara global muncul di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah.
Rendahnya efisiensi dalam pengalokasian sumber daya sangat buruk – bisa dibilang menyalahi moral, sehingga melemahkan pengembangan solusi-solusi kesehatan bagi negara yang paling membutuhkan.
Dahulu dimungkinkan bagi kita mengatasi masalah pembangunan global menyangkut generasi pertama dengan pemindahan modal dan solusi langsung dari negara-negara kaya ke negara-negara miskin.
Misalnya melalui program untuk meningkatkan jumlah siswa masuk sekolah dasar, dan di bidang kesehatan masyarakat, gerakan imunisasi massal.
Tetapi, generasi terbaru masalah pembangunan, seperti kualitas pendidikan hingga kematian anak akibat penyakit dapat diobati, lebih sulit dipecahkan.
Permasalahan semacam itu menuntut adanya peningkatan kapasitas jangka panjang dan transfer pengetahuan dari negara-negara kaya ke negara-negara miskin; keduanya penting dalam pengembangan solusi.
Dengan kata lain, fokus pada strategi-strategi dan investasi kesehatan masyarakat secara global harus bergeser menuju penurunan ketimpangan struktural antara negara-negara kaya dan miskin, dari segi kapasitas melakukan riset medis dan implementasi kesehatan masyarakat.
Misi tersebut – menurut saya pribadi harus menjadi tujuan utama setiap inisiatif kesehatan masyarakat di tingkat global saat ini – perlu mengenali peranan besar lembaga-lembaga seperti International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research (icddr,b), berkedudukan di Dhaka, Bangladesh, tempat saya bekerja sebagai ilmuwan.
Sekarang, sebagian besar aktivitas kesehatan masyarakat di tingkat global melibatkan peneliti dari negara-negara maju yang memimpin tim lokal di negara-negara berkembang.
Meskipun ini lebih baik daripada memaksakan solusi-solusi sudah jadi seperti di zaman Perang Dingin lalu, ini tidak ideal.
Penelitian kesehatan dan penerapan kebijakan di negara-negara berkembang harus dipimpin oleh peneliti dan spesialis dari negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah – pakar yang bisa memadukan keahlian ilmiah paling mutakhir dengan pemahaman yang kuat atas konteks lokal.
Manfaat besar dari inovasi yang dimotori negara-negara berkembang sudah dirasakan sejak dahulu.
Semenjak 15 tahun terakhir, inovasi-inovasi ilmiah yang dirintis oleh negara dunia ketiga sudah berkontribusi signifikan terhadap kemajuan yang diraih Tujuan Pembangunan Milenium (MDGs), terutama dalam hal kesehatan dunia.
Sumbangan icddr,b saja cukup membuktikan keuntungan di balik inovasi kesehatan yang diusung sebuah negara berkembang.
Semua peneliti di lembaga tersebut menerapkan sains yang bersifat rumit dan inovatif, mulai dari uji klinis dan studi epidemiologi hingga uji coba modifikasi perilaku yang bertujuan mengurangi penyebaran penyakit menular, dan hasilnya sungguh menakjubkan.
Contoh terkemuka dari hasil kerja icddr,b adalah cairan rehidrasi oral (oral rehydration solution atau ORS), larutan dari campuran gula dan garam yang diberikan lewat mulut kepada pasien yang menderita diare seperti kolera.
Cairan tersebut diperkirakan mencegah 40 juta kematian global sejak tahun 1960an dan disebut salah satu penemuan medis terpenting di abad ke-20. Ini lah salah satu hasil dari peran sentral icddr,b.
Baru-baru ini, saya dan tim mengembangkan sistem baru berbiaya rendah untuk penggunaan “bubble CPAP” (continuous positive airway pressure), yang menjaga aliran udara selama proses pengobatan pneumonia akut.
Trevor Duke, Direktur di Centre for International Child Health di RSRoyal Children di University of Melbourne, juga terlibat dalam proyek ini.
Versi bubble CPAP yang kami kembangkan, yang menggunakan bahan lebih murah dan banyak tersedia seperti tabung plastik dan botol shampo, terbukti selama pengujian bahwa lebih efektif daripada terapi oksigen aliran rendah yang lazim dipakai sesuai anjuran WHO.
Di akhir uji coba, RS Dhaka menggunakan bubble CPAP baru yang rendah biaya, alih-alih terapi yang disarankan WHO, sebagai bagian dari pengobatan standar untuk anak-anak penderita pneumonia.
Sejak saat itu, angka kematian pasien yang diobati dengan bubble CPAP turun dari 21% menjadi hanya 6%.
Kesuksesan ini berangkat dari fakta bahwa para peneliti icddr,b – mayoritas adalah warga negara Bangladesh yang menerima pelatihan di luar negeri – sangat familiar menyikapi masalah yang perlu diatasi.
Mereka tahu persis cara menghadapi keterbatasan sumber daya yang sangat sulit, bahkan mustahil.
Pengalaman MDG selama 15 tahun menunjukkan dengan jelas potensi inovasi negara berkembang yang tidak diragukan lagi dalam memajukan kesehatan masyarakat.
Untungnya, para pemimpin dunia betul-betul meresapi pembelajaran tersebut: rumusan Sustainable Development Goals atau Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan – agenda pembangunan pasca-2015 yang ambisius telah diadopsi pada pertemuan PBB bulan September lalu – bersendikan pada ide kepemilikan lokal.
Meskipun demikian, di balik dukungan kuat terhadap penelitian dan pengembangan yang dimotori institusi setempat, masih ada sejumlah kendala yang menghambat inovasi negara berkembang yang perlu dipecahkan segera.
Tentu tidak mengejutkan bahwa masalah tersulitnya adalah kurangnya sumber daya, baik manusia dan anggaran.
Untuk mengatasinya, negara-negara maju dan berkembang perlu bekerja sama guna menjamin adanya investasi yang memadai, agar upaya lokal terus berjalan dengan optimal.
Melalui dukungan yang cukup dari mekanisme pembiayaan dalam dan luar negeri, pusat-pusat inovasi seperti icddr,b bisa tumbuh dan berkembang di negara-negara miskin.
Dengan mendorong pertukaran pengetahuan dan transfer teknologi, lembaga-lembaga tersebut bisa mempererat kerja sama dengan negara-negara berkembang dan pada akhirnya menghilangkan ketimpangan yang langgeng dan tragis yang selama ini menghantui kesehatan dunia.
Inovasi-inovasi kesehatan yang bermunculan dari negara-negara miskin sudah melewati ujian scalability dan applicability di tempat-tempat yang paling membutuhkan.
Ketika mayoritas penduduk dunia tinggal di tempat yang memiliki keterbatasan sumber daya, kita harus menghargai dan berinvestasi pada upaya yang dikerahkan para pihak yang mendorong garda depan ilmu kedokteran di negara-negara berkembang.
Healthy People, Healthy Cities, Healthy Economies
OXFORD – The forces that drove the growth of European and North American cities in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries are now driving urbanization in Brazil, China, India, Mexico, Russia, and other emerging-market countries.
Because the growth of these cities has been accelerated and magnified by productive technologies, rapid internal migration, and high net reproduction rates, many have reached unprecedented sizes at breathless speed.
Indeed, all but three of the world’s 20 largest cities are in emerging markets.
Many forecasts suggest that by 2030, the four largest emerging-market economies will have overtaken the G-7 in combined size, and that by 2050, today’s emerging-market economies will represent more than half the global economy and an even larger share of the world’s population.
These forecasts all assume that economic growth will be generated in cities.
But will emerging-market cities be healthy enough to drive rapid economic growth?
But a recent symposium at Oxford University concluded that emerging-market cities could improve and maintain urban health by capturing the inherent advantages of concentration, coordinating health policies and programs, adopting successful innovations, reforming health education and training, and developing improved planning processes.
Indeed, many potential solutions stem from opportunities for innovation created by the physical concentration of people and economic activity.
It is invariably more efficient to build and maintain health-related infrastructure, such as water supply and sanitation systems, clinics, and hospitals, and deliver specialized health care, where population densities are highest – and to create affordable-care networks of community health workers using low-cost technology. It is invariably easier to capture economies of scale and operation in public-health programs where those economies are greatest.
Moreover, while the health of urban populations is directly or indirectly affected by actions taken (or not taken) in almost every branch of government, few emerging markets have acted to improve horizontal coordination within national or city administrations. Fewer still have addressed the need for vertical coordination betweennational and city governments.
Tailored solutions are required – what works in one city might not work in others – but, because problems arising from weak or absent coordination are widespread, emerging markets should consider governance models that vest accountability for urban health outcomes – together with the authority to shape them – in city governments.
But such innovation does not always begin at home, which is why city governments need to know about potentially applicable ideas and lessons from other cities and countries.
Unfortunately, the diffusion and dissemination of innovative ideas in the fields of public health and health care is generally a random, haphazard, and inefficient process.
So emerging markets should collaborate to develop health-knowledge networks aimed at facilitating mutual learning.
There is also an urgent need to address the fact that public health and medical education in emerging markets is rarely integrated.
Having received different training and developed different mindsets, public-health officers and medical doctors (and their subordinates) often operate in silo-like environments – to the detriment of the people they serve.
Moreover, there are few opportunities for doctors to specialize in urban health.
To overcome this challenge, emerging-market governments should consider radical reforms in education and training in urban public health and health care.
Urban growth in emerging-market countries – and the corresponding concentration of poverty – has challenged and sometimes overwhelmed the capacity of their governments to provide sustainable and affordable housing, water supply and sanitation, solid-waste management services, and education – all of which directly affect urban health – as well as basic health-care services.
To address these issues emerging-market cities should practice anticipatory planning, based on realistic demographic forecasts; develop city and nationwide patient registers and health-information systems; and seek to integrate health and health-care planning with overall city planning.
If cities are to drive emerging-market countries towards a better future, their governments must ensure that urban housing, infrastructure, and services stay abreast of demand.
After all, an investment-friendly business environment requires adults who are fit to work and children who are fit to learn.
Ultimately, the economic health of emerging-market countries will depend on the reinvention of urban public health.
Heal Thyself Online
NEW YORK – An interesting phenomenon is happening to health care in the United States, quite apart from all the noise about changes to the country’s system of health insurance: individuals are starting to take charge of their own health and trying to avoid needing care in the first place.
Just as people long ago moved from institutional, mainframe computers to personal computers, they are starting to make the same move from institutional to individual tools with their health – not for treating serious diseases such as cancer, to be sure, but for everyday monitoring and prevention.
A variety of trends are coming together to make this happen.
First, it is becoming apparent that many health problems are self-induced: too much unhealthy food and drink, too much smoking, too little sleep or exercise.
There is nothing new about that insight, but now it is easier to keep track of personal behavior.
Many of these new “homebrew health” people meet at so-called Quantified Self Meetups, where some people demonstrate their software and others come to learn or compare data with others.
The tools they use include everything from pedometers/accelerometers that monitor footsteps and motion (from Nike, FitBit and others) to sleep monitors (MyZeo), pulse and heart monitors, and glucose monitors (mostly for diabetics). People also count and calculate their food consumption.
Just as you can use your computer to manage your finances according to a budget, so can you use it to manage your body.
The hope is that the data may help you to modify your behavior in the right direction.
In my own case, I behave pretty well already: I swim for 50 minutes a day, I floss regularly, I eat sensibly, and so forth.
But now that I use the MyZeo sleep monitor (I sleep fine!), I have noticed a marginal change in my own behavior when I am out at night.
Sometimes, I am more motivated to leave early, anticipating extra sleep points in the morning!
It is a small thing, but the kind of change that adds up over time.
Potentially even more effective are social tools, using so-called “game dynamics.”
That is, just as you can earn points by collaborating with others in video games like World of Warcraft, so can you earn points by competing or collaborating with your friends in healthy behavior.
These are services that make health into a serious game where others can reinforce your willpower.
Imagine a health club that does not threaten you, but rather sends a message: “Juan and Alice will be waiting for you to join them lifting weights today at 4 p.m.”
Or “Your team is only four points behind the Blue team.
Please come and help us win.”
An existing service in which I plan to invest, www.GetUpandMove.me, allows you to challenge a friend: “I will swim for 50 minutes if Alice runs around the block four times.”
The challenge is posted on Facebook or Twitter, ideally soliciting encouragement from your friends.
Right now, this market is incoherent, much like the early days of the personal computer.
The different applications do not talk to one another; it is difficult to match your exercise against your sleeping patterns, or to share data with other people.
But that is the excitement: there are many companies at early stages, all looking for money and partners.
Not all of them will survive; with luck, some of them may merge.
Those with great technology and lousy marketing will find others with lousy technology and great marketing.
The companies with back-end standards will create interfaces to a couple of the leading applications; then other applications will tie themselves into those back-ends.
How will all this be paid for?
In the beginning, early adopters will pay for most of these tools and services directly; others will be sponsored by advertisers.
It would be good to believe that they will be effective, but so far we have little proof.
A vendor’s testimonial that nine out of 10, or 99 out of 100, customers are satisfied with the results will hardly be convincing, because those who fail to improve will have less interest in participating.
More convincing will be data shared by individuals and collected (with permission) by third parties.
At some point, employers, who are interested in healthy, motivated employees and lower health costs (but demand a lower level of proof than insurance companies and governments), are likely to come in, based on these informal data-collection efforts and their own pilot programs.
That will lead to more data being collected, and eventually there may be enough to convince insurance companies and governments to pay as well.
One part of me resists that: good health should be something that people do for themselves.
But the realist in me knows otherwise about what can help good behavior spread.
As a taxpayer, I would rather pay to foster other people’s good behavior than pay more for the consequences of their bad behavior.
China’s Climate Commitment
BEIJING – In what some might consider a surprising development, China – currently the world’s largest emitter of carbon dioxide – is emerging as a global leader in climate policy as it seeks to build a cleaner and more efficient economy.
Indeed, China’s efforts to curb pollution and environmental destruction, while shifting to a more sustainable growth model, can provide valuable lessons for governments worldwide.
The first step toward sustainable economic growth is to recognize, as China’s leaders have, that pollution – produced largely through coal-fired power plants – is profoundly damaging citizens’ lives and livelihoods, particularly in major cities like Beijing and Shanghai.
Moreover, greenhouse-gas emissions are contributing to climate change, the effects of which, as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warns, could prove devastating for all countries, with China highly vulnerable.
Moreover, China is already the world’s largest oil importer, and energy demand continues to increase rapidly.
As a result, energy security has become a serious issue.
In this context, the authorities’ effort to accelerate the shift of China’s growth model to one that is more innovative, inclusive, efficient, and sustainable represents the only feasible way forward.
The good news is that some progress has already been made, innovation is occurring rapidly, and clear plans are being formulated and implemented.
China is now the world’s largest investor in clean energy, with a record $68 billion channeled toward renewable-energy development in 2012 and another $54 billion last year.
Furthermore, its non-fossil energy supply more than doubled from 2005 to 2013 while the CO2 intensity of GDP fell by 28%.
And China’s reliance on coal-based energy is decreasing, with the rate of decline targeted to accelerate.
But much more needs to be done.
Over the last eight years, China’s economy has grown by an average of 10% annually – a total increase of around 115% – leading to a 53% increase in CO2 emissions.
Fortunately, China’s government recognizes the need to pursue more stable, higher-quality GDP growth.
At the same time, given slower growth in world markets and the challenges of domestic structural adjustment, the annual growth target has been reduced, to around 7.5%.
These structural adjustments are aimed at reducing China’s dependence on heavy industry and manufacturing exports while fostering domestic consumption, promoting higher-tech activities, and strengthening the services sector.
This shift will naturally bring about a decline in demand for energy-intensive raw materials like iron, steel, and cement; at the same time, it will better equip China for the next stages of its development.
To support these efforts, China will build generating stations that rely on natural gas, nuclear power, and renewable sources.
The government has already pledged $286 billion to renewable-energy development and $376 billion to energy-conservation projects in 2011-2015.
Investment in coal-fired electricity generation has been shrinking year on year since 2005.
As a result, by 2020, China’s consumption of energy generated from sources other than fossil fuels will be roughly equivalent to Japan’s total energy consumption.
Non-fossil energy sources will comprise 15% of China’s overall energy mix, reaching 20-25% by 2030.
Beyond that, such sources will meet all further growth in energy demand.
Along with more stringent restrictions on coal consumption and greenhouse-gas emissions, the upcoming 13th Five-Year Plan, for 2016-2020, will include additional investment in research and development.
With this mix of policies, Chinese carbon emissions could peak by 2030, even as the economy grows at a rate of 4-5%.
Coal consumption is likely to peak by 2025.
These targets may be ambitious, but they are entirely achievable.
In fact, with a sufficiently strong commitment from policymakers and businesses, China could reach its clean-energy goals ahead of schedule.
Indeed, moving to a path that offers a reasonable chance of preventing the average global temperature from rising more than 2oC above the level reached in the late nineteenth century – the established international goal – requires that other countries, too, accelerate progress.
This transformation promises not only to benefit the environment, but also to create new sources of economic growth and employment opportunities.
The Chinese dream of one billion citizens living in thriving cities – with access to high-quality education, job opportunities in high-tech industries, and a thriving services sector – can become reality.
And the benefits will not be limited to China.
Other countries can learn from China’s experience through observation and collaboration.
At the same time, they can benefit from the technological advances and cost reductions that Chinese investment in renewable-energy R&amp;D and deployment is enabling.
Finally, China’s deepening commitment to sustainability could improve the chances that the United Nations climate conference in Paris in 2015 will produce a global agreement.
The global nature of environmental challenges creates an important opportunity for international cooperation based on shared interest.
Such cooperation should extend beyond emissions-reduction targets to technology transfer, knowledge sharing, and economic opportunity.
Rich-country policymakers, in particular, should bear in mind this imperative, given their economies’ history of high emissions and greater access to technology.
While China’s economic transformation is vital to its long-term prosperity, it is one – albeit important – step toward mitigating the massive risks associated with climate change.
Lasting progress will require a similar commitment from governments worldwide.
The Spanish Revival
MUNICH – After fighting for its life for the last two years, Spain’s economy finally seems to have moved out of intensive care.
The banking sector has been deemed “cured”; demand for Spanish bonds has soared; and the country can once again raise capital at reasonable interest rates on the market.
But much more work must be done to ensure a stable long-term recovery.
First, the good news.
Investor confidence is on the mend, exemplified by the recent placement of €10 billion ($13.8 billion) in ten-year government bonds – which was over-subscribed by four times.
While risk premiums on ten-year bonds remain far above pre-crisis levels, yields have dropped considerably, from 4% at the beginning of 2010 to 3.2% today.
And a growing number of banks and companies are returning to the capital market.
Moreover, the Spanish economy returned to growth in the third quarter of last year, and is on track to grow by roughly 1% this year.
If, as expected, GDP grows by about 2% next year, Spain will outperform the eurozone average and create an environment conducive to significant long-term employment gains.
Perhaps the most notable consequence of Spain’s recent reform efforts is its current-account surplus – the country’s first in more than two decades.
At the peak of the crisis, Spain’s current-account deficit amounted to an unprecedented 10% of GDP.
Much of this progress reflects surging exports, which grew at an annual rate of 5.2% in 2013, outperforming Germany.
Rapid export growth, together with a drop in imports, enabled Spain to halve its trade deficit last year.
In fact, Spanish factories have boosted their productivity to such a degree that they are now taking orders away from their European competitors.
It should be noted, however, that productivity gains are partly attributable to a massive wave of employee layoffs – the dark side of economic remediation.
Likewise, the reduced labor costs and falling inflation caused by recession and austerity helped to boost Spanish firms’ competitiveness within the eurozone.
To be sure, wage and price adjustments, including temporary developments affecting food and energy costs, have turned Spain’s inflation rate negative, at roughly -0.1%.
But worries about potential deflation scenarios are unwarranted.
On the contrary, by increasing Spaniards’ real disposable incomes, low inflation is helping to stimulate private consumption, fueling a corresponding improvement in economic sentiment indicators, including consumer trust.
And yet, despite these positive indicators, Spain’s long-term economic recovery remains far from certain.
One critical test of its trajectory will be how investment activity develops over the next few quarters.
Though investment stabilized in the second half of last year, it remains well below pre-crisis levels.
The challenge is not simply to increase investment, but also to ensure that it is sustainable, unlike before the crisis, when excessive allocation of capital to real-estate development caused construction and related sectors to become overheated.
This time around, investment must be spread across all sectors, boosting their competitiveness and, in turn, their contribution to GDP growth.
Fortunately, the outlook appears promising, with increased private-sector confidence, rising capacity utilization, and an encouraging sales outlook for companies.
Ongoing fiscal consolidation – and thus strong pressure to keep a tight rein on the budget – will, however, restrict public-sector investment.
The most potent threat to Spain’s economic recovery stems from the labor market.
With an unemployment rate of 25.3% – and youth unemployment running at 53.9% – the situation appears grim.
Making matters worse, despite considerable gains in the last quarter of 2013, employment growth is far too weak to make a significant dent in joblessness.
In 2012, the government implemented sweeping labor-market reforms to increase companies’ internal flexibility (making it easier to dismiss permanent workers and facilitating wage moderation), and introduced a model for reducing workers’ hours.
But such changes take effect slowly, and often not until the recovery phase.
Given this, the government must do more to boost employment in the short term, especially among young people, whose knowledge, effort, and entrepreneurial spirit is critical to Spain’s long-term economic success.
Additional measures to improve vocational training or extend part-time work, for example, could prove to be invaluable.
The final challenge facing Spain is government debt, which currently amounts to nearly 100% of GDP.
So far, efforts to curb public debt have centered on painful austerity measures, including substantial cuts in the supply of public goods, especially health care and education.
At the same time, pension reform – including adjustments in how benefits are indexed to inflation – will ease some of the pressure on the public budget.
Such measures, together with further liberalization of protected domestic sectors, will strengthen Spain’s economic-growth model considerably.
The risk now is a relapse into reform fatigue.
While a slowdown in the pace of reform might bring temporary relief, it would almost certainly reverse Spain’s hard-won achievements.
Indeed, with the worst now over, complacency is the Spanish economy’s worst enemy.
Quantitative Easing for the People
OXFORD – It is now a near certainty that, by the end of this year, falling energy and commodity prices will push annual inflation in the eurozone below zero – well under the European Central Bank’s target of near 2%.
Rather than continue to allow misguided conventional thinking, centered on German economic ideology, to impede effective action, the ECB must pursue quantitative easing (QE) “for the people” – an adaptation of Milton Friedman’s “helicopter drops” strategy – to reverse deflation and get the eurozone back on track.
As it stands, conventional monetary policy has had – and American-style QE will have – little impact on the eurozone’s core countries.
This can be explained partly by the fact that, when it comes to credit provision, capital markets do far less of the heavy lifting in the eurozone (where banks matter more) than in the United States.
As a result, bringing down yields on government, corporate, and asset-backed bonds has less impact.
At the same time, the euro exchange rate – the one mechanism whereby current policies could still make a difference – cannot be pushed down much further.
For starters, given the eurozone’s huge trade surplus, doing so would incur strong international resistance.
Moreover, the mechanisms by which the US Federal Reserve’s purchases of asset-backed securities stimulate consumer spending – low mortgage rates, widely available home refinancing, high housing prices, and home-equity withdrawal – function differently in the eurozone.
In Germany, France, and Italy, higher house prices spur non-owners to save more for the down payment and inspire caution among tenants, who expect future rent hikes.
And the housing wealth of existing owners does not translate into significantly higher spending, given the lack of access to home-equity loans and cheap mortgage refinancing.
Finally, in countries like Germany, where households’ bank and saving deposits far outweigh their debt, lower interest rates reduce total household spending.
Another factor impeding QE’s impact in the eurozone is low bond yields, which, by increasing measured pension-fund deficits, make some companies reluctant to invest and thus more likely to raise contribution rates and limit pension benefits.
In the US, more generous assumptions regarding discount rates are used to calculate pension-fund liabilities.
Furthermore, US-style QE, in particular, tends to have adverse distributional implications, because it channels more money toward the wealthy, who have a lower propensity to spend, without providing much to the poorer people who would use it to consume more.
In the eurozone, the distribution issue is especially complex, given that institutional differences between countries can give the impression of discrimination among them.
Clearly, the ECB must develop a strategy that works in the eurozone’s unique system, instead of continuing to follow the Fed’s lead.
Such a strategy should be based on Friedman’s assertion that “helicopter drops” – printing large sums of money and distributing it to the public – can always stimulate the economy and combat deflation.
But, in order to maximize the impact of such an operation, the ECB would also have to find a way to ensure fair distribution.
One simple solution would be to distribute the funds to governments, which could then decide how best to spend them in their countries.
But the eurozone’s rule against using the ECB to finance government spending bars this approach.
A more feasible option, therefore, would be to provide all workers and pensioners with social-security numbers (or the local equivalent) with a payment from the ECB, which governments would merely assist in distributing.
Another alternative would be to use the electoral register, a public database that the ECB could use independently of governments.
Of the roughly 275 million adults with social-security numbers in the eurozone, some 90% are on the electoral register.
Extrapolating from America’s experience in 2001, when a $300 per person social-security rebate boosted spending by about 25% of the total amount distributed, a €500 ($640) check from the ECB could increase spending by about €34 billion, or 1.4% of GDP.
The extra tax revenue that such a rebate would produce would reduce government deficits significantly.
Beyond lifting the eurozone economy out of deflation, such an initiative would have massive political benefits, as it would reduce resentment toward European institutions, especially in struggling countries like Greece and Portugal, where an extra €500 would have a particularly strong impact on spending.
In this way, the ECB could prove to disgruntled citizens and investors that it is serious about meeting its inflation target, and even help to stem the rise of nationalist parties.
To be sure, some countries – especially Germany – are likely to resist this approach by marshaling arguments about prudence and responsibility.
But the fact is that “helicopter money” would work – and nothing in eurozone law prohibits it.
After years of austerity, infighting, and unemployment, it is time to implement a QE program that delivers what Europe needs.
Rescue Helicopters for Stranded Economies
BERKELEY – For countries where nominal interest rates are at or near zero, fiscal stimulus should be a no-brainer.
As long as the interest rate at which a government borrows is less than the sum of inflation, labor-force growth, and labor-productivity growth, the amortization cost of extra liabilities will be negative.
Meanwhile, the upside of extra spending could be significant.
The Keynesian fiscal multiplier for large industrial economies or for coordinated expansions is believed to be roughly two – meaning that an extra dollar of fiscal expansion would boost real GDP by about two dollars.
Some point to the risk that, once the economy recovers and interest rates rise, governments will fail to make the appropriate adjustments to fiscal policy.
But this argument is specious.
Governments that wish to pursue bad policies will do so no matter what decisions are made today.
And to the extent that this risk exists at all, it is offset by the very tangible economic benefits of stimulus: improved labor-force skills, higher business investment, faster business-model development, and new, useful infrastructure.
Aversion to fiscal expansion reflects raw ideology, not pragmatic considerations.
Few competent economists have failed to conclude that the United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom have large enough fiscal multipliers, strong enough spillovers of infrastructure, investment, and other demand-boosting programs, and sufficient financial space to make substantially more expansionary policies optimal.
The question is not whether, but how much, fiscal stimulus is appropriate.
Answering that should be a simple, technocratic cost-benefit calculation.
And yet, in most countries that would benefit from fiscal stimulus, nothing is being done.
Faced with this, my former teacher and long-time colleague Barry Eichengreen has become positively alarmed: “The world economy is visibly sinking, and the policymakers who are supposed to be its stewards are tying themselves in knots.”
Germany’s experience with hyperinflation in the 1920s and its subsequent embrace of “ordoliberalism,” in which the government avoids interfering in the economy, has “rendered Germans allergic to macroeconomics,” Eichengreen writes.
It is time for central banks to assume responsibility and implement “helicopter money,” putting cash directly into the hands of people who will spend it.
Proponents of austerity in Germany, the US, and the UK are suspicious of central banks for the same ideological reasons they are averse to deficit-spending legislatures.
But their objections to central banks are far weaker.
That is because, as David Glasner, an economist at the Federal Trade Commission, has pointed out, attempts to erect an automatic monetary system – whether based on the gold standard, Milton Friedman’s k-percent rule, or the Stanford University economist John Taylor’s “rules-based monetary policy” – have all crashed and burned spectacularly.
History has refuted the University of Chicago economist Henry Simons’s call for “rules rather than authorities” in monetary policy.
The design task in monetary policy is not to construct rules but, instead, to establish authorities with sensible objectives, values, and technocratic competence.
The actions of central banks have always been “fiscal policy” in a very real sense, simply because their interventions alter the present value of future government principal and interest payments.
But when it comes to promoting economic recovery, central banks can certainly do more.
They have immense regulatory powers to require that the banks under their supervision hold capital, lend to classes of borrowers that have historically faced discrimination, and serve the communities in which they are embedded.
And they have clever lawyers.
Helicopter money could take many forms.
Its exact shape will depend on the legal structure of a given central bank, and on the extent to which its administrators are willing to take actions that go beyond their traditional authority (with the implicit or explicit promise that the rest of the government will turn a blind eye).
Success in rebooting the economy will depend on ensuring that the extra cash goes into the hands of those who are constrained in their spending by low incomes and a lack of collateral assets.
And, as with governments engaged in fiscal stimulus, the key to a positive outcome will be to rule out even a smidgeon of fear that repayment obligations will become onerous in any way.
Helicopter Money Is in the Air
LONDON – Fiscal policy is edging back into fashion, after years, if not decades, in purdah.
The reason is simple: the incomplete recovery from the global crash of 2008.
Europe is the worst off in this regard: its GDP has hardly grown in the last four years, and GDP per capita is still less than it was in 2007.
Moreover, growth forecasts are gloomy.
In July, the European Central Bank published a report suggesting that the negative output gap in the eurozone was 6%, four percentage points higher than previously thought.
“A possible implication of this finding,” the ECB concluded, “is that policies aimed at stimulating aggregate demand (including fiscal and monetary policies) should play an even more important role in the economic policy mix.”
Strong words from a central bank.
Fiscal policy has been effectively disabled since 2010, as the slump saddled governments with unprecedented postwar deficits and steeply rising debt-to-GDP ratios.
Austerity became the only game in town.
This left monetary policy the only available stimulus tool.
The Bank of England and the US Federal Reserve injected huge amounts of cash into their economies through “quantitative easing” (QE) – massive purchases of long-term government and corporate securities.
In 2015, the ECB also started an asset-buying program, which ECB President Mario Draghi promised to continue “until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.”
QE has not been a magic bullet.
While it helped stop the slide into another Great Depression, successive injections of money have yielded diminishing returns.
The ECB’s announcement of its policy narrowed the gap in bond yields between Europe’s core and periphery.
But a study by Thomas Fazi of the Institute for New Economic Thinking emphasizes QE’s lack of influence on bank lending, the increase in non-performing loans, and the dire output and inflation figures themselves.
Moreover, QE has undesirable distributional consequences, because it gives money to those who have already have it, and whose current spending is little influenced by having more.
Policymakers should have been alert to the likelihood of this mediocre outcome.
When central banks try to reduce inflation by pumping liquidity out of the system, their policy is subverted by commercial banks’ ability to pump it back in by making loans.
In today’s deflationary environment, the reverse has happened.
Central banks’ attempt to pump in liquidity to stimulate activity is subverted by commercial banks’ ability to pump liquidity out by augmenting reserves and refusing to lend.
That leaves fiscal policy.
The logic of current economic conditions implies that governments should be taking advantage of ultra-low interest rates to invest in infrastructure projects, which would both stimulate demand and improve the structure of the economy.
The problem is the climate of expectations.
As the Oxford economist John Muellbauer says, treasuries and central banks have been “hammering into the consciousness of the private sector the importance of reducing gross government debt relative to GDP.”
This orthodoxy arises from the idea that borrowing is simply “deferred taxation.”
If the private sector believes that taxes will have to rise to pay for government borrowing, according to this view, people will increase their savings to pay the higher taxes, thus destroying any stimulative effect.
The orthodoxy mistakenly assumes that government spending cannot generate any extra income; but so long as it prevails, debt-financed fiscal policy is ruled out as a means to revive economic growth.
Former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, among others, has offered influential support for “helicopter drops” to revive flagging economies.
Helicopter money comes in two forms, which could (and should) be dropped together.
The first is to put purchasing power directly into the hands of consumers – for example, by issuing each voter or citizen with smart cards worth $1,000 each.
The Swiss economist Silvio Gesell, who originally proposed a scheme of “stamped money” at the start of the last century, added a stipulation that balances unspent after a month should be taxed, to discourage hoarding.
Alternatively, helicopter money could be used to finance infrastructure spending.
The advantage of such “monetary financing” is that such spending, while adding to the deficit and leading to a permanent increase in the money supply, would not increase the national debt, because the government would “owe” the money only to its own banker.
This would eliminate the offsetting negative expectation of higher taxes.
Surely, issuing debt that never has to be repaid is too good to be true, right?
There is indeed the obvious danger that governments might easily become addicted to monetary finance to pay for private and public spending, which is why it is unlikely to be tried openly unless economic conditions worsen significantly.
But the political risk of doing nothing if we stumble into another recession (as seems quite likely) is worse.
Like it or not, unconventional fiscal policy could well be the next game in town.
Money from Heaven?
TOKYO – The world economy is struggling.
The single currency is fettering, not freeing, the eurozone; Japan is smarting from the slowdown of America’s normalization of monetary policy; and emerging markets worldwide are suffering the consequences of China’s economic mismanagement.
But adverse global conditions, however troubling, should not lead central bankers to neglect the risks of untested policies – above all the “helicopter drops” that many are now proposing.
Conceived in 1969 by Milton Friedman as part of a thought experiment – not an actual proposal – helicopter drops got their name from the fantastic vision of fresh money being scattered from a helicopter whirring overheard.
But the point of helicopter drops – or what former US Fed Chair Ben Bernanke recently called a “money-financed fiscal program” (MFFP) – is simply to distribute newly printed cash directly to consumers, such as through tax rebates.
Over the last half-century, central bankers have repeatedly ruled out the use of MFFP.
But in the current environment of persistently weak aggregate demand, below-target inflation, and slow or no output growth, economists worldwide have been desperately seeking deus ex machina – a search that, for some, has led to the heliport.
Among the most prominent advocates of MFFP is Adair Turner, whose latest book, Between Debt and the Devil, provides an insightful thought experiment on the use of helicopter money.
Turner and his fellow MFFP advocates seem to believe that placing more money in the hands of the public is practically always welcome.
In their view, it is not only a straightforward way instantly to boost real demand; it also seems preferable to debt-financed fiscal stimulus, owing both to political constraints on debt-burdened governments and to MFFP’s more direct – and thus faster – impact on economy-wide spending.
But MFFP could easily produce too much demand.
The only guarantee against an inflationary surge in this scenario is the prudence of policymakers.
But their incentive to limit inflation may not be particularly strong.
In fact, throughout history, governments have had strong political incentives to monetize the deficit, with the subsequent inflation reducing the debt burden (and effectively confiscating the borrowed savings).
That is why inflation is so much more prevalent in history than deflation.
Yet no MFFP proposal even recognizes this tendency, much less includes provisions to avoid it.
Of course, central banks are independent from government precisely to ensure that their policies are utterly pragmatic, instead of being shaped by partisan politics.
But, in reality, such conduct has been repeatedly absent.
Who today still holds up former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan as a paragon of sagacity?
Still, the biggest risk is posed by fiscal authorities, who tend to be more heavily influenced by political considerations.
Unfortunately, MFFP, by matching monetary expansion to fiscal expansion, effectively empowers fiscal authorities over monetary authorities.
Turner believes that Japan, in particular, would benefit from helicopter drops.
In his view, MFFP is the ideal solution to spur demand, without further augmenting Japan’s already-heavy debt burden.
But Japan’s large public-debt burden is dangerous precisely because of its potential to spur inflation, through the monetization of the debt.
In this context, introducing MFFP – a policy that is even more likely to destabilize prices – seems dangerous.
Japan has made this mistake before.
In 1931, after more than a decade of deep deflation, Finance Minister Korekiyo Takahashi used debt-financed fiscal expansion to bring about a domestic economic revival.
But Takahashi knew when it was time to rein in spending, and in 1934 he attempted to do just that.
His focus on reducing military expenditure, however, attracted strong opposition from army officers, who assassinated Takahashi in 1936.
His successor allowed the military budget to swell, funded by newly created money.
This stimulated rapid inflation, which was brought under control only after the reconstruction following World War II.
Today, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s approach to monetary expansion – central to his “Abenomics” program for economic recovery – is producing positive results, especially in the labor market.
The job-to-applicant ratio stands at 1.28, its highest level since 1991.
The wages of part-time workers are, for the first time in Japan’s history, rising faster than those of full-time employees.
Moreover, prices of food products have started to increase.
Japanese companies are generating strong profits (Japanese stocks may even be undervalued).
And, although GDP is growing very slowly, and even turning negative from time to time, gross national income continues to rise steadily.
It seems clear that, rather than risk triggering inflation, Japan should continue on this promising path.
And, indeed, even Turner has offered an alternative proposal that fits with this scenario.
He recommends that Japan continue its current method of monetary easing – which can boost demand, while maintaining some safeguard against inflation – and postpone its forthcoming consumption-tax hike.
While fiscal stimulus and monetary expansion do not always have to go hand in hand, under current circumstances in Japan, this proposal makes sense.
The False Promise of Helicopter Money
LONDON – One of the most prominent questions concerning the global economy today is whether monetary policy is approaching the limit of its effectiveness.
Inflation remains well below target in the eurozone and Japan, despite aggressive quantitative easing (QE) and negative policy interest rates, and both the euro and yen have appreciated against the US dollar since the start of the year.
The problem with the debate is that it has focused solely on the effectiveness of policies, without considering the need for prudence.
The credibility and independence of monetary authorities are essential to the effectiveness of their policies.
And yet some of the proposals being fielded call for central banks to stray further into uncharted territory, expanding and extending their deviation from careful balance-sheet management.
This could inflict reputational damage that may be difficult to rectify, with real financial and economic consequences.
The direct impact of unconventional monetary policy is apparent and largely as expected (with the exception of the recent appreciation of the euro and yen).
Liquidity in banking systems is ample, and borrowing costs have declined, even turning negative for some governments.
But the expected second-order effects – increased economic activity and inflation – have not materialized.
As a result, despite the fact that headline inflation is being dragged down by low commodity prices, a near-consensus has emerged that additional easing is required.
Monetary policy is not the only option for further easing, but it is the most likely.
Structural reforms to support growth typically have long gestation periods, and the economic dislocations that accompany them reduce their political appeal.
Further fiscal easing is at least partly constrained by record-high levels of government debt, which will take many years to bring down.
When it comes to monetary policy, however, the options are similarly limited.
Even monetary policymakers acknowledge that QE is subject to diminishing returns, while adverse effects on the banking system limit the scope for setting policy rates too deeply negative.
As a result, an old idea, first proposed by Milton Friedman in 1969, is making a comeback: “helicopter money.”
Advocates envisage central banks creating money and distributing it directly to those who would spend it, resulting in immediate increases in demand and inflation.
Because households might choose to save some of the money, contemporary suggestions center on helicopter money being transferred to governments, to invest in infrastructure projects or other demand-enhancing initiatives.
Variations call for central banks to buy perpetual government bonds that pay no interest or to convert existing bond holdings into something similar.
Such proposals are troubling for many reasons.
The direct funding by central banks of fiscal deficits or purchases of government debt would result in the monetization of fiscal policy.
Monetization unambiguously weakens central banks’ balance sheets by adding assets that carry no real value (claims on government that will never be repaid), offset by liabilities (newly created money) generated to acquire them.
Advocates of helicopter money rely on two claims.
Some believe that policy can be calibrated to stop short of inflicting meaningful harm, usually because the resulting improvement in economic conditions will obviate the need for continued stimulus.
For others, central banks’ balance sheets are not a constraint, because the exclusive ability to create additional unlimited and cost-free liabilities guarantees long-term profitability.
There are problems with both claims.
Relying on a calibrated approach counts on stimulus being withdrawn before any evidence of concern over the central bank’s finances appears.
But there is no certainty that monetized fiscal spending will spark an economic recovery.
Nor can it be known beforehand that expansionary fiscal policy would be curtailed if economic prospects do not improve.
In fact, in the absence of negative public or market commentary on central-bank finances, the fiscal authorities may be tempted to expand their use of cost-free funding in what looks from their perspective very much like the proverbial “free lunch.”
There are also serious reasons to doubt the claim that seigniorage – the profit to central banks from having zero-cost liabilities (and at least some income-generating assets) – would guarantee profitability in the long term.
Never in the post-gold standard era has there been greater focus on the limits of monetary policy.
This focus could easily turn to the health of central banks’ balance sheets if they continue to expand.
The concept of seigniorage is poorly understood outside a relatively small community; it should not be used as the first line of defense.
None of this comes as news to central banks, which attach the utmost importance to their reputation for having robust finances, carefully managing risk, and ensuring the soundness of money.
Indeed, the financial prudence that underpins policy credibility and confidence in central banks is ultimately what makes seigniorage possible.
Only institutions that are perceived as financially viable can expect their liabilities to be held by others as assets; central banks are no exception.
At stake is the value of money.
Helicopter money would transfer risk from governments’ balance sheets to those of central banks, blurring the lines between policies, institutions, and their relative autonomy.
Its appeal lies in being able to exploit the unique financial structures of central banks.
But there are limits beyond which confidence in the financial integrity of central banks – and consequently the soundness of money – will be undermined.
Those limits are of course impossible to identify in advance.
But at a time of heightened sensitivity to the implementation and effectiveness of monetary policy, it would be a mistake to embark on a path that jeopardizes central banks’ very viability.
Help the Poor Help Themselves
HELSINKI – One early result of today’s global recession is that many donor governments are trimming their foreign aid programs.
Before taking office, President Barack Obama had promised a doubling of American foreign assistance, from $25 billion to $50 billion, but since then Vice-President Joe Biden has warned that this commitment will probably be achieved more slowly because of the downturn.
Here in Finland, our aid decreased by 62% in the early 1990’s, a period that Finns still call “The Depression.”
Japan’s overseas aid declined by 44% when that country hit hard times.
The current worldwide slump could bring a cut in official development assistance (ODA) of 30%.
It is also easy to predict that donor governments will be looking carefully at the ever-growing expenditure on the United Nations’ 14 peacekeeping operations around the world.
The total bill for all UN operations in the 12 months to mid-2008 reached $6.7 billion, about twice the level 15 years ago.
One can only imagine the grave consequences if operations that are already spread thin are cut.
Recall that the Rwandan genocide was preceded by a similar lack of enthusiasm for financing the UN mission there.
Recent events in Congo and elsewhere suggest that there is no room for complacency.
But by far the biggest transfer of assets from rich countries to the developing world takes place through migrant workers’ remittances.
Few decision-makers seem aware of this.
In 2006, around 150 million migrants sent roughly $300 billion to their families in developing countries.
The number of transactions is huge, estimated at 1.5 billion remittances annually.
Most are for sums of only $100-$300, and they normally go towards immediate household consumption.
The value of all ODA in 2006 was $126 billion, less than half the value of private remittances, even though it includes assistance from OECD and non-OECD countries, as well as from China.
If the recession costs migrants their jobs in richer host countries and forces them to return home to their countries of origin, millions of already poor people will be thrown into greater poverty.
The possible impact can be gauged by looking at where the $300 billion in remittances are distributed.
In 2006, poorer European countries received about $50 billion, Africa got $38 billion, Latin America and the Caribbean $68 billion, the Middle East $24 billion.
Asia is the major beneficiary, receiving $113 billion.
In all, an estimated 10% of the world’s population is estimated to benefit from remittances, with 57 countries each receiving $1 billion or more annually.
Indeed, some countries are dependent on this income flow.
Cape Verde received 34% of its GDP from remittances, Eritrea 38% and Burundi 23%.
In Asia, the figures were 30% for Afghanistan and 38% for Tajikistan, while in Europe Moldova received 31% of its GDP from external sources.
Some of these countries are either in conflict or are fragile states, so a diminishing flow of remittances will aggravate their instability, and perhaps increase the flow of migration to other countries.
Governments in Europe and elsewhere should therefore consider carefully what other forces will be at work if and when migrant workers are sent home.
These governments already spend tax money on direct foreign aid.
So they should weigh tax breaks that might entice employers to keep migrant workers on the payrolls, as this would probably be a much more efficient way to support these poor countries.
Moreover, given that transaction costs often take a big slice of remittances, aid mechanisms could be used to create safe and cheap channels for financial flows, especially where private money cannot easily reach remote rural areas, as is often the case in Africa or Asia.
Anti-terrorism laws are a problem here, because the demand for more effective control mechanisms on international financial transfers places an extra burden on remittance operators.
These new rules have certainly pushed transaction costs higher.
But the fight against terror and its financing means that governments and financial institutions have extensive data on the cross-border flow of money, which should be used to help people send money to their relatives more easily.
Sending money to some countries is now allowed only through formal banking channels, and this has created virtual monopolies while also preventing remittance money from reaching rural areas where banks don’t operate.
In West Africa, a simple money transfer operator now handles 70% of official payments and also imposes exclusivity on banks.
Allowing more informal financial institutions to channel foreign payments would ease the money flow to remote regions.
Cooperatives, credit unions, and new forms of micro-financing could form networks that would ensure greater accessibility.
Restrictive legal rules in some countries exclude migrants from using official banking systems unless they have the necessary legal status.
Other countries, however, have taken steps to make remittance transfers possible via mobile phones.
The sheer size of these remittances, and their importance in keeping many millions of people above the poverty line, suggests that rich-country governments should take a careful look at the existing system.
An improved system could help alleviate the burden imposed on innocent victims of the financial and economic downturn.
Such a review of remittances should look into restrictive practices that could be abolished, and ask whether official assistance should be adapted to the needs of this informal yet crucially important aid network.
The Living Legacy of Helsinki
VIENNA – Forty years ago, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe concluded with the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, a historic triumph of cooperation over conflict that set the stage for the end of the Cold War.
The accord represented a revolutionary approach to comprehensive security, as well as to bilateral and multilateral relations.
Its signatories recognized a direct link between political and military issues and human rights concerns – and that this link is a fundamental component of peace and security.
That is why, when Serbia was entrusted to lead the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which grew from the Helsinki conference, this year, we were looking forward to celebrating the accord’s many achievements on its 40th anniversary.
But, with the resurgence of armed conflict in Europe challenging the Helsinki Final Act’s fundamental principles, this anniversary has taken on new meaning.
The crisis in Ukraine has, in fact, underscored the Final Act’s enduring relevance.
Indeed, the only way to reconsolidate European security is to reach a durable settlement based on its principles; indeed, had those principles been respected, the current crisis in Ukraine would not have occurred in the first place.
It is now apparent that the roots of that crisis are far deeper than anyone initially realized.
Well before the turmoil in Ukraine erupted, the East-West divide, which our predecessors worked hard to close in Helsinki, had begun to reemerge.
A growing sense of mistrust and hostility, together with a diminishing commitment to the OSCE’s brand of comprehensive security, was hindering cooperation in various areas.
Constructive engagement on security issues had been difficult for some time, reflected in a lack of progress on arms control and other key areas of the OSCE agenda.
The emergence of the crisis in and around Ukraine has only made these challenges more profound, and the search for a solution more urgent.
The high-level Panel of Eminent Persons on European Security as a Common Project, established at the Basel Ministerial Council by last year’s Swiss OSCE chairmanship, provided invaluable insights when they presented their Interim Report on European security at the Munich Security Conference Core Group Meeting in Vienna this week.
The report focuses on the lessons of the OSCE’s engagement in Ukraine, and part of the solution is reflected in the Panel’s title; European security is, indeed, a common project.
The OSCE could play a pivotal role, serving, like the Helsinki conference 40 years ago, as a platform to overcome the existing divide, restore trust, and rebuild a cooperative approach to common security concerns.
The most visible aspects of the OSCE response to the crisis in and around Ukraine have been carried out by the Trilateral Contact Group and the Special Monitoring Mission.
Yet the entire OSCE toolbox has been mobilized to mitigate the crisis, as well as to support other critical steps, including constitutional reform, the protection of ethnic minority rights, and political dialogue and reconciliation.
As the only regional platform that brings all of the key stakeholders to the table, the OSCE plays a vital role in keeping the lines of communication open and finding opportunities for joint action.
Given our good relations with all the key stakeholders in the crisis, Serbia can contribute to the process.
Our chief objectives are preventing the crisis from escalating into a larger conflict, ensuring a sustainable political process, and preserving the inclusive and cooperative nature of the OSCE’s work.
There is little doubt that de-escalation on the ground and visible progress in the Trilateral Contact Group – and the four working groups operating under its auspices – would set the stage for renewed discussions on broader European security issues and the future role of the OSCE.
Given the obvious imperative for cooperative solutions to address transnational and global security threats, this could not be more important.
Simply put, without a shared approach to security and a dedicated joint response, overcoming our current challenges will be virtually impossible.
And, in fact, the situation could worsen considerably, with so-called “frozen” conflicts heating up and reverting to armed confrontation.
As growing instability exacerbates social tensions, ethnic conflict, radicalization, and violent extremism become increasingly likely.
The East-West divide that leaders in Helsinki confronted in 1975 was much wider than the one that that exists today.
Yet, with courage and commitment, they managed to produce a pragmatic compromise based on a set of key principles – a compromise that opened the way for far-reaching cooperation and, indeed, the emergence of today’s interconnected and interdependent world.
Today’s leaders must show similar wisdom and vision, supporting the OSCE’s efforts to revitalize the principles of the Helsinki accord.
This will require increased investment of both financial resources and political capital – and a shared commitment to put that investment to good use.
Serbia, a post-conflict society built on a series of compromises, is well placed to coordinate Europe’s much-needed security dialogue during its chairmanship of the OSCE – an organization that helped us through our own transition.
What better advocate is there than one who speaks with conviction gained from personal experience?
The Helsinki principles do not need to be reconsidered; on the contrary, they need to be reaffirmed, strengthened, and safeguarded.
The platform is already in place.
Let us get to work – together.
The Unsustainability of Organic Farming
STANFORD – “Sustainable” has become one of the buzzwords of the twenty-first century.
Increasing numbers of universities offer courses or even programs in “sustainability,” and many large companies boast substantial departments devoted to the subject.
In April, many of the iconic multinational companies in the agriculture/food sector were represented at a three-day “Sustainable Product Expo,” convened by Wal-Mart – the largest retailer in the United States – at its Arkansas headquarters.
But, as with many vague, feel-good concepts, “sustainability” contains more than a little sophistry. For example, sustainability in agriculture is often linked to organic farming, whose advocates tout it as a “sustainable” way to feed the planet’s rapidly expanding population.
But what does “sustainable” really mean, and how does it relate to organic methods of food production?
The organic movement’s claims about the sustainability of its methods are dubious.
For example, a recent study found that the potential for groundwater contamination can be dramatically reduced if fertilizers are distributed through the irrigation system according to plant demand during the growing season; organic farming, however, depends on compost, the release of which is not matched to plant demand.
Moreover, though composting receives good press as a “green” practice, it generates a significant amount of greenhouse gases (and is often a source of pathogenic bacteria in crops).
The study also found that “intensive organic agriculture relying on solid organic matter, such as composted manure that is mixed in to the soil prior to planting, resulted in significant down-leaching of nitrate” into groundwater.
Increasing the nitrate levels in groundwater is hardly a hallmark of sustainability, especially with many of the world’s most fertile farming regions in the throes of drought.
A fundamental reason that organic food production is far less “sustainable” than many forms of conventional farming is that organic farms, though possibly well adapted for certain local environments on a small scale, produce far less food per unit of land and water.
The low yields of organic agriculture – typically 20-50% below conventional agriculture – impose various stresses on farmland, especially on water consumption.
A British meta-analysis published in 2012 identified some of the stresses that were higher in organic agriculture.
For example, it found that “ammonia emissions, nitrogen leaching, and nitrous oxide emissions per product unit were higher from organic systems,” as were “land use, eutrophication potential, and acidification potential per product unit.”
Lower crop yields in organic farming are largely inevitable, owing to the arbitrary rejection of various advanced methods and technologies.
Organic practices afford limited pesticide options, create difficulties in meeting peak fertilizer demand, and rule out access to genetically engineered varieties.
If organic production were scaled up significantly, the lower yields would lead to greater pressure to convert land to agricultural use and produce more animals for manure, to say nothing of the tighter squeeze on water supplies – all of which are challenges to sustainability.
Another limitation of organic production is that it works against the best approach to enhancing soil quality – namely, the minimization of soil disturbance (such as that caused by plowing or tilling), combined with the use of cover crops.
Such farming systems have many environmental advantages, particularly with respect to limiting erosion and the runoff of fertilizers and pesticides.
Organic growers do frequently plant cover crops, but in the absence of effective herbicides, they often rely on tillage (or even labor-intensive hand weeding) for weed control.
At the same time, organic producers do use insecticides and fungicides to protect their crops, despite the green myth that they do not.
More than 20 chemicals (mostly containing copper and sulfur) are commonly used in growing and processing organic crops – all acceptable under US rules for certifying organic products.
Perhaps the most illogical and least sustainable aspect of organic farming in the long term is the exclusion of “genetically engineered” (also known as “genetically modified,” or GM) plants – but only those that were modified with the most precise techniques and predictable results.
Except for wild berries and wild mushrooms, virtually all the fruits, vegetables, and grains in European and North American diets have been genetically improved by one technique or another – often as a result of seeds being irradiated or undergoing hybridizations that move genes from one species or genus to another in ways that do not occur in nature.
The exclusion from organic agriculture of organisms simply because they were crafted with modern, superior techniques makes no sense.
It not only denies farmers improved seeds, but also denies consumers of organic goods access to nutritionally improved foods, such as oils with enhanced levels of omega-3 fatty acids.
In recent decades, conventional agriculture has become more environmentally friendly and sustainable than ever before.
But that reflects science-based research and old-fashioned technological ingenuity on the part of farmers, plant breeders, and agribusiness companies, not irrational opposition to modern insecticides, herbicides, genetic engineering, and “industrial agriculture.”
More Crop for the Drop
STANFORD – The United Nations has called drought the “world’s costliest natural disaster,” both financially, imposing an annual cost of $6-8 billion, and in human terms; since 1900, it has affected two billion people, leading to more than 11 million deaths.
That is because so much of the world is vulnerable; currently affected areas include Australia, Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, North and South America, and the Middle East.
Given that agriculture accounts for 70% of water consumption, on average, worldwide, it seems logical that this sector should be the focus of conservation measures.
And, in fact, a proven technology exists that could go a long way toward reducing the impact of drought: genetic engineering (GE).
Sometimes called “genetic modification,” GE enables plant breeders to make existing crop plants do new things – such as conserve water.
Even with research and development hampered by resistance from activists and excessive government regulation, drought-resistant GE crop varieties are emerging from the development pipeline in many parts of the world.
Over the last two decades, such crop varieties have been cultivated on more than 1.5 billion hectares by more than 17 million farmers in some 30 countries – without disrupting a single ecosystem or causing so much as a stomachache.
Worldwide, these new varieties have provided “very significant net economic benefits at the farm level, amounting to $18.8 billion in 2012 and $116.6 billion” from 1996 to 2012, according to a recent report by Landes Bioscience.
Most of these new crop varieties are designed to resist herbicides, so that farmers can adopt more environmentally friendly, no-till cultivation practices, and many have also been engineered to resist pests and diseases that ravage crops.
Others have higher nutritional value, making them ideally suited for developing-country populations that struggle to acquire the nutrients they need to lead healthy, productive lives.