A growing body of evidence suggests that this media proliferation has countless ill effects.
The United States led the world into the television age, and the implications can be seen most directly in America’s long love affair with what Harlan Ellison memorably called “the glass teat.”
In 1950, fewer than 8% of American households owned a TV; by 1960, 90% had one.
That level of penetration took decades longer to achieve elsewhere, and the poorest countries are still not there.
True to form, Americans became the greatest TV watchers, which is probably still true today, even though the data are somewhat sketchy and incomplete.
The best evidence suggests that Americans watch more than five hours per day of television on average – a staggering amount, given that several hours more are spent in front of other video-streaming devices.
Other countries log far fewer viewing hours.
In Scandinavia, for example, time spent watching TV is roughly half the US average.
The consequences for American society are profound, troubling, and a warning to the world – though it probably comes far too late to be heeded.
First, heavy TV viewing brings little pleasure.
Many surveys show that it is almost like an addiction, with a short-term benefit leading to long-term unhappiness and remorse.
Such viewers say that they would prefer to watch less than they do.
Moreover, heavy TV viewing has contributed to social fragmentation.
Time that used to be spent together in the community is now spent alone in front of the screen.
Robert Putnam, the leading scholar of America’s declining sense of community, has found that TV viewing is the central explanation of the decline of “social capital,” the trust that binds communities together.
Americans simply trust each other less than they did a generation ago.
Of course, many other factors are at work, but television-driven social atomization should not be understated.
Certainly, heavy TV viewing is bad for one’s physical and mental health.
Americans lead the world in obesity, with roughly two-thirds of the US population now overweight.
Again, many factors underlie this, including a diet of cheap, unhealthy fried foods, but the sedentary time spent in front of the TV is an important influence as well.
At the same time, what happens mentally is as important as what happens physically.
Television and related media have been the greatest purveyors and conveyors of corporate and political propaganda in society.
America’s TV ownership is almost entirely in private hands, and owners make much of their money through relentless advertising.
Effective advertising campaigns, appealing to unconscious urges – typically related to food, sex, and status – create cravings for products and purchases that have little real value for consumers or society.
The same, of course, has happened to politics.
American politicians are now brand names, packaged like breakfast cereal.
Anybody – and any idea – can be sold with a bright ribbon and a catchy jingle.
All roads to power in America lead through TV, and all access to TV depends on big money.
This simple logic has put American politics in the hands of the rich as never before.
Even war can be rolled out as a new product.
The Bush administration promoted the premises of the Iraq war – Saddam Hussein’s non-existent weapons of mass destruction –in the familiar colorful, fast-paced, and graphics-heavy style of television advertising.
Then the war itself began with the so-called “shock and awe” bombing of Baghdad – a made-for-TV live spectacle aimed at ensuring high ratings for the US-led invasion.
Many neuroscientists believe that the mental-health effects of TV viewing might run even deeper than addiction, consumerism, loss of social trust, and political propaganda.
Perhaps TV is rewiring heavy viewers’ brains and impairing their cognitive capacities.
The American Academy of Pediatrics recently warned that TV viewing by young children is dangerous for their brain development, and called on parents to keep children under two away from the TV and similar media.
A recent survey in the US by the organization Common Sense Media reveals a paradox, but one that is perfectly understandable.
Children in poor American households today not only watch more TV than children in wealthy households, but are also more likely to have a television in their room.
When a commodity’s consumption falls as income rises, economists call it an “inferior” good.
To be sure, the mass media can be useful as a provider of information, education, entertainment, and even political awareness.
But too much of it is confronting us with dangers that we need to avoid.
At the very least, we can minimize those dangers.
Successful approaches around the world include limits on TV advertising, especially to young children; non-commercial, publicly-owned TV networks like the BBC; and free (but limited) TV time for political campaigns.
Of course, the best defense is our own self-control.
We can all leave the TV off more hours per day and spend that time reading, talking with each other, and rebuilding the bases of personal health and social trust.
Anatomy of a Crisis
BERKELEY – Getting out of our current financial mess requires understanding how we got into it in the first place.
The fundamental cause, according to the likes of John McCain, was greed and corruption on Wall Street.
Though not one to deny the existence of such base motives, I would insist that the crisis has its roots in key policy decisions stretching back over decades. 
In the United States, there were two key decisions.
The first, in the 1970’s, deregulated commissions paid to stockbrokers.
The second, in the 1990’s, removed the Glass-Steagall Act’s restrictions on mixing commercial and investment banking.
In the days of fixed commissions, investment banks could make a comfortable living booking stock trades.
Deregulation meant competition and thinner margins. Elimination of Glass-Steagall then allowed commercial banks to encroach on the investment banks’ other traditional preserves.
In response, investment banks branched into new businesses like originating and distributing complex derivative securities.
They borrowed money and put it to work to sustain their profitability.
This gave rise to the first causes of the crisis: the originate-and-distribute model of securitization and the extensive use of leverage.
It is important to note that these were unintended consequences of basically sensible policy decisions.
Other things being equal, deregulation allowed small investors to trade stocks more cheaply, which made them better off. But other things were not equal.
In particular, the fact that investment banks, which were propelled into riskier activities by these policy changes, were entirely outside the regulatory net was a recipe for disaster.
Similarly, eliminating Glass-Steagall was fundamentally sensible.
Conglomerates allow financial institutions to diversify their business, and combining with commercial banks allows investment banks to fund their operations using relatively stable deposits instead of fickle money markets.
This model has proven its viability in Europe over a period of centuries, and its advantages are evident in the US even now with Bank of America’s purchase of Merrill Lynch.
But conglomeratization takes time.
In the short run, Merrill, like the other investment banks, was allowed to double up its bets.
It remained entirely outside the purview of the regulators.
As a stand-alone entity, it was then vulnerable to market swings.
A crisis sufficient to threaten the entire financial system was required to precipitate the inevitable conglomeratization.
The other element in the crisis was the set of policies that gave rise to global imbalances.
The Bush administration cut taxes. The Fed cut interest rates in response to the 2001 recession.
Financial innovation, meanwhile, worked to make credit even cheaper and more widely available.
This, of course, is just the story of subprime mortgages in another guise.
The result was increased US spending and the descent of measured household savings into negative territory.
Of equal importance were the rise of China and the decline of investment in Asia following the 1997-1998 financial crisis.
With China saving nearly 50% of its GNP, all that money had to go somewhere.
Much of it went into US treasuries and the obligations of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
This propped up the dollar and reduced the cost of borrowing for US households, encouraging them to live beyond their means.
It also created a more buoyant market for the securities of Freddie and Fannie, feeding the originate-and-distribute machine.
Again, these were not outright policy mistakes.
Lifting a billion Chinese out of poverty is arguably the single most important event in our lifetimes.
The fact that the Fed responded quickly prevented the 2001 recession from worsening.
But there were unintended consequences.  The failure of US regulators to tighten capital and lending standards when abundant capital inflows combined with loose Fed policies ignited a furious credit boom.
The failure of China to move more quickly to encourage higher domestic spending commensurate with its higher incomes added fuel to the fire.
Now, a bloated financial sector is being forced to retrench.
Some outcomes, like the marriage of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, are happier than others, like the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers.
But, either way, there will be downsizing.
Foreign central banks are suffering capital losses on their unthinking investments.
As they absorb their losses on US treasury and agency securities, capital flows toward the US will diminish.
The US current-account deficit and the Asian surplus will shrink.
US households will have to start saving again.
The one anomaly is that the dollar has strengthened in recent weeks.
With the US no longer viewed as a supplier of high-quality financial assets, one would expect the dollar to have weakened.
The dollar’s strength reflects the knee-jerk reaction of investors rushing into US treasuries as a safe haven.
It is worth remembering that the same thing happened in August 2007, when the sub-prime crisis erupted.
But once investors realized the extent of US financial problems, the rush into treasuries subsided, and the dollar resumed its decline.
Now, as investors recall the extent of US financial problems, we will again see the dollar resume its decline.
Emphasizing greed and corruption as causes of the crisis leads to a bleak prognosis.
We are not going to change human nature.
We cannot make investors less greedy.
But an emphasis on policy decisions suggests a more optimistic outlook.
Unintended consequences cannot always be prevented.
Policy mistakes may not always be avoidable.
But they at least can be corrected.  That, however, requires first looking more deeply into the root causes of the problem.
Anatomy of a Financial Meltdown
NEW YORK – A vicious circle is currently underway in the United States, and its reach could broaden to the global economy.
America’s financial crisis has triggered a severe credit crunch that is making the US recession worse, while the deepening recession is leading to larger losses in financial markets – thus undermining the wider economy.
There is now a serious risk of a systemic meltdown in US financial markets as huge credit and asset bubbles collapse.
The problem is no longer merely sub-prime mortgages, but rather a “sub-prime” financial system.
The housing recession – the worst in US history and worsening every day – will eventually see house prices fall by more than 20%, with millions of Americans losing their homes.
Delinquencies, defaults, and foreclosures are now spreading from sub-prime to near-prime and prime mortgages.
Thus, total losses on mortgage-related instruments – include exotic credit derivatives such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) – will add up to more than $400 billion.
Moreover, commercial real estate is beginning to follow the downward trend in residential real estate.
After all, who wants to build offices, stores, and shopping centers in the empty ghost towns that litter the American West?
In addition to the downturn in real estate, a broader bubble in consumer credit is now collapsing: as the US economy slips into recession, defaults on credit cards, auto loans, and student loans will increase sharply. US consumers are shopped-out, savings-less, and debt-burdened.
With private consumption representing more than 70% of aggregate US demand, cutbacks in household spending will deepen the recession.
We can also add to these financial risks the massive problems of bond insurers that guaranteed many of the risky securitization products such as CDOs.
A very likely downgrade of these insurers’ credit ratings will force banks and financial institutions that hold these risky assets to write them down, adding another $150 billion to the financial system’s mounting losses.
Then there is the exposure of banks and other financial institutions to rising losses on loans that financed reckless leveraged buy-outs (LBOs).
With a worsening recession, many LBOs that were loaded with too much debt and not enough equity will fail as firms with lower profits or higher losses become unable to service their loans.
Given all this, the recession will lead to a sharp increase in corporate defaults, which had been very low over the last two years, averaging 0.6% per year, compared to an historic average of 3.8%.
During a typical recession, the default rate among corporations may rise to 10-15%, threatening massive losses for those holding risky corporate bonds.
As a result, the market for credit default swaps (CDS) ­– where protection against corporate defaults is bought and sold – may also experience massive losses.
In that case, there will also be a serious risk that some firms that sold protection will go bankrupt, triggering further losses for buyers of protection when their counterparties cannot pay.
On top of all this, there is a shadow financial system of non-bank financial institutions that, like banks, borrow short and liquid and lend to or invest in longer-term and illiquid assets.
This shadow system includes structured investment vehicles (SIVs), conduits, money market funds, hedge funds, and investment banks.
Like banks, all these financial institutions are subject to liquidity or rollover risk – the risk of going belly up if their creditors do not rollover their short-term credit lines.
But, unlike banks, they do not have the safety net implied by central banks’ role as lender of last resort.
Now that a recession is underway, US and global stock markets are beginning to fall: in a typical US recession, the S&amp;P 500 index falls by an average of 28% as corporate revenues and profits sink.
Losses in stock markets have a double effect: they reduce households’ wealth and lead them to spend less; and they cause massive losses to investors who borrowed to invest in stock, thus triggering margin calls and asset fire sales.
There is thus a broader risk that many leveraged investors in both equity and credit markets will be forced to sell illiquid assets in illiquid markets, leading to a cascading fall in asset prices to below their fundamental values.
The ensuing losses will aggravate the financial turmoil and economic contraction.
Indeed, adding up all these losses in financial markets, the sum will hit a staggering $1 trillion.
Tighter credit rationing will then further hamper the ability of households and firms to borrow, spend, invest, and sustain economic growth.
The risk that a systemic financial crisis will drive a more pronounced US and global recession has quickly gone from being a theoretical possibility to becoming an increasingly plausible scenario.
Anatomy of a Revolution Delayed
The ongoing conflict between Iran’s rulers and the Iranian public is the result of a head-on collision between two contradictory forces. In recent years, public attitudes in Iran have become more liberal.
At the same time, power has shifted from conservative pragmatism toward a much more militant fundamentalism.  The call by the most important group of Iran’s clerics for the election results to be thrown out is but the latest sign of the fight back of both the reformist and pragmatic conservative factions.
Thirty years after the Islamic revolution, Iranians are growing demonstrably less religious and more liberal.
Two face-to-face surveys of more than 2,500 Iranian adults, conducted in 2000 and 2005, clearly show the trend.
The percentage of those who “strongly agree” that democracy is the best form of government increased from 20% to 31%.
Similarly, on a number of questions concerning gender equality – including political leadership, equal access to higher education, and wifely obedience – the numbers continued a downward trend.
Those who considered love as the basis for marriage increased from 49% to 69%, while those who depended on parental approval fell from 41% to 24%.
In 2005, a much higher percentage than in 2000 defined themselves as “Iranian, above all” rather than “Muslim, above all.”
This trend is not hard to understand.
The imposition of a monolithic religious discourse on society has made liberal values attractive to Iranians.
But, while this was reflected in reformist trends in the country’s wider political life, a movement toward militant fundamentalism took shape within the regime’s power structure.
Reform-minded politicians were partly to blame for this change.
Far from opposing absolutist power as an impediment to religious democracy, they tried to persuade the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, of the value of reform.
But Khamenei had no interest in reform, as he made plain in dismantling the reform movement.
The presidency of Mohammad Khatami, an avowed reformer, who served eight years, beginning in 1997, convinced the Supreme Leader that his authority would be assured only if the presidency was held by a subservient fundamentalist such as the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
In this, Khamenei was following the lead of the late Shah, who kept Amir Abbas Hoveyda, a loyal retainer, as prime minister from 1965 until the Shah was overthrown in 1979.
The problem with the Supreme Leader’s calculation, however, is that Ahmadinejad is a loose cannon.
His populist rhetoric and religious fundamentalism have alienated a large section of conservative-pragmatist clerics and their supporters.
Many members of this group honor the institution of private property, and Ahmadinejad’s talk of redistributing wealth is not to their liking.
More disturbing to them is his apocalyptic conviction regarding the imminent advent of the Hidden Imam, the Mahdi, whose appearance is believed to lead to the destruction of the world and the end of time.
Generally, Ahmadinejad begins his public speeches with prayers for the Mahdi’s immediate return.
For the Shia religious hierarchy, long accustomed to relegating the advent of the Mahdi to a distant future, Ahmadinejad’s insistent millenarianism is troublesome.
They have often dismissed as unorthodox, if not heretical, any claim of personal contact with the Imam or speculation about his arrival.
Several ayatollahs opined that such talk about the Mahdi is unbecoming of a president or, worse, indicative of an unstable leader.
These concerns were reflected in the fact that the Society of Combatant Clergy, a conservative body, was unable to endorse Ahmadinejad’s candidacy.
Defiance of the Supreme Leader by millions of Iranians just a day after he firmly endorsed Ahmadinejad threw the country into a political crisis.
Worldwide broadcasts of the beating and killing of protesters have undermined the regime’s religious credentials.
Seeking a way out of this difficult situation, the Supreme Leader declared that the electoral disputes must be settled in through legal channels, not on the street.
Given his role in justifying electoral fraud, this argument seems like an effort to buy time to clear the streets of demonstrators, put opposition leaders under severe physical and psychological stress, and isolate Mir Hossein Mousavi, the presumed winner of the real vote.
Nonetheless, Khamenei’s invocation of the law echoes the demands of many conservative-pragmatists who lean toward Mousavi, who is not in a position to challenge Khamenei’s authority directly.
Mousavi must carefully continue his legal campaign, without compromising the trust he has gained from the majority of Iranians.
He must stand by his two principal demands: nullification of the election and establishment of an impartial committee to rule on the government’s violations of the electoral law.
Should Mousavi persuade Khamenei to reconsider his position, the Supreme Leader’s hold on power will be shaken.
If Khamenei holds fast, Mousavi cannot gain the presidency, but he will continue to represent the hopes of the majority of Iranians who differ dramatically with their government.
For now, what will happen depends on Mousavi’s perseverance.
Anatomy of Thatcherism
London – Thirty years ago this month, Margaret Thatcher came to power. Although precipitated by local conditions, the Thatcher (or more broadly the Thatcher-Reagan) revolution became an instantly recognizable global brand for a set of ideas that inspired policies to free markets from government interference.
Three decades later, the world is in a slump, and many people attribute the global crisis to these very ideas.  
Indeed, even beyond the political left, the Anglo-American model of capitalism is deemed to have failed.
It is held culpable for the near financial meltdown.
But 30 years of hindsight enable us to judge which elements of the Thatcher revolution should be preserved, and which should be amended in the light of today’s global economic downturn.
Most obviously in need of amendment is the view that minimally managed and regulated markets are both more stable and more dynamic than those subject to extensive government intervention.
The Thatcherite assumption, in other words, was that government failure is far more menacing to prosperity than market failure.
This was always bad history.
The record shows that the period 1950-1973, when government intervention in market economies was at its peacetime height, was uniquely successful economically, with no global recessions and faster rates of GDP growth – and growth of GDP per capita – than in any comparable period before or since.
One can argue that economic performance would have been even better with less government intervention.
But perfect markets are no more available than perfect governments.
All we have are comparisons between what happened at different times.
What these comparisons show is that markets plus government have done better than markets minus government.
Nevertheless, by the 1970’s the pre-Thatcher political economy was in crisis. The most notorious symptom of this was the emergence of “stagflation” – simultaneously rising inflation and unemployment.
Something had gone wrong with the system of economic management bequeathed by John Maynard Keynes.
In addition, government spending was on the rise, labor unions were becoming more militant, policies to control pay kept breaking down, and profit expectations were falling.
It seemed to many as though government’s reach had come to exceed its grasp, and that either its grasp had to be strengthened or its reach had to be reduced.
Thatcherism emerged as the most plausible alternative to state socialism.
Nigel Lawson was Thatcher’s second Chancellor of the Exchequer, or finance minister.
Out of the government’s anti-inflationary efforts emerged the “Lawson doctrine,” first stated in 1984 and broadly accepted by governments and central banks ever since.
“The conquest of inflation,” Lawson said, “should...be the objective of macroeconomic policy.
And the creation of conditions conducive to growth and employment should be...the objective of microeconomic policy.”
Inflation in 1950-1973 and 1980-2007 was about the same – just over 3% – while inflation targeting has failed to prevent a succession of asset bubbles that have brought recessions in their wake.
Nor has Thatcherite policy succeeded in one of its chief aims – to reduce the share of government spending in national income.
The most one can say is that it halted the rise for a time.
Now public spending is on the increase again, and record peacetime deficits of 10% or more of GDP stretch ahead for years.
In de-regulating financial markets worldwide, the Thatcher-Reagan revolution brought about the corruption of money, without improving on the previous growth of wealth – except for the very wealthy.
The average world citizen would have been 20% richer had world GDP per capita grown at the same rate between 1980 and 2007 as it did between 1950 and 1973 – and this despite China’s high growth rates in the past 20 years.
Furthermore, in unleashing the power of money, the Thatcherites, for all their moralizing, contributed to the moral decay of the West.
Against these formidable minuses are three pluses.
The first is privatization.
By returning most state-owned industries to private ownership, the Thatcher revolution killed off state socialism.
The British privatization program’s greatest influence was in the former communist states, to which it gave the ideas and techniques needed to dismantle grossly inefficient command economies.
This gain must be preserved in the face of the current clamor to “nationalize” banks.
Thatcherism’s second success was to weaken trade unions.
Set up to protect the weak against the strong, labor unions had become, by the 1970’s, enemies of economic progress, a massive force of social conservatism.
It was right to encourage a new economy to grow outside these congealed structures.
Finally, Thatcherism put paid to the policy of fixing prices and wages by central diktat or by tripartite “bargains” between governments, employers, and trade unions.
These were the methods of fascism and communism, and they would, in the end, have destroyed not just economic, but political, liberty.
Political pendulums often swing too far.
In rebuilding the shattered post-Thatcherite economy, we should be careful not to revive the failed policies of the past. I still find fruitful Keynes’s distinction between the agenda and the non-agenda of politics.
As long as central government takes responsibility for maintaining a high and stable level of employment, Keynes thought, most of the rest of economic life can be left free of official interference.
Building a proper division of responsibility between state and market from this insight is today’s main task.
An Autumn Abyss?
BERLIN – In the coming months, several serious regional economic and political crises could combine into one mega-watershed, fueling an intense global upheaval.
In the course of the summer, the prospect of a perilous fall has become only more likely.
The drums of war are being banged ever more loudly in the Middle East.
No one can predict the direction in which Egypt’s Sunni Islamist president and parliamentary majority will lead the country.
But one thing is clear: the Sunni Islamists are decisively altering the region’s politics.
This regional re-alignment need not be necessarily anti-Western, but it surely will be if Israel and/or the United States attack Iran militarily.
Meanwhile, civil war is raging in Syria, accompanied by a humanitarian catastrophe.
To be sure, President Bashar al-Assad’s regime will not survive, but it is determined to fight until the end.
Syria’s balkanization among the country’s diverse ethnic and religious groups is a clearly predictable result.
Indeed, a Bosnia-type scenario can no longer be excluded, while the prospect of the Syrian government’s loss of control over its chemical weapons poses an immediate threat of military intervention by Turkey, Israel, or the US.
Moreover, the Syrian civil war has become a proxy in an openly declared battle for regional hegemony between Iran on one side and Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey, and the US on the other.
Staying on the sidelines of this Arab-Western coalition, Israel is playing its cards close to its chest.
Iran, for its part, has proclaimed Syria an indispensable ally, and is determined to prevent regime change there by all available means.
Does that mean that Hezbollah’s militias in neighboring Lebanon will now become directly involved in Syria’s civil war?
Would such intervention revive Lebanon’s own long civil war of the 1970’s and 1980’s?
Is there a threat of a new Arab-Israeli war hanging over the Middle East?
And, as Kurds inside and outside of Syria grow more assertive, Turkey, with its large and long-restive Kurdish population, is also growing restive.
At the same time, the regional struggle currently playing out in Syria is becoming increasingly entangled with the other major source of war sounds: Iran’s nuclear program.
Indeed, parallel to the Syrian drama, the rhetoric in the confrontation between Israel and Iran over the program has become dramatically harsher.
Both sides have maneuvered themselves into a dead-end.
If Iran gives in and agrees to a sustainable diplomatic solution, the regime will lose face on a critical domestic issue, jeopardizing its legitimacy and survival.
From the regime’s point of view, the legacy of the 1979 Islamic revolution is at stake.
But the international sanctions are hurting, and Iran risks losing Syria.
Everything points to the regime’s need for success – now more than ever – concerning its nuclear program.
Similarly, Israel’s government has backed itself into a domestic policy trap of its own.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Defense Minister Ehud Barak cannot accept a nuclear-armed Iran.
They do not fear a nuclear attack against Israel, but rather a nuclear arms race in the region and a dramatic shift in power to Israel’s disadvantage.
From their point of view, Israel must either convince the US to attack Iran and its nuclear plants or take on the maximum risk of using its own military forces to do so.
Both sides have substantially reduced their options, thereby limiting the possibility of a diplomatic compromise.
And that means that both sides have stopped thinking through the consequences of their actions.
Everywhere there is talk of a “military option,” which means air strikes.
But, while advocates speak of a limited “surgical operation,” what they are really talking about is the start of two wars: an aerial war, led by the US and Israel, and an asymmetric war, led by Iran and its allies.
And what if this “military option” fails?
What if Iran becomes a nuclear power, the region’s democratic movements are swept away by a wave of anti-Western Islamic solidarity, and the Iranian regime emerges even stronger?
Iran, too, evidently has not thought its position through to its logical conclusion.
What does it stand to gain from nuclear status if it comes at the cost of regional isolation and harsh United Nations sanctions for the foreseeable future?
And what if it triggers a regional nuclear arms race?
A war in the Persian Gulf – still the world’s gas station – would affect oil exports for some time, and energy prices would skyrocket, dealing a severe blow to a global economy that is teetering on the brink of recession.
China, already in economic trouble, would be hit hardest, along with the whole of East Asia.
With the US also economically weakened and facing a presidential election, America’s leadership ability would be seriously constricted.
And could a weakened Europe cope with an oil shock at all? &nbsp;A regional and global security shock caused by asymmetric warfare could add still further to the world economy’s troubles, causing exports to slump even more.
Respice finem!
(“Consider the end”), the Romans used to say.
World leaders need to take this timeless wisdom to heart.
And that applies doubly to Europeans.
It would be absurd if we had to suffer a real catastrophe again in order to understand what European integration has always been about.
Antarctica’s Point of No Return
POTSDAM – Recent satellite observations have confirmed the accuracy of two independent computer simulations that show that the West Antarctic ice sheet has now entered a state of unstoppable collapse.
The planet has entered a new era of irreversible consequences from climate change.
The only question now is whether we will do enough to prevent similar developments elsewhere.
What the latest findings demonstrate is that crucial parts of the world’s climate system, though massive in size, are so fragile that they can be irremediably disrupted by human activity.
It is inevitable that the warmer the world gets, the greater the risk that other parts of the Antarctic will reach a similar tipping point; in fact, we now know that the Wilkes Basin in East Antarctica, as big or even bigger than the ice sheet in the West, could be similarly vulnerable.
There are not many human activities whose impact can reasonably be predicted decades, centuries, or even millennia in advance.
The fallout from nuclear waste is one; humans’ contribution to global warming through greenhouse-gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, and its impact on rising sea levels, is another.
Indeed, the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report stated, in uncharacteristically strong terms, that the sea level is “virtually certain” to continue to rise in the coming centuries or millennia.
Moreover, the greater our emissions, the higher the seas will rise.
But the recent revelations about Antarctica are different.
Rather than reacting to global warming with gradual and predictable patterns of change, the West Antarctic ice sheet has suddenly “tipped” into a new state.
A relatively small amount of melting beneath the Amundsen Sea’s ice shelf has pushed its grounding line to the top of a sub-glacial hill, from which it is now “rolling down.”
Simply put, one thermal kick was enough to initiate an internal dynamic that will now continue under its own momentum, regardless of any action that humans might take to prevent it.
It is not completely clear whether humans have caused this tipping – though nothing like it has ever occurred during the 11,500-year Holocene period before humans started interfering with the planet’s energy balance.
But that is not the point.
What is important is that we recognize the existence of gigantic parts of the earth’s climate system – such as West Antarctica’s three-quadrillion-ton ice sheet – that can be tipped when a fractional temperature rise occurs in key locations.
This risk is no longer merely theoretical.
For the first time, findings based on observations and computer simulations all point to the same conclusion: the huge Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica has begun an irreversible ice discharge, and nothing can now halt the subsequent drainage of the entire basin.
It has passed the point of no return.
That is why we must now focus on similar topographic conditions elsewhere.
If an “ice plug” near the coast of Wilkes Basin melts or breaks off into icebergs, the basin’s huge quantities of water will drain into the ocean.
Although no one knows precisely what might destabilize the Wilkes Basin, we can be fairly certain that further global warming, caused by greenhouse-gas emissions, will increase the risk.
The fact that sea levels will continue to rise is now clear.
But we can still determine how high and how fast levels rise by controlling the degree of global warming that we cause.
Climate change is caused by mankind, so the good news is that mankind can stop it by cutting greenhouse-gas emissions.
Although West Antarctica’s fate is sealed, we may still be able to prevent the collapse of East Antarctica’s marine ice sheet.
That means deciding – sooner rather than later – which path to follow.
The current path risks further destabilization in Antarctica; choosing the alternative path of a new energy system for the planet is our last best hope.
And Free Flows the Nile
NEW DELHI – For 18 days, during the ebb and flow of protest, it did not seem possible that the end of the Egyptian Revolution would come so suddenly, in a terse announcement that lasted no more than a half-minute: “President Hosni Mubarak has relinquished office….”
With that, amidst roars of victory, an era was ended, reaffirming the old saying that “the graveyards of the world are full of those who considered themselves indispensable to their nations.”
In the days and weeks ahead, there could arise occasions when the news from Cairo is not uplifting, but let us never forget that Egypt has taken a giant step, which in reality is a giant step for all Arabs.
After all, Egypt is the heart, brain, and nerve center of the Arab world.
True, it once spawned the radical Muslim Brotherhood, but it also gave birth to Islamic socialism and anti-colonialism, Arab unity, and now a democratic affirmation of the people’s will.
Pernicious talk that Arabs do not want democracy has been exposed as the big lie it is.
Egypt, in the great Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore’s memorable words, is the land “where the head is (now) held high and the mind is (now) without fear…” The consequences will be vast.
Ancient Arab lands are bestirred.
Decades-old, apparently immovable autocracies are finding their hold on power unhinged; change is invading their static environs.
Yesterday’s treaties, particularly those with the United States and Israel, will no longer inspire the same type of confidence they have long had as instruments of state policy.
Memory of these 18 days is so crowded that it is difficult to separate one event from another, one phase from the next: the dramatic, the moving, the bizarre, and the unreal from the bathetic.
But the thread that united all, the theme that remained unerringly constant, was the yearning for “change” – immediate, real, and tangible, not a promise or a tantalizing, unreachable mirage.
Will this yearning travel beyond the Nile, as it did from Tunis to Cairo?
This question haunts other Arab portals of power.
And not just Arab; globally, foreign policies are being hurriedly – and somewhat confusedly – revised and rewritten.
This is why US policy oscillated so disconcertingly from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s “Do not rush the pace or else the pro-democracy movement could well be hijacked” to President Barack Obama’s emphatic call for “change now.”
Of course, a grave question arises about the now-ruling Supreme Council of the Military High Command in Egypt: How can the enforcers of the status quo become the agents of change?
But, then, military rule is only a temporary measure, or so we reason.
The great Tunisian poet Abul-Qasim Al Shabi has captured poignantly the spirit of Egypt’s saga: “If one day the people want life, then fate will arise…night fade away, chains broken…” That, in essence, is what the young in Egypt have done.
Their idiom is current; their instruments of change are today’s electronic media.
They – and we – are very far from the world that Mubarak, or the great Gamal Abdel Nasser, knew and understood.
The Egyptian revolution now faces the exacting task that confronts all successful revolutions: how to define the future.
Like the Ottoman Empire’s fragmentation in 1922 or Nasser’s overthrow of King Farouk’s regime in 1952, the current transformation, too, must be shaped.
And how that future is shaped will determine whether or not Mubarak’s end marks the beginning of political transformation throughout the Middle East.
That is the possibility that is shaking governments from Washington to Beijing.
It is not just the reliability of the Suez Canal and oil exports that are now in doubt; decades of fixed strategic certainties must now be reexamined.
Consider Israel, which has watched the events in Cairo with a degree of worry unfelt since January 1979, when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini unseated the Shah of Iran.
That strategic nightmare cost Israel and the US their closest ally in the region, one that was soon transformed into an implacable enemy.
Israel’s two most recent wars – against Hezbollah in Lebanon in 2006, and against Hamas in Gaza in 2009 – were fought against groups sponsored, supplied, and trained by Iran.
Clearly, Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will also now lie unattended as Israel concentrates on developments in Egypt.
Above all, Israel must wonder if the peace treaty with Egypt will hold, and, if not, how to carry out the massive restructuring of its defense posture that will be required.
But it is not only the fate of Israel that has now shocked US policy, in particular, to its core.
Egypt, after all, has been the cornerstone of America’s balancing act in the Middle East – and the Islamic world – for three decades.
The Egypt-Israel peace treaty has kept Egypt comfortably neutralized, freeing the US to commit its strategic resources elsewhere.
In turn, Egypt, propped up by massive US aid, has secured the region from a larger conflagration, even though the Israel-Palestine conflict has continued to smolder.
Herein lies the core of the dilemma for the US: it wants Egypt’s basic state apparatus to survive, so that the levers of power do not fall into the wrong hands.
This requires the US to be seen as siding with the public’s demand for change, yet to avoid being identified with political immobility.
There is reason to feel reassured by Obama’s reactions.
He termed Mubarak’s departure a display of “the power of human dignity,” adding that “the people of Egypt have spoken, their voices have been heard, and Egypt will never be the same.”
But nothing that Obama, or anyone else, says can answer the question now occupying the attention of senior US officials: Will the coming of popular sovereignty to Egypt inevitably lead to anti-Americanism?
Running in Place
SANTIAGO – A billionaire with a Harvard degree runs for President of Chile promising reforms to enhance productivity and competitiveness, and wins.
Once he takes office in 2010, the economy recovers quickly from the global financial crisis, creates jobs, and continues growing until recently.
The billionaire, never one to shy from publicity, claims the credit.
Chile is a case of successful pro-market reform, argues Sebastián Piñera, who stepped down from the presidency on March 11.
He is wrong.
The Chilean economy has expanded, and no one with his or her heart in the right place can fail to celebrate that; but this growth has little to do with the former president’s policies.
Even worse, the expansion is proving to be unsustainable, and Chileans will soon feel the consequences of Piñera’s failure to carry out the pro-growth reforms he once promised.
Chile was hit hard by the 2008-2009 financial crisis: foreign loans vanished and the price of copper, Chile’s main export, collapsed.
But this time around, the Chilean economy was in shape to withstand massive external shocks.
The government had been running surpluses, public debt was almost nil, and banks were well regulated.
As a result, the government of President Michelle Bachelet (who was in office from 2006 to 2010 and has just been sworn in for a second term) was able to launch a potent anti-crisis fiscal stimulus, financed with resources saved from the earlier copper boom.
The central bank, autonomous from political pressures and run by highly respected professionals, did its part by slashing interest rates.
In Europe, the recession has lasted six years and counting; in Chile, it lasted ten months.
Tough regulation and record-low interest rates left companies and households with no debt overhang and little need to deleverage.
By late 2009, the Chilean economy was growing again, and in the years since, growth has been helped by highly propitious external conditions.
Sky-high commodity prices, rock-bottom dollar interest rates, and ample international liquidity are what Chile hopes for in the rest of the world; they are also precisely what Chile got since 2010.
Unsurprisingly, growth was swift – until late last year, when the combination of the US Federal Reserve’s gradual exit from quantitative easing and lower commodity prices worldwide caused a swift deceleration in economic activity.
After recording annual GDP growth of more than 5% on average during the last four years, Chile’s economy is expected to grow by 3.7% or less in 2014.
Piñera blamed the incoming Bachelet administration, and its plan to raise taxes, for the drop in the growth rate.
If so, Bachelet’s economists are very influential indeed, because a similar slowdown has occurred all over Latin America and in emerging countries worldwide.
The immediate cause of Chile’s slowdown is the decline in investment, particularly in mining; but the underlying problem is that the failure to diversify the economy sufficiently makes it far from clear what new kinds of investment, and which new exports, will take up the slack.
The export basket of economically diversified countries like Thailand, Malaysia, Mexico, and Ireland is entirely different from what it was a generation ago.
By contrast, Chile’s export basket has remained unchanged.
In 1984, Chile exported copper and other minerals, paper and pulp, fruits and wine, fishmeal, and a smattering of light manufactures.
Thirty years later, Chile’s exports comprise the same items.
Investment in energy would probably take off – if only Chile’s institutions were modernized to make that possible.
This is another area where Piñera’s legacy is wanting.
Chile is unique among its neighbors in having no oil or gas.
Chileans today pay the highest electricity rates in the region, because generating capacity has failed to keep pace with rising demand.
A prolonged dry spell could cause the lights to go off in the next few years.
Ensuring both cheaper energy and a clean environment is a big challenge.
Experts agree that it will require a national plan for locating generators across Chile’s mountainous territory, a revamped regime for the transmission of power, more intensive use of natural gas, and a concerted effort to promote renewables, particularly wind and solar.
Regrettably, Piñera took action in none of these areas.
Employment policy was yet another shortcoming of his administration.
With the post-2009 recovery came a drop in measured joblessness, which allowed the government to pay scant attention to a labor market that leaves out far too many women and young Chileans.
There is broad consensus that Chile must change hiring and firing rules, allow unions to negotiate shifts and working hours, improve on- and off-the-job training, and make more information available to job-seekers.
But these are all politically sensitive areas, where the smallest legal change can elicit howls of opposition.
Piñera took the safe route of attempting no changes at all.
And, of course, those young Chileans will have better prospects of getting a job if they come equipped with a first-rate education.
Chile has succeeded in getting the young into the classroom (enrollment rates are comparable to those in developed countries); but it has had limited success at ensuring that the young – and particularly the children of low-income families – receive a high-quality education once they are there.
Piñera’s government became embroiled in a fight with protesting students over who should pay for university education.
That controversy prevented most other changes in education from going forward.
Bachelet has vowed to end this paralysis and make educational reform her administration’s top priority.
The goal is laudable, but achieving it will not be easy.
Every year, Chile’s finance ministry asks a group of independent experts how fast Chile can grow without triggering inflation or other imbalances.
In 2008, before Chile felt the consequences of the financial crisis, the average answer provided by those experts was 4.83%.
In 2013, after three years of center-right government in Chile, the corresponding answer was ...4.85%.
Under Piñera’s government, pro-growth rhetoric was abundant.
But rhetoric alone cannot boost an economy’s growth trajectory.
One Hundred Days of Solitude
SANTIAGO – When violence flared up in Ukraine and protesters began dying at the hands of government agents, the European Union threatened sanctions against Ukrainian officials responsible for “violence and excessive force.”
President Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv, leaving behind a private zoo with exotic pigs and goats – and also the foreign ministers of Germany, France, and Poland, who were in town trying to broker a deal to end the violence.
But when violence flared up – virtually simultaneously – in Venezuela and protesters began dying at the hands of government agents, the Organization of American States raised its voice to announce that...it would not raise its voice.
The situation was up to Venezuela to sort out, the OAS stated.
Foreign ministers from other Latin American countries are nowhere to be seen in Caracas – certainly not denouncing repression and demanding an end to the violence.
Meanwhile, the body count keeps rising.
The contrast highlights what everyone already knows: Latin America’s regional institutions are weak – even weaker than Europe’s.
But it also reveals something else: a morally crooked logic that condemns governments and leaders to remain silent in the face of aggression, repression, and even death, because to say anything would be tantamount to “intervention” in another country’s internal affairs.
It was not always like this.
Not long ago in Latin America, life and liberty were deemed to be universal rights, to be defended across national borders.
My father was a Chilean lawyer and human-rights activist.
General Augusto Pinochet kicked him and our family out of the country, and I spent my adolescence and early adulthood in exile, sharing hopes and fears with other expatriates from Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay.
None of us – and no one on the Latin American left – would have doubted for a moment that defending human rights was everyone’s responsibility, and that the international community should come down hard on governments that tortured and killed their own people.
In Pinochet’s Chile or General Jorge Rafael Videla’s Argentina, anyone who complained about government-sponsored violence was painted as a member of an international communist conspiracy.
Today, anyone who complains about violence in Venezuela is, according to President Nicolás Maduro, a fascist and a lackey of the American empire.
Everything has changed, yet everything remains the same.
Yes, the situation in Venezuela must be sorted out by Venezuelans.
The problem is that some Venezuelans today cannot march peacefully on the streets without being shot at.
Some Venezuelans cannot speak freely to their fellow citizens, because each and every television station that would carry their words has been muzzled or driven off the air.
And some Venezuelans cannot be sure their rights will be respected.
Terms in office have expired for the prosecutor-general, members of the national election commission, and supreme court justices, but no successors have been named, because Maduro is unwilling to negotiate with the opposition and lacks the two-thirds majority in the National Assembly needed to appoint officials of his choosing.
Venezuelans would like nothing better than to be the ones who decide their own destiny, but the democratic means to do so are being denied to them.
Indeed, one of the key opposition leaders, Leopoldo López, has been arrested on ludicrous charges of “inciting crime.”
It would have been preposterous to tell Ukrainian demonstrators facing government storm troopers to just grin and bear it without any external solidarity or support.
It is just as preposterous to tell Venezuelan demonstrators the same thing.
In these circumstances, the principle of self-determination, so beloved of foreign ministries everywhere, becomes an empty slogan.
Perhaps the saddest of all foreign reactions came from the University of Chile’s student federation.
Using language reminiscent of the Stalinist 1950’s, the federation – which has led student protests demanding better education in Chile – condemned their Venezuelan counterparts for “defending the old order” and “deviating from the path the people have chosen.”
The problem with this argument (if one can call it that) is that “the people” do not speak with one voice, nor do their pronouncements fall fully formed from the sky.
To figure out what real people actually want and respond accordingly, democracies have procedures, constitutional guarantees, and individual rights.
When these are trampled upon, as they have been in Venezuela, people can neither speak freely nor choose their path.
It is equally silly to argue that Maduro’s actions must be legitimate because he came to power through an election.
A democratically elected leader retains legitimacy only to the extent that he or she behaves democratically once in office.
As Georgetown professor Hector Schamis recently recalled, António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal, Alfredo Stroessner in Paraguay, and Suharto in Indonesia attained power through elections, yet no history book calls them democratic.
Yanukovych, too, won an election, but he will be remembered mostly for the bloodshed he unleashed, the bankruptcy that now faces Ukraine’s economy, and, of course, his private zoo and stable of Ferraris.
Venezuelans, like Ukrainians, should know that they are not alone.
Their struggle for democratic rights is everyone’s struggle.
People in Latin America know this, even if their leaders are not always willing to say it out loud.
Industrial Policy Reconsidered
SANTIAGO – First, the World Bank became a tireless advocate of women’s and gay rights.
Then the International Monetary Fund backed the use of capital controls and voiced concern over income inequality.
Next in line for ideological modernization is the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB): in a forthcoming report, the bank calls for industrial policies in Latin America.
This is a welcome development.
To be sure, the IADB – never as stodgy as the Bretton Woods twins, but still a traditional international financial bureaucracy – does not speak of industrial policies; it uses the politically correct phrase “productive development policies” (PDPs).
Yet the message is clear: in Latin America, the state and public policy should have a role in deciding what gets produced.
A generation ago, this message would have been heretical.
Today, it is a matter of common sense.
Last week, economists from the IADB brought their gospel to a conference in Santiago, Chile.
The country, for decades the region’s poster-child for good economic management, is also an example of the risks that all Latin American economies face.
With commodity prices falling and dollar interest rates on the rise, Chilean growth is slowing sharply.
Productivity gains have been sluggish for nearly 15 years, and the country’s export basket is the same as it was in the 1980’s.
Chile’s growth problems are among the least severe in the region.
It is one of only four countries (along with Brazil, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) that have managed to reduce the per capita income gap with the United States since 1960.
As the IADB has pointed out in several earlier reports, productivity has been stagnant in most of Latin America for a half-century or more.
What is to be done?
The conventional prescription includes improving education (especially the technical kind), modernizing labor markets, reducing bureaucratic red tape, and facilitating foreign investment and technology transfer.
To this standard tool kit the IADB now adds PDPs, which can be “horizontal” or “vertical.”
Horizontal PDPs provide the inputs that a broad range of firms, across different sectors, need for their growth and development.
Simple examples include transport infrastructure, trained engineers, and a labor force proficient in English.
More sophisticated examples can involve systems for health and safety inspection, product-quality certification, or intellectual-property protection.
The problem is that some of these publicly provided inputs can be sector- or product-specific.
Roads to remote and beautiful mountains foster eco-tourism but do not help carry merchandise to the nearest port.
A lab built to certify that beef does not have foot-and-mouth disease is of little use in verifying that fruit and vegetable exports are similarly disease-free.
That is where vertical policies – those that favor a particular sector – come in.
Horizontal PDPs are relatively uncontroversial, but vertical PDPs can unleash severe criticism, with skeptics claiming that they involve “picking winners.”
But, as the examples given above suggest, the line between horizontal and vertical policies is inevitably fuzzy.
In other words, when a government provides money to train a particular kind of engineer, lay out a particular road, or build a particular lab, it is favoring one sector over others, and hence de facto picking winners.
The IADB argues that it is better to do this consciously, transparently, and with the appropriate checks and balances.
Vertical policies are also useful in solving coordination failures.
Consider the tourism industry, which has great potential in the beautiful Patagonia region of southern Argentina and Chile.
But no private firm will build a hotel in this remote, under-populated region if no road leads there.
By the same token, no government official will build a road if there are no hotels or lodges, for the road would lead nowhere.
Without deliberate private-public coordination focused on tourism, the sector may never take off.
Skeptics also point out that Latin America already went through a round of industrial policy in the 1960’s and 1970’s, with results that were mediocre at best.
The IADB report provides a balanced assessment of that episode.
Though import substitution and subsidies were initially successful in igniting industrialization, lack of scale soon hindered efforts (a country of a few million cannot hope to have an auto industry aimed only at the domestic market).
Worse, government help was handed out to strong and weak performers alike.
In Asia, many firms that initially received help sooner or later became world-class competitors.
In Latin America, with little market and policy discipline and chronically overvalued exchange rates, that transition seldom happened.
To be sure, those problems had to be corrected.
But in doing so, claims the IADB, Latin American governments may have gone too far: “There is now a growing consensus among policymakers and analysts alike that by putting all industrial policy out of bounds, the region may have thrown out the baby with the bathwater.
More and more, the question is not put in terms of whether to do active productive development policies but rather how to do them.”
Unlike 1960’s-vintage industrial policy, modern PDPs aim to correct market failures, not do away with market incentives.
Market failure is not the only issue.
The emerging new approach to PDPs is also fearful of state failure.
State agencies can be captured and aid can be used for private or political gain.
To prevent this, the report again usefully deviates from reigning orthodoxy, which tells countries to identify and copy “best practices” from abroad.
This approach cannot succeed if such practices require what local government cannot deliver.
Hence, “the focus ought to be not on policy best practices but on policy best matches with institutional capabilities.”
Latin America will need a great deal of fresh thinking and many policy innovations if it is to keep growing in a post-commodity-boom era.
No policy is failure-proof.
But the approach advocated in the forthcoming IADB report is the region’s best hope today.
Dead Cow Walking?
SANTIAGO – Simón Bolívar, the South American independence hero who hoped to weave the continent into a single nation, would shudder at the disintegration that prevails today in the continent’s energy sector.
Surely he would understand that no community can be built on so fragmented a foundation.
Peru has gas, which it sells to Mexico.
Bolivia also has gas, but it has been under-exploiting it ever since it nationalized the industry in 2006.
Argentina used to have a gas industry, but it was decimated by years of misguided government policies.
Brazil discovered hydrocarbons deep in the Atlantic Ocean a few years ago and has begun auctioning off rights, but actual production is still years away.
Chile has no oil or gas, and no one in the neighborhood will sell it any, so it has to buy its supplies from as far away as Indonesia.
Moreover, South America’s electricity grids are seldom interconnected, and rates for power vary widely.
Brazil and Chile have the region’s highest electricity prices (which are also among the highest in the world).
The competitiveness of their industries, and consumers’ household budgets, suffer accordingly.
Optimists imagine a scenario in which production is rationalized, pipelines are built, grids are interconnected, and gas from Bolivia, Argentina, or elsewhere fuels growth throughout the continent, benefiting everyone in the process.
But such dreams always hit a formidable obstacle: national rivalries that date back decades – in some cases centuries – and that repeatedly keep mutually profitable energy-integration agreements from being signed.
Or, if they are signed, they are often broken when compelling short-term considerations intervene.
For example, a decade ago, contracts promising a steady supply of Argentine gas at pre-set prices led Chile to spend billions refitting its power stations.
But, after a long period of price controls and massive underinvestment, domestic demand in Argentina was far outpacing supply.
So then-President Néstor Kirchner’s government tore up the contracts and cut off exports to Chile, stunting its economic growth and leaving painful memories among its citizens.
But now a new and powerful factor could change this dismal political equation: shale gas, which is already having an important effect on the United States and its economy.
With US natural-gas prices down to just over $4 per million BTU (from $13 just a few years ago), even prudent analysts expect the shale-energy revolution to increase America’s potential economic growth and add as many as two million new jobs.
The impact of shale energy on South America is twofold.
For starters, there is the potential for cheaper imports for those countries with no gas (Chile) or where local demand could exceed local supply (Brazil).
For a country like Chile, where large hydroelectric projects have been politically controversial, and where solar and wind power have been too slow in coming, gas imports from the US would be a tremendous boon.
In 2013, the US Department of Energy authorized the first substantial gas-export facilities; while the trickle is not yet a steady flow, the gap between US and much-higher world prices implies tremendous potential benefits.
Then there is the shale gas to be exploited closer to home.
Argentina reportedly has the world’s third-largest shale-gas reserves, after the US and China.
The huge Vaca Muerta (Dead Cow) field, owned by the energy company YPF, is just now beginning to be explored.
Argentina’s government expropriated YPF from Spain’s Repsol in 2012, with the resulting suits and countersuits delaying any potential investment in shale.