First, member countries must urgently boost their capacity to deal with asylum applications, so that they can quickly identify those who deserve protection.
Second, the EU needs to improve burden sharing – ideally among all countries, but perhaps among a smaller group at first – in providing shelter for those who gain asylum.
International law – and basic morality – demands nothing less.
Turning Off the Dividend Spigot
NEW YORK – European banks’ high litigation and restructuring costs have resulted in major losses on their books and abysmal stock-market performance.
As the industry and European regulators now reflect on this dismal state of affairs and search for solutions, they should consider banks’ revenue distribution – including employee bonuses and shareholder dividends – as part of the problem.
Revenue distribution is one primary reason for European banks’ capital shortfalls.
To understand why, we should look back to October 2014, when the European Banking Authority began balance-sheet stress tests for the eurozone’s largest 123 banks and found a capital shortfall of €25 billion ($28 billion) in all of them.
At the time, the EBA required the banks to devise plans to address their respective shortfalls within 6-9 months.
Some banks took action and raised equity through rights issues, sometimes with substantial help from governments.
But most banks mollified regulators by simply shedding riskier assets to improve their capital ratios.
Needless to say, these efforts were ineffective, and European banks’ share prices have declined by 50%, on average, since the initial 2014 assessment.
Banks that failed the stress test and didn’t take the result seriously are partly to blame, but so, too, are regulators who did not sufficiently hold the banks’ feet to the fire to improve their balance sheets, and who may have applied stress tests that were too weak to detect financial frailty.
The EBA conducted another series of stress tests and reported the results in late July.
This latest round looked at 51 banks and, contrary to previous tests, was not designed to identify capital shortfalls, but rather to provide “a common analytical framework to consistently compare and assess the resilience of large EU banks to adverse economic developments.”
Regulators now suppose that the European banking sector is resilient to adverse shocks.
On the same day as the EBA’s announcement, the worst performer, Italy’s Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, announced €5 billion ($5.6 billion) in new funding, pursuant to its €5.6 billion capital requirement.
Still, market reaction to the announcement was negative (the EuroStoxx Banks index fell 7.5% in two days), most likely because the EBA did not include specific estimates of European banks’ capital shortfalls or outline a recapitalization plan.
In a new paper investigating this market reaction, using United States capital-requirement rules, we calculate the total capital shortfall in all 51 participating banks to be €123 billion.
Despite this large capital shortfall, 28 of the 34 publicly listed banks in the stress test paid out about €40 billion in dividends for 2015, meaning that they distributed, on average, over 60% of their earnings to shareholders.
Dividend payments made by under-capitalized banks amount to a substantial wealth transfer from subordinated bondholders to shareholders, because it is bondholders who will suffer the losses in a crisis.
Moreover, it is potentially a wealth transfer from taxpayers to private shareholders, because under new banking rules government bailouts are possible after bondholders have covered (bailed in) 8% of a bank’s equity and liabilities.
By contrast, undercapitalized banks in the US are forced to halt all forms of capital distribution if they fail a stress test.
Fortunately, following the 2016 round of stress tests, the EBA is now also considering this type of regulatory sanction.
Thus, “competent authorities may also consider requesting changes to the institutions’ capital plan,” which “may take a number of forms such as potential restrictions on dividends required for a bank to maintain the agreed trajectory of its capital planning in the adverse scenario.”
We estimate that if European regulators had adopted this approach and forced banks to stop paying dividends in 2010 – the start of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe – the retained equity could have paid for more than 50% of the 2016 capital shortfalls.
The figure above shows our calculated capital shortfalls, using the EBA stress test’s “adverse scenario” losses and the cumulative dividends these banks have distributed since 2010.
Dividends paid out by some banks, such as BNP Paribas and Barclays, actually exceed the current capital shortfalls, while at others – such as Deutsche Bank, Commerzbank, and Société Générale – capital shortfalls far exceed dividends that would have been retained.
The latter banks would still require substantial capital issuances on top of dividend restrictions to make up the difference.
Nonetheless, our findings suggest a simple first step toward preventing bank capital erosion: stop banks with capital shortfalls from paying dividends (including internal dividends such as employee bonuses).
Such a policy would not even require regulators to broach topics like capital issuance, bailouts, or bail-ins, and some banks have even already begun to suspend dividend payments.
All that’s left now is for the European Central Bank to enforce this practice across the eurozone.
A New Year’s Banking Union
BRUSSELS – Five years after the outbreak of the financial crisis, Europe’s economic and political situation remains fragile.
A mild recession is expected in Europe this year, and unemployment is on the rise.
Beyond deficit reduction, we need to implement a €120 billion ($155 billion) European investment plan, and deepen the European Single Market to unleash its growth potential.
But we also need other structural measures.
The European Union must put an end to the negative feedback loop between individual member states and their national banking systems.
Between 2008 and 2011, EU taxpayers granted banks €4.5 trillion in loans and guarantees.
In some countries, the threat of bank recapitalization with public funds has resulted in a drop in market confidence and a huge rise in interest rates.
The European Central Bank (ECB) has taken decisive action to break this vicious circle.
Moreover, there is now a consensus that the 17 eurozone countries need a banking union to accompany their common currency.
The European Commission has proposed a single rulebook for banks’ capital requirements; mutual support between national deposit guarantee schemes; and Europe-wide rules for resolving failing banks that place the main burden on bank shareholders and creditors, not on taxpayers.
On June 29, European heads of state and government committed themselves to the creation of a single European supervisor for banks in the eurozone.
This is good news for both financial stability and public finances: once the single supervisor is in place, supervision will be more credible and impartial, which is important for dealing with ailing banks and managing their return to viability.
The European Commission also put forward a set of legislative proposals to establish the single supervisory mechanism and confer key supervisory tasks on the ECB.
This proposal must now be amended and approved as soon as possible by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers if we are to have a chance of activating the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) and proceeding with the other essential pillars of a banking union.
Further work, however, is still needed in several areas:
The scope of the new supervisory mechanism.
Some member states favor restricting European supervision to systemically important banks.
But the Commission believes that it should cover all 6,000 banks in the eurozone.
After all, “systemically important" is impossible to define.
The failures of banks like Northern Rock, Dexia, and Bankia are reminders that small and medium-size banks can endanger the entire financial system.
And it would be inherently unstable to have two supervisory mechanisms for banks operating in the same market.The participation of non-eurozone countries in the new supervisory scheme.
The Commission’s proposal confers powers on the ECB for the supervision of all banks in the eurozone.
For non-eurozone countries, the proposals provide for a mechanism to join on a voluntary basis and submit to the ECB’s authority.
But the EU treaties make it complicated to give these non-eurozone countries full voting powers.
I do not see any political problem with giving these countries a full voice in shaping the decisions of the European supervisor, but creativity will be needed to find a legally sound and fair solution.National supervisors’ role in the new system.
Clearly, the European Council has decided on a paradigm shift: powers are moving to the ECB.
But national supervisors will be members of the board that will take key decisions, which they will prepare and implement.
In the current negotiations, we can still fine-tune the roles of the European and national supervisors, but ultimate authority must rest with the ECB.Non-eurozone EU members that do not want to join the single supervisory mechanism.
These countries have expressed concerns about the new powers conferred on the ECB.
In particular, they question the ECB's voting rights within the European Banking Authority, which will remain in charge of developing a single rulebook for all 27 countries in the EU’s single market and enhancing convergence of supervisory practices.
We need to find ways to preserve fully the influence of non-eurozone countries within the European Banking Authority.Democratic accountability for the ECB’s new supervisory powers.
The ECB must, of course, maintain its full monetary-policy independence, despite its new role.
So a key question is how, in addition to giving an important role to the European Parliament, national parliaments can play their part in overseeing supervisory decisions.Timing.
According to some EU countries, the Commission’s proposal is too ambitious to enter into force at the beginning of 2013.
But an effective single banking supervisor is a prerequisite for the ESM’s direct recapitalization of banks.
Only with this possibility and strong unified supervision will Europe be in a position to break the vicious circle between banks’ balance-sheet weakness and sovereign debt, and thus resolve the eurozone crisis.Entry into force in January 2013 would bring about supervision by the ECB of banks that have received or requested public funding.
Only in July 2013 would all banks of major systemic importance be subject to ECB supervision.
The remaining banks would be subject to the new mechanism at the start of 2014.
Intense discussions are normal for such a high-stakes project.
Countries like Germany, Finland, and the Netherlands are right to argue that rapid progress cannot come at the expense of the new supervisory structure’s quality.
But EU countries have to stick to the commitment that they made in June and strike a deal in time for a gradual entry into force in January 2013.
Europe’s Emerging Bubbles
MUNICH – The European Central Bank’s latest policy moves have shocked many observers.
While the goal – to prevent deflation and spur growth – is clear, the policies themselves are setting the stage for severe instability.
The policies in question include setting the interest rate on the ECB’s main refinancing operations to zero; raising monthly asset purchases by €20 billion ($22.3 billion) to €80 billion; and pushing the interest rate on money that banks deposit with the ECB further into negative territory – to -0.40%.
The inflationary credit bubble spurred in southern European countries by the persistence of lower interest rates undermined their competitiveness and drove asset and property prices to unsustainably high levels.
When the bubble burst, the ECB tried to prevent the excessive prices from returning to their equilibrium levels by using its printing press and promising unlimited coverage to investors. The latest ECB measures are just more of the same.
Of course, when the financial crisis erupted in full force in 2008, following the collapse of the US investment bank Lehman Brothers, the ECB’s interventions were justified.
But after the global economy started to recover during the latter part of the following year, the ECB’s moves became increasingly problematic, because they enabled countries to evade structural reform and hindered the necessary disinflation in the southern eurozone countries – or even halted it altogether, as in Portugal and Italy.
Southern Europe had succumbed to the drug of cheap credit.
But when private credit stalled and the symptoms of withdrawal began to appear, the ECB provided replacement drugs.
Instead of treating the addiction, it created junkie economies that were unable to function without a fix.
Japan made a similar mistake when its property bubble burst in 1990.
For over two decades, the Bank of Japan flooded the economy with money at near-zero interest rates.
The Japanese government, for its part, has followed such a relentless policy of deficit spending that public debt jumped from 67% of GDP to 246% of GDP today, with the latest upward push provided by the dubious “Abenomics” economic strategy being pursued by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government.
None of this has helped, because neither monetary nor fiscal policy can substitute for structural reform.
On the contrary, the more Keynesian and monetarist drugs are administered, the feebler the self-healing power of the markets and the weaker the willingness of policymakers to impose painful detoxification treatments on the economy and populace.
But the worst effects of the ECB policy may be yet to come, if the eurozone’s still-sound economies also become credit junkies.
There are already some worrying signs of this.
Property markets in Austria, Germany, and Luxembourg have practically exploded throughout the crisis, as a result of banks chasing borrowers with offers of loans at near-zero interest rates, regardless of their creditworthiness.
In Austria, property prices have risen by nearly half since the Lehman collapse; in Luxembourg, they have risen by almost one-third.
Even Germany, Europe’s largest economy, has been experiencing a massive property boom since 2010, with average urban property prices having risen by more than one-third – and by nearly half in large cities.
The country is undergoing a construction boom not seen since reunification.
Real estate agents have only leftovers on offer.
The German property boom could be reined in with an appropriate jump in interest rates.
But, given the ECB’s apparent determination to head in the opposite direction, the bubble will only grow.
If it bursts, the effects could be dire for the euro; the new Euro-skeptic Alternative for Germany party, which made astonishing headway in the country’s recent state elections, would make sure of that.
The Eurozone’s Minsky Conundrum
BRUSSELS – Stubbornly low inflation has the European Central Bank worried.
But its response – essentially just more quantitative easing – could backfire, exacerbating imbalances and generating serious financial instability.
As it stands, the headline consumer price index in the eurozone hovers around zero, and even core inflation remains below 1% – too far for comfort from the ECB’s target of around 2%.
While a new round of weakness in global commodity prices earlier this year contributed to these figures, it does not explain the weakness in longer-term inflation expectations, which have improved little since March, when the ECB started its massive €60 billion ($66.3 billion) per month bond-buying program.
But instead of rethinking its strategy, the ECB is considering doubling down: buying even more bonds and lowering its benchmark interest rate even further into negative territory. This would be a serious mistake.
Easier credit conditions and lower interest rates are supposed to boost growth by stimulating investment and consumption demand.
But in the core of the eurozone – countries like Germany and the Netherlands – credit has been plentiful, and interest rates have been close to zero for some time, so there was never much chance that bond purchases would have a significant impact there.
And, indeed, the European Commission’s most recent economic forecast shows that spending in the core countries has not increased as a result of the ECB’s policies; Germany’s external surplus is actually increasing.
Of course, in the highly indebted peripheral countries, there was room for interest rates to fall and for credit supply to grow – and they have, leading governments and households to increase their spending.
While the asymmetrical impact of the ECB’s policy is appropriate in principle (because unemployment is much higher in the periphery), the reality is that a recovery supported by the least solvent economies is not sustainable.
Back in 1986, Hyman Minsky warned about the longer-term dangers to financial stability if “Ponzi” borrowers – those who can service their debt only with new debt – become the main pillar of the economy.
A zero-interest-rate environment is of course ideal for such borrowers, because there is nothing to provide an indication of solvency; borrowers can just roll over their debt.
But it is bad for those with a strong asset position; by reducing their spending power, it spurs them to save even more.
The standard response to Minsky’s concern – that the spenders can’t afford it and the savers aren’t spending – is that monetary policy should focus on ensuring price stability, while macroprudential policy aims to safeguard financial stability by limiting borrowing by highly indebted agents.
But this approach does not work.
If macroprudential policy limited additional credit to marginal borrowers effectively, monetary policy would have no impact on demand (as long as the most solvent agents refuse to spend more).
This problem arose in the United States after the 2001 recession.
Although the Federal Reserve kept interest rates low for a protracted period, the corporate sector did not increase its investment.
The recovery was ultimately fueled by so-called “subprime” mortgages: home-purchase loans extended to borrowers with lower credit ratings.
The result, as we know, was a mega-bubble that triggered the 2008 financial crisis.
In the eurozone’s case, the risk is compounded by the ineffectiveness of its key macroprudential instrument, the Stability and Growth Pact, in limiting countries’ spending, as lower interest rates give debtor countries leeway to spend more.
Public debt as a share of GDP is on the rise in Italy and Spain, even though both countries, with their eurozone partners, have committed to reducing the debt ratio.
In fact, even without lower interest rates, the deficit limits that the Pact imposes have proved to be non-binding, exemplified by France’s flouting of them since 2009.
In short, monetary policy is perpetuating the disequilibrium between creditor and debtor economies in the eurozone, and macroprudential policy is doing nothing to stop it.
When interest rates normalize, this could generate serious financial instability.
But – and this is the conundrum – the ECB has few options for stimulating demand among the eurozone’s more solvent agents, and thus supporting a sustainable recovery.
In deciding its next move – whether to initiate more bond purchases, lower interest rates even further, or do both – the ECB must recognize that any positive impact on demand probably will be limited to the eurozone’s weaker economies – that is, the economies that can least afford it.
This is a high-risk move, one that is probably not justified by the effort to bring price increases a few dozen basis points closer to the ECB’s target.
A recovery has already begun in the eurozone. It should be left to run its course.
An even more expansionary monetary-policy stance might strengthen the recovery marginally, but at the cost of increasing the eurozone’s already-dangerous imbalances.
Europe’s Chimerical Capital-Markets Union
LONDON – The eurozone's survival is in doubt again, as Greece demands debt forgiveness and an end to austerity – or else.
But, though Europe's currency union is at risk, and its banking union remains at an early stage of development, the endlessly creative European Commission is embarking on another adventure: a so-called “capital-markets union."
That “so-called" is appropriate, because the project, despite being only vaguely defined at this point, is most certainly not intended to create a single European capital market.
Indeed, European Union leaders know better than to announce such an ambition, which would require a new treaty – no one is prepared to open up that can of worms.
After all, European voters are in no mood to transfer more powers to Brussels.
The capital-markets union actually began as a slogan, coined by one of EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker's acolytes.
Now, the new financial markets commissioner, the United Kingdom's Lord Jonathan Hill, has been assigned the unenviable task of putting flesh on bare bones.
The Commission's “Green Paper" consultation round on the subject produced more questions than answers.
Think tanks, lobby groups, and national regulators have wasted no time in trying to influence Hill's efforts, and to head off any initiatives that might damage their interests.
The Bank of England has argued that there should be no replication of the banking union grant of new powers to the European Central Bank at the expense of national central banks.
The capital-markets union, the BOE argues, “does not require institutional change," so no super-regulator should be created.
The Commission has accepted that conclusion for now, though one of Hill's aides has suggested that, “at some point…supervisory issues will pop up."
In fact, establishing a European version of the US Securities and Exchange Commission is a longstanding aim of the Brussels Eurocracy – one that may be achieved one day, but not just yet.
But before delving into institutional issues – a favorite topic of EU veterans – one should consider what problem the capital-markets union is supposed to solve.
And here, there is considerable agreement.
Most regulators and market participants agree that Europe's financial markets are dysfunctional.
With banking assets amounting to roughly 300% of EU-wide GDP, compared to some 70% in the United States, large pools of savings are being left unused.
Moreover, European companies receive an excessive 80% of their finance from banks and less than 20% from capital markets (the proportions are roughly reversed in the US).
The need to redress that imbalance has become increasingly evident since the recent financial crisis, as banks' efforts to rebuild their capital bases (and meet stricter regulatory requirements) has led to credit rationing.
Loosening that constraint on output growth would improve the European economy's resilience, encourage risk-taking, and promote dynamism.
The overall aim of the capital-markets union is thus relatively straightforward.
But achieving it is not – in no small part because Europe's heavy reliance on bank finance stems from structural and cultural factors.
And the remedies that the Commission has suggested so far – for example, encouraging crowdfunding and standardizing the terms of securitization – appear unlikely to promote rapid growth in non-bank finance.
Promoting a pan-European private placement market might help, as would aligning standards for covered bonds.
But both strategies would face serious legal obstacles.
Indeed, though Hill's modest initial agenda certainly would do no harm (and should be pursued as quickly as possible), any substantial measures beyond it would confront major roadblocks.
For example, harmonizing insolvency regimes across the continent and reducing tax incentives that favor debt over equity, while entirely logical, strike at the heart of member states' remaining sovereignty, and thus will be extremely difficult to push forward.
Some of the other ideas that Hill has floated, such as relaxing the capital standards for long-term investments, run counter to the EU solvency standards for insurers and pension funds that will be implemented next year.
Some old nags have also been dragged out of the stables for another run around the course.
“Streamlined" prospectuses and exemptions from some accounting standards for small companies have been tried before in individual countries – and have failed.
Looser standards for issuers weaken protection for investors, and there is evidence that lax regulation of new issues may reduce investor demand for them, raising the cost of finance.
Unless the political mood changes radically in Europe – an unlikely development – it would be unrealistic to expect the capital-markets union to be anywhere near as transformational as the banking union has been.
It will be, at best, a small disturbance, in which few national sacred cows are slaughtered.
What began as a slogan may turn out to be helpful.
But a capital-markets union is highly unlikely to end Europe's love affair with its banks.
The biggest impact on market structure will continue to come from ever-rising capital requirements, which will make bank credit more expensive and encourage borrowers to look elsewhere.
Europe’s Dog in the Nighttime
BRUSSELS – The new European Commission headed by Jean-Claude Juncker is off to a rocky start.
But one would not know it from reading the news headlines.
As Sherlock Holmes understood, a dog that does not bark in the nighttime usually goes unnoticed.
In Europe’s case, the European Union’s fiscal rules are at issue, and the Commission – in principle the EU’s watchdog – should bark loudly when they are flouted.
Last month, howls seemed inevitable after two large EU countries, Italy and France, submitted budget plans for 2015 that clearly violated their governments’ vows of continued austerity.
At first, the Commission dutifully rejected the two budgets as incompatible with the rules of the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact (SGP).
But then something happened that was as “curious” as in Arthur Conan Doyle’s story.
Within days, both countries offered mini-adjustments to their budgets, worth about 0.2% of GDP, and their finance ministers wrote to the Commission that their budgets should now be approved.
The Commission did not react, leaving French and Italian leaders to claim that they, not Brussels bureaucrats, had the last word.
In fact, the latest forecast reflects an even worse outcome for France and Italy this year than originally promised, with France’s deficit set to increase slightly for 2015 and Italy’s cyclically adjusted deficit expected to deteriorate.
The Stability and Growth Pact prescribes an annual improvement of at least 0.5 % of GDP.
The new Commission thus risks losing its authority from the very start of its mandate.
Whether it does is a crucial question, because maintaining a high degree of credibility is essential to economic policymaking in the eurozone.
To see why, it is worth recalling that the SGP’s original rules were judged “stupid” by one former Commission president (Romano Prodi), because the single-minded pursuit of a deficit below 3 % of GDP could be inappropriate during recessions.
That argument was accepted, and the SGP was supposedly rendered more “intelligent” by, for example, permitting budget deficits to be adjusted for the economic cycle, adding medium-term objectives for expenditure, and introducing escape clauses.
But the new rules obviously require a strong institution to interpret them, and whose judgment is accepted by everybody.
Though checking whether a budget is below the SGP’s ceiling of 3% of GDP may be a straightforward matter, there can be reasonable disagreement about whether the business-cycle adjustment should be estimated at 0.5% or 0.8% of GDP, or whether a country is adhering to its medium-term expenditure objective.
The Commission is supposed to have the last word, thereby ensuring the rules’ credibility and consistency – and it seems to have lost this fight in the first round.
One could, of course, argue that the SGP should be scrapped, because austerity makes no sense when the eurozone faces the risk of deflation.
But the Commission, not fiscally louche member countries, should be the one to decide that.
The other problem for Europe is a dog that does bark, but for no reason.
This is the case of the United Kingdom, which has been asked to pay an additional contribution to the EU budget of about €2 billion ($2.5 billion, which amounts to a rounding error of the UK’s own budget).
The reason for this additional levy is that a few weeks ago the UK’s Office for National Statistics announced, proudly, that it had discovered that the country’s gross national income (GNI) had been much higher than previously assumed, not only in 2013, but also in all previous years.
Including the revisions for the 2002-2012 period, the difference comes to about £350 billion ($560 billion).
Because every EU member state is obliged to contribute about 1% of its GNI to the Union’s budget, the UK’s data revision had to lead to a back payment of billions of euros.
But British Prime Minister David Cameron’s government has declared that it does not intend to pay money that “the European Commission was not expecting and does not need.”
These two cases – the dog that should have barked but did not, and the dog that barked for no reason – threaten the EU’s fundamental workings, which are based on a clear rulebook enforced vigorously by a strong Commission.
Juncker’s Commission risks losing its authority from the start if the rules can be bent or broken to accommodate the larger member states’ domestic political priorities.
The Commission must regain political and intellectual leadership and make its choice: either explain why the SGP rules must be followed even now, in the face of deflation, or agree with those who argue that the current environment calls for a fiscal stimulus.
It cannot avoid taking sides by insisting publicly on austerity rules but then acquiescing when member states break them.
Leaders in member states have to play their part as well.
Pandering to populists may be attractive in terms of short-term electoral gains, but the long-term cost in terms of credibility, both their own and that of the EU, will be very high.
This year, however, senior government officials from Brazil, China, India, Nigeria, Singapore, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia also joined, an important sign of the times.
John McCain, the US senator and 2008 presidential candidate, always leads a large congressional delegation to Munich.
The US administration also typically sends the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of State to deliver a ritual speech reassuring the Europeans of the strength of the transatlantic alliance.
This year, Vice President Joe Biden did the honors, bumping the US representation up a notch.
The conference also featured a panel on an unusual subject – “The American Oil and Gas Bonanza: The Changing Geopolitics of Energy.”
US Special Envoy and Coordinator for International Energy Affairs Carlos Pascual described “the US internal energy revolution”: a 25% increase in natural-gas production, which should push down US gas prices, and enough oil output to reduce oil imports from 60% to 40% of consumption, with an additional 10% increase projected.
Pascual projected that the US will be able to import all of its energy needs from within the Americas by 2030.
A recent confidential study by the German Intelligence Agency raises the possibility that the US could actually become an oil and gas exporter by 2020, in contrast to its present position as the world’s largest energy importer.
That honor would likely fall to China, which would become increasingly dependent on the Middle East.
As an extra bonus, the higher US proportion of gas use has reduced US carbon emissions to 1992 levels.
The sense of US good fortune, a phrase that is not often heard around the world these days, increased with the panelists’ description of how lower energy prices for US manufacturing has a broad positive impact on the American economy’s competitiveness.
As a result, the country’s energy reserves have also become an investment magnet.
German Minister of Economics and Technology Philipp Rösler said that many German firms are already relocating to the US because of lower energy prices.
Equally important, the panelists reported on the rising importance of liquid natural gas relative to pipeline gas, which has enormous geopolitical implications.
In a nutshell, if gas is exported in liquid form, it is fungible.
In other words, if Russia restricts the flow of gas to Ukraine for political reasons, but the rest of Europe has gas from other sources, they can simply resell their gas to Ukraine and export it via the Baltic Sea.
Jorma Ollila, Chairman of Royal Dutch Shell, described the global map of major shale oil and gas deposits.
Ukraine itself has the third-largest reserves in Europe; other countries with large deposits include Poland, France, China, Indonesia, Australia, South Africa, Argentina, and Mexico.
And the US has already taken over from Russia as the world’s largest gas producer.
All of this data got Brazilian Foreign Minister Antonio de Aguiar Patriota’s attention.
On a panel entitled “The Rising Powers and Global Governance,” Patriota referred to the energy discussion and noted that the rising powers should remember that “the established powers are not sinking powers.”
In short, the pervasive narrative of Western decline suddenly reversed itself.
The horizon seemed brighter on the European side as well.
In the opening panel on “The Euro Crisis and the Future of the EU,” cautious optimism prevailed.
No one thought that the European Union’s troubles were resolved, but no one thought that the eurozone was coming apart, either.
On the contrary, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble made clear that German resolve to see the eurozone through its troubles was firm.
And a prominent economist in the audience who has often predicted the eurozone’s demise was backtracking rapidly.
Aside from reports of a rising US (fiscal woes notwithstanding) and a stabilizing Europe (despite the common currency’s troubles), the conference featured a speech by Biden that went far beyond the reassuring rhetoric that US policymakers typically offer in European capitals.
Biden told the audience that he and US President Barack Obama believe that “Europe is the cornerstone of our engagement with the rest of the world” and “the catalyst for our global cooperation.”
Biden pointed out that “Europe is America’s largest economic partner,” recalling figures that the Asia-focused Obama administration has often seemed to forget: “over $600 billion in annual trade that creates and sustains millions of jobs on the continent and at home, and a $5 trillion overall commercial relationship.”
Biden went on to suggest a “comprehensive transatlantic trade and investment agreement”; a week later, in his State of the Union Address, Obama announced the launch of negotiations for precisely such an agreement.
Biden concluded with a flourish.
“Europe remains America’s indispensable partner of first resort,” he declared. “And, if you forgive some presumptuousness, I believe we remain your indispensable partner.”
Those strong words reflect a new sensibility in Washington.
As former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton declared in one of her last foreign-policy speeches, the US is not planning to pivot away from Europe to Asia, but rather with Europe to Asia.
Western fortunes are rising, slowly but surely.
Together, Europe and the US account for more than 50% of global GDP, have the largest military force in the world by many multiples, and control a growing proportion of global energy reserves.
They also have a formidable diplomatic and development-assistance capacity, representing a peaceful community of democracies that share a common commitment to the rights, dignity, and potential of all human beings.
Imagine that community spreading down the east coast of Latin America and the west coast of Africa.
It might be an Atlantic century after all.
Europe and Asia’s Arms Race
When European unification was launched, it was thought that “ever closer union” would establish a community that would protect Europeans from political blackmail.
Now we see – though the lifting of the Union’s arms embargo may now be delayed thanks to US pressure and Chinese aggressiveness – that the European Union has become merely a tool for corruption when France and China draw up joint action plans.
The strategy is simple and ruthless.
The world’s largest dictatorship is preparing to crush and occupy the first Chinese democracy in history – Taiwan.
In order to do so, the People’s Republic needs much more sophisticated arms than those it possesses today.
The United States naturally does not export such arms to China.
Instead, the US is trying to deter China’s rulers from launching a military attack on the democrats in Taiwan.
But if the EU ever begins to offer China extensive exports of powerful and offensive weapons systems, the military power of the People’s Liberation Army would be able to defeat Taiwan’s defense forces.
Over 600 missiles, already deployed on the mainland, are aimed at cities and military bases on the island.
The threat is more apparent than real – for now.
Russia currently sells certain arms to China, but avoids exporting its most sophisticated systems, since the Kremlin views China as a potential future threat.
However, if EU countries start competing for a share of the Chinese market, the Russians could soon be tempted to sell their best arms to the communist regime in Beijing.
China’s new armaments, together with the North Korean crisis, will probably force half a dozen countries in the region to renew their armed forces.
Thus, by whenever the Union should decide to lift its ban on weapons exports to China, the EU could help fuel an arms race in East Asia.
How did China and France manage to fool the EU into thinking that it should ever take part in this?
When Jacques Chirac’s government decided to expound its economic co-operation with China, arms became an important component in the strategy.
Just as a ruthless Prime Minister Chirac sold a nuclear reactor to Saddam Hussein in the 1970’s, so the President Chirac of today is being lured into doing big business with another aggressive dictatorship.
The rest is a question of economic blackmail.
French diplomats have of course informed China about the reluctance of other European countries about lifting the arms embargo, which was imposed after the massacre in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
China then simply threatened to abandon or never to conclude trade deals with these EU members.
To the Germans, the Chinese probably murmur something about Siemens and Volkswagen.
To the Dutch their whispers are most likely about Philips.
China follows the power game within the EU through its French friends, and therefore knows which governments need to be whipped into line.
In Sweden, it has probably been enough to whisper “Ericsson” and “Volvo” to make Primer Minister Göran Persson understand what is at stake for his country commercially.
What European nation, indeed, dares to put at risk a Chinese order for several billion euros?
Typically enough, no EU-country has mentioned Taiwan as a reason not to resume arms exports.
Instead, the EU talks of a “code of conduct” (which probably does not mean very much, but sounds nice) and “free trade” (another charming euphemism for arms exports to dictatorships.
This silence gives a hideous signal.
For what the EU in practice says to China is this: “Taiwan’s cause in not our own.”
If and when the Union lifts the embargo, Europe will be refusing to take responsibility for the catastrophe that may be approaching.
As usual, it is up to America to protect a free nation that may otherwise be destroyed.
Compare this situation to the drama 60 years ago.
Then it was American troops and arms that liberated Western Europe from Nazism.
Now it may be European arms in the hands of the Chinese that will be aimed at American troops protecting a democracy with 23 million inhabitants (in other words, as many people as in all the Nordic countries combined).
As Tom Lantos, a Democratic US Congressman from California, put it, the move to lift the ban on arms exports to China clearly shows that the EU has “lost its moral compass.”
Lantos knows about moral compasses: as a boy, he was rescued by Raoul Wallenberg from being deported to Auschwitz by the Nazis in Budapest.
Wallenberg was a Swede.
But now Sweden is revealing that it, too, lacks political morality.
Several friends of mine in the Conservative party’s parliamentary group have long been engaged in supporting a free Taiwan.
Over the past ten years, we have held Scandinavian conferences on Taiwan in the parliaments in Copenhagen, Oslo, and Stockholm.
But a call from Prime Minister Persson was enough to render the Conservative party leader Fredrik Reinfeldt docile.
Persson had discovered that he lacked a majority in the Swedish parliament to lift the arms embargo on China.
By whispering “Ericsson” into Reinfeldt’s ear, it seems, Persson achieved the desired result.
Reinfeldt became the first Conservative party leader in Swedish history to encourage arms exports to a Communist dictatorship.
But Reinfeldt, like Jacques Chirac, has forgotten something.
Liberal-minded people may very well prefer not just to exchange one cynical prime minister for another at the next election.
They may prefer a clear choice.
European Defense Integration Now
MADRID – During the European Union’s recent Bratislava summit, the first to take place without a British presence, several proposals to improve European security were made.
Though some may argue otherwise, discussions on improved European security are both wise and necessary: after a period of paralysis and self-doubt for the European project, the EU must face its security problems and propose unifying initiatives.
Europe’s citizens increasingly regard security as a high-priority issue and want the EU to show greater leadership.
The EU’s friends and allies expect improvement in European security as well.
Offering EU citizens security within the Union’s borders requires more stability abroad.
Recent events have shown this clearly: the refugee crisis bedeviling the EU, for example, would be much easier to manage if the situation in Syria was different.
Because security at home and abroad are so interrelated, the EU should not compartmentalize its policies – an idea that is well developed in the proposed new “Global Strategy” for the Union, presented recently by High Representative Federica Mogherini.
Traditionally, nation-states have defended themselves against foreign threats through military means, while running their internal affairs according to a set of norms designed to protect their citizens’ rights.
Today, military preparedness is still necessary to defend against external threats, but it is no longer sufficient.
A “civilian” angle is needed as well.
All assets needed to achieve security must adapt to the reality of today’s threats and conflicts.
This means that the EU’s military capacities cannot be structured in isolation, but must work side by side with its civil capabilities (police agencies, intelligence units, the courts, and even non-governmental organizations).
The capacity for a fused civil-military response to crisis must become integral to EU policy and that of its member states.
The EU has already undertaken deployments that combine military and civilian capabilities.
But it has always been clear that much more is needed to improve the efficacy of such actions.
Indeed, the EU’s Treaty of Lisbon includes many measures along these lines, but most have not yet been implemented.
One reason for this is the distraction caused by the EU’s economic problems since 2008.
But now the gravity of the refugee problem requires that humanitarian and security issues be framed within a pan-European outlook.
The division between the domestic and external capacities of EU member states simply is no longer sustainable.
Fortunately, many of the capacities available to member states in their internal policies are also useful for their defense deployments.
For example, it is increasingly clear that enhancing intelligence cooperation is essential.
If the EU wants to extend the reach of its security policies, it will need more resources; but, above all, existing capacities need to be used better and more cooperatively.
But such cooperation requires a strategic headquarters for all EU security-related operations, rather than maintaining the current model whereby operational centers are established on an ad hoc basis.
Moreover, in order for the EU to achieve strategic autonomy, it needs a competitive European defense industry, with investment in research and development of defense technologies rising substantially as part of a common effort.
The European Defense Agency’s Capabilities Development Plan was designed precisely with these requirements in mind.
Advancing this plan will enable optimized use of existing member-state resources – thereby securing advantageous economic synergies – as well as precise identification of the additional resources required to achieve our goals.
The legal basis for a mechanism for permanent, structured cooperation on security already exists, enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon.
Treaty provisions enable willing EU states to reinforce their military cooperation and deploy quickly for shared missions abroad.
Activating this mechanism has been part of recent discussions within the European Council and seems to be the most viable way to deepen defense integration.
And an EU with security and defense as one of its pillars would boost Europe’s global weight.
Some still think that deeper defense integration may weaken other institutions, such as NATO, to which EU members belong.
But the truth is that Europe’s ability to provide an effective collective response in a crisis would be welcomed by NATO (which would have more resources at its disposal) and the United Nations.
Integrating EU defense, moreover, would facilitate NATO operations, so that groups of EU countries engaged in permanent structured cooperation could, for example, participate in the North Atlantic Council, NATO’s governing authority, as a single entity.
The EU is defined not only by how it protects its own citizens, but also by what actions it takes outside its borders.
Beyond ensuring that these actions are guided by international law, the EU should foster a global debate on the deficiencies of certain international norms in the face of today’s new conflicts.
Even in this era of pervasive Euroskepticism, Europe’s citizens want a more decisive EU approach to foreign and security policy, which is necessary, beneficial, and part of our duty.
The EU, after all, will be defined by its actions, and peace and security are among the public goods that it must provide, both within and beyond its borders.
European Discrimination on Trial
What good are Europe’s treaties aimed at ensuring the legal equality of all citizens when entire groups face systematic discrimination?
That is the question that the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) faces this week as its Grand Chamber, consisting of 17 judges, begins considering an appeal of an initial ruling that rejected claims of discrimination against the Roma by the Czech Republic’s education authorities.
All European states are members of the Council of Europe, all have signed the European Convention on Human Rights, 39 of the 46 member states have adopted the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, and 14 have ratified Protocol 12 on the prohibition against discrimination.
Nevertheless, the living conditions of many Roma remain appalling.
Although recent reports published in 2006 by the European Union’s Monitoring Center on Racism and Xenophobia and the Council of Europe’s Human Rights Commissioner note some improvements, they indicate Roma living conditions have stagnated, if not deteriorated.
Roma are still victims of discrimination in access to housing, employment, healthcare, and education, despite significant local efforts at the Council of Europe’s instigation and with its support.
Discrimination in educational access is particularly important, given its profound effect on its victims’ life prospects.
In the most extreme cases, the education system itself is segregated: isolated schools in remote camps; special classes for Roma children in mainstream schools; and an over-representation of Roma children in classes for children with learning difficulties.
The EHCR was confronted with the third issue in the case D.H. and others vs. Czech Republic .
The Court was referred to 18 cases of girls and boys who, between 1996 and 1999, were placed in special schools for children with learning difficulties, either directly or after a period of time in primary schools.
The question was whether the children were victims of discrimination owing to their national minority status.
The Czech government admitted that some of the special schools’ student bodies comprised 80% to 90% Roma children.
However, if there was discrimination, it was not direct, because under Czech law, such a move could be decided only by a school headmaster based on the results of an intelligence test at an educational psychology counseling centre, and subject to the approval of the child’s parents or legal guardian.
A difference in treatment is not discriminatory in itself.
According to the case law of national supreme courts and the ECHR, discrimination exists only when people in a similar situation are treated differently.
Yet national and international case law recognizes that a non-discriminatory measure in theory can be discriminatory in practice.
So, in the current case, the alleged discrimination does not stem from the law itself, but from its effects, with the plaintiffs relying mainly on statistics showing the over-representation of Roma in special schools.
Many other reports on the situation of Roma in the Czech Republic, including by the Council of Europe, are available.
But, as the Court rightly noted, it should rule only on the cases to which it is referred, and should not make known its opinion on the Czech education system’s legitimacy, as choices concerning educational opportunities fall under the jurisdiction of states and therefore can vary accordingly.
Working on this assumption and given the case it had to solve, an EHCR panel of seven judges ruled against the plaintiffs in February 2006, concluding that the law on special schools is not aimed specifically at Roma and does not apply only to them.
According to the Court, the law’s legitimate purpose is to adapt teaching to the difficulties of a specific category of pupils, and psychological tests seem to be objective enough not to be suspected of racial bias.
Moreover, the requirement of parents’ approval for placing children in special schools remains valid, while Roma children who were initially placed in those schools could have returned to mainstream schools later, and thus reintegrated into normal schooling.
As well-founded as the Court’s reasoning may be, a feeling of unease persists.
The statistics showing the enormous proportion of Roma children in those schools are hard to ignore, and the suspicion of discrimination is difficult to avoid.
While laws have changed, mentalities do not always follow at the same pace, and we intuitively know that it is easy to get psychology to mean a lot of things.
Indeed, before announcing its decision, the Court felt it necessary to state that while it did not conclude that the Convention had been violated, statistics still revealed “worrying figures, and the situation in general in the Czech Republic regarding Roma children’s education needs to be improved.”
The Court’s president, Jean-Paul Costa, expressed a similar view, without questioning the legitimacy of the decision, although Judge Cabral Barreto wrote a dissenting opinion.
Moreover, it is significant that the Court agreed, at the request of the parties, to refer the case on appeal to its Grand Chamber.
According to Costa, rejecting the ruling in February 2006 would contradict previous case law.
Will the Court, then, decide on the workings of the Czech education system itself?
Or will it follow Judge Barreto, who calls for recognition of an obligation to adopt affirmative action policies aimed at benefiting Romanies?
Whatever formula is adopted, it is certain that Roma children should be afforded the same opportunities as other children.
It is this imperative that underlies the importance of the coming decision, for it provides an occasion for the Court to reassert the fundamental principle of non-discrimination that defines our democratic societies.
The Birth of Fiscal Unions
PRINCETON – Fiscal unification is often an effective way to enhance creditworthiness, and it may also create a new sense of solidarity among diverse peoples living within a large geographic area.
For this reason, Europeans have often looked toward the model of the United States.
But they have never been able to emulate it, because their motivations for union have been so varied.
Desperate countries often consider such unions to be the best way out of an emergency.
In 1940, Charles de Gaulle proposed, and Winston Churchill accepted, the idea of a Franco-British union in the face of the Nazi challenge, which had already overwhelmed France.
In 1950, five years after the war, Germany’s first postwar chancellor, Konrad Adenauer, also proposed a union – this time between France and Germany – as a way out of his defeated country’s existential crisis.
Political unification was rejected; but economic association has had a brilliant career for more than six decades – until now.
The fundamental idea behind a fiscal union is that poorer, less creditworthy countries can gain from joint debt liability with richer countries.
Indeed, one of the most fascinating proposals to this effect came at the beginning of World War I, when the Russian Empire found that its limited capacity to borrow on international capital markets and its low foreign-currency reserves left it unable to create an effective military force.
So the Russian government proposed what would have amounted to a full fiscal union with Britain and France for war-related finances.
France latched onto the idea, because its borrowing capacity was also weaker than Britain’s.
The British wanted to win the war – but not so much that they were prepared to accept unlimited liability for debt incurred by the French and Russian governments.
In reality, a fiscal union between such diverse political systems would have been unworkable.
An autocratic or corrupt regime has a strong incentive to spend in a way that benefits the elite.
That incentive increases if it can command the resources of a more democratically governed state, where citizens agree to pay taxes (and pay off future debt) because they also control the government.
The only circumstance in which democracies sign up to such a deal is when a clear security interest is at stake.
It was that predicament that gave pre-1914 Russia unique access to the French financial market.
Yet, in 1915, the British, even in the face of an ongoing war, were unwilling to assume Russia’s liabilities.
Perhaps the sheer degree of uncertainty in pre-war Europe, or the more amorphous nature of the threat, made security concerns trump financial risk.
Russia’s World War I credit arrangements anticipated some of the political maneuvering about debt and its relation to security that occurred in late-twentieth-century Europe.
Post-1945 West Germany was vulnerable for a long time, because it sat on the Cold War’s fault line.
As a result, West German governments offered neighboring countries financial help in exchange for security and political solidarity, especially at moments when they were uncertain about the reliability and continuity of US support.
But there were limits.
In 1979, when West Germany adopted a fixed exchange-rate regime with a support mechanism for its partners (the European Monetary System), the Bundesbank ensured that it was not committed to unlimited currency interventions and that it might stop when the stability of the Deutsche Mark was endangered.
The logic was repeated on an even larger scale at the beginning of the 1990’s, but this time without any pre-determined limits.
The European Union’s commitment to monetary union enabled the eurozone’s Mediterranean countries to improve their debt dynamics and public finances dramatically.
Their borrowing costs fell as they locked their currencies into a union with countries – Germany, in particular – with a stronger reputation for stability.
At that point, the problem of how to divide the eventual bill when things became costly was not addressed, and the problem of excessive debt was wished away by the establishment of convergence criteria (which were not fully implemented anyway).
But, since 2009, when financial distress in the eurozone’s periphery brought such problems to the fore, Europeans have faced the same question as the WWI Allies.
Are security and political interests so overwhelming that they justify assuming large and unlimited liabilities incurred by political systems over which they have no control?
Because Europe is at peace, with no singular, overriding security threat, it is likely that when the extent of the bargain becomes clear, voters and politicians in the rich creditor countries will reject it.
But the more uncertain security challenges that Europe faces may just demand the kind of strong fiscal link that the French and Russians were willing to forge before 1914, and that the Germans and French embraced in 1950.
The implications for the present are important: the only palatable way in which the necessary balance between liability and security can be achieved is through a process of political reform that dissolves corrupt oligarchies and weakens incentives for fiscal imprudence.
One approach might be to ask citizens in all European countries whether they are prepared to accept some sort of fiscal compact involving a hard limit on debt.
Germans refer to this solution as a Schuldenbremse (debt brake).
It presupposes a profound process through which institutions and the assumptions underlying them come to be widely shared.
But that takes time, as the history of the US – the world’s most successful union born of emergency – amply demonstrates.
Europe and the Global Food Crisis
PARIS – The world has been shaken by unprecedented spikes in food prices, by hunger riots, and by social tensions that demonstrate that food supplies have returned as a source of insecurity – to which global warming and declining natural resources are adding unprecedented urgency.
By 2050, it is estimated that there will be nine billion people on earth, so the need for food may double – primarily among urban populations in the world’s poorest countries.
But there is more to finding a solution than simply identifying those nations that are capable of feeding the rest of the world.
It is increasingly urgent that every nation gain the means of feeding itself.
This means that agriculture should become an international priority, with the poorest countries helped to safeguard the security and independence of their food supplies.
Countries and organizations are already mobilizing.
The United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization argues that rising food prices could lead to increasing global conflicts.
The Davos World Economic Forum ranks food insecurity as a major risk to humanity.
The World Bank has forcefully emphasized the importance of agriculture to jump-starting economic expansion and breaking the cycle of poverty.
UN Secretary Ban Ki-moon has created a working group to define a common plan of action, and France’s President Nicolas Sarkozy has proposed a global partnership for food.
Sarkozy’s proposed partnership has three pillars.
First, an international group should draft a worldwide strategy for food security.
Second, an international scientific platform should be charged with evaluating the world’s agricultural situation, sending out warnings of upcoming crises, and possibly facilitating governments’ adoption of political and other strategic tools to deal with food crises.
Finally, the international finance community, despite its current problems, must be mobilized.
The reliability and size of the European Union’s farm output means that it can and should play the role of regulator in global markets.
If Europe cut back on its agricultural production, the increase in its own food imports would contribute significantly to a worldwide increase in food prices.
This makes it imperative that EU food production levels be held steady – for the sake of Europeans and of people in the world’s poorest countries.
But Europe cannot build up its own agriculture to the detriment of the less fortunate.
So the EU must harmonize its policies with poorer countries.
At present, export subsidies and support payments represent less than 1% of the European agricultural budget, and the EU has undertaken to eliminate them once it receives reciprocal undertakings from major food-exporting countries.
Since 2001, with the “Everything but Arms” initiative, all products from poor countries – with the exception of weapons and munitions – can enter the EU single market on a duty-free basis.
This has led to the EU becoming the primary market for the poorest countries’ products.
The EU is also developing ways to respond to new global challenges through changes to its Common Agricultural Policy.
This was reflected in the decision to suspend the “set aside” rule that requires a proportion of agricultural land to lie fallow.
Now the EU is preparing to increase dairy quotas progressively, and evaluating the impact on world markets of its decisions regarding bio-fuels.
But Europe’s focus must be on encouraging the development of local agriculture.
Doing so is the only way to achieve greater global food security and reduce poverty.
It will also make it possible to ensure that today’s high prices for agricultural products are transformed into opportunity for poor farmers.
This is vital because, according to the World Bank, growth in farming eliminates poverty twice as much as growth in any other economic sector.
Indeed, agriculture remains the primary productive sector in the world’s poorest countries, employing 65% of the working population and, on average, contributing more than 25% to GDP.
But over the past 20 years, support for agricultural development has been declining.
Only 4% of public development assistance is now earmarked for agriculture.
The European Commission and EU member states are therefore planning to increase their assistance, both through the European Development Fund and by developing new sources of financial support.
Further liberalization of farm trade will not ensure food security.
Faced with the erratic nature of agricultural markets, regulation is needed to soften the impact on poorer countries of volatile food prices.
This does not mean that protectionism is the way forward, only that taking account of specific issues that affect international farm trade – weather, price volatility, or health risks – may be necessary from time to time.
But, in a world where productivity differentials can be as great as one to 1,000, it would be unwise to rely on markets alone to enable the poorest countries to expand their economies.
Nor is it likely that much economic expansion will result from competition between multinational food distributors and producers in countries where famine still stalks the land.
Instead, bringing together outside expertise and local knowledge of the geography and environmental and economic constraints in order to spread risks and share the management of resources and projects is far more likely to help poor countries achieve food independence.
It was such an approach that, in less than 20 years, helped postwar Europe achieve food sovereignty.
Countries that have protected their agricultural development from the threats posed by international markets – such as India or Vietnam – have achieved substantial reductions in agricultural poverty.
The time has also come to prioritize agriculture in order to ensure growth with a more human face.
At the heart of the EU, France wants to play its part in a collective effort that is fast becoming a major issue for us all.
Crisis and Transformation
ANKARA – It has become a cliché to characterize our era as one of multiple rapid transformations.
But 2012 was particularly eventful. Not a single day passed without requiring continuous and concerted attention to economic crises, political and military conflicts, social upheavals, cultural clashes, or environmental problems in some corner of the world.
Turkey’s immediate neighborhood occupied the top spot on the global policy agenda in 2012, and will continue to so in 2013.
To our north, Europe is at a crossroads, undergoing a process of creative destruction, with potentially far-reaching ramifications well beyond the confines of the European Union.
To our south, an irreversible quest for dignity, freedom, democracy, and peace is altering the region’s political landscape.
Needless to say, economic measures alone cannot end the EU’s ongoing crisis.
Europe must redefine itself and identify its mission anew if it wishes to retain its geopolitical weight.
The EU must decide whether it represents a community of values or a narrowly defined geographic entity whose exclusionary impulses will eventually erode its global relevance.
As an integral part of Europe with EU membership as a strategic objective, Turkey is not an indifferent bystander; on the contrary, we strive to participate in the current debate by offering our own views and ideas.
We believe, for example, that EU integration needs to be wider as well as deeper, thereby maintaining its positive transformative influence in neighboring regions.
Here, of course, the Middle East and North Africa should be of paramount concern.
Historically, whatever happens on one side of the Mediterranean has had a direct impact on the other; given today’s high level of global interdependence, there is every reason to believe that this will remain true.
The Arab peoples’ genuine aspiration to secure for themselves the universal rights that Europeans enjoy refutes the West’s long-held orientalist perspective.
Of course, it is still too early to predict the outcome of the Arab Awakening, and the countries in transition still face daunting challenges.
But none of the various nightmare scenarios materialized, which augurs hope for the future.
Moreover, in Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt, free and fair elections –&#160;the first in these countries’ history – were held in 2012.
But democracy is not only about elections. The task of creating essential democratic institutions – the rule of law, habits of accountability, gender equality, and freedom of expression and faith – still awaits these countries.
Yet the Arab peoples have finally experienced genuine empowerment, and have crossed the threshold of fear.
I believe that they will continue to advance toward democracy.
That said, the situation in Syria and recent Israeli aggression in Gaza remain open wounds.
In Syria, a bloody civil war is laying waste to some of the world’s most magnificent ancient cities.
The Syrian people’s demands are the same as those heard in Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt: a dignified, democratic life.
Instead, they have gotten an inhuman campaign of violence – including attacks by warplanes, helicopters, and tanks – by President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
The regime’s effort to turn its struggle for survival into an ethnic and sectarian conflict could wreak havoc across the region, starting with neighbors like Lebanon and Iraq.
From the very outset of the Arab Awakening, Turkey has taken a principled stand on the side of legitimate and democratic aspirations.
Aware of our special role as a historical partner and, more so, as a source of inspiration to those demanding their rights and freedom, we felt particularly compelled to do so.
For Turkey, the civil war in Syria has created an additional challenge in the form of a humanitarian crisis.
We are now hosting approximately 200,000 Syrians who fled their country’s growing violence, and have already spent more than $400 million to accommodate these desperate people – with almost no assistance from the rest of the world.
But we will never be dissuaded from helping our Syrian neighbors in their most difficult hour, given the special bonds emanating from centuries of shared history.
Two other fundamental and inter-related security challenges in the region – the Arab-Israeli conflict and the growing danger of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) – also must be resolved in order to ensure that the Middle East’s historic transformation leads to security, stability, and prosperity.
Here, the recent violence in Gaza has once again demonstrated the risk of an all-out regional conflict.
Israel’s latest operation in Gaza brought it no benefit, either tactical or strategic.
On the contrary, this aggression, clearly staged for domestic political consumption, will harm Israel’s long-term security.
For the first time, Hamas proved capable of causing disruptions as far away as Tel Aviv, while Israel was forced to defend its behavior and reputation even with its traditional allies, including the United States.
But the biggest lesson for Israel is that it needs to comprehend better the new strategic environment following the Arab Awakening.
It is imperative to adopt a more holistic approach to both of these problems.
The reference point for such an effort should be parallel implementation of the 2002 Arab Peace Plan, which addresses Israel’s security concerns, and a regional disarmament mechanism based on United Nations Security Council Resolution 687, adopted in 1991 to enable the elimination of WMDs from the entire region.
I deeply appreciate US President Barack Obama’s remarks at the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference in 2010, at which he supported this idea and invited other major actors to take the initiative on disarmament.
This approach would enable a fair and lasting resolution of the Palestinian issue, which profoundly offends people’s sense of justice and causes instability and extremism, while eliminating tensions arising from the threat perceptions of Iran and other countries in the region.
Beyond this, advanced countries and international financial institutions should implement a comprehensive economic recovery program for the Arab countries in transition, similar to the Marshall Plan implemented after World War II.
Europe and the international community have an opportunity to help the Mediterranean region to regain the prosperity and grandeur that it once had, and to turn the Middle East into a zone of peace, democracy, and stability.
Turkey will play whatever part it can in order to realize this vision.
Europe and the New World Order
BERLIN – November 15, 2008, is a date to remember, because on that day history was made.
For the first time, the G-20, the world’s 20 leading economies, came together in Washington, D.C., to find an answer to the global financial and economic crisis.
While this first meeting resulted in nothing more than declarations of intent, it still marks a historic turning point.
Faced with the gravest financial and economic crisis worldwide since the 1930’s, the Western industrial nations (including Russia) that previously dominated the world economy are no longer capable of coming up with an effective response.
Moreover, hopes for mitigating or, indeed, overcoming the global economic crisis rest exclusively with the emerging economic powers, first and foremost China.
As a result, the G-8, which excludes the most important emerging-market countries, has lost its significance for good.
Globalization has resulted in a lasting change in the distribution of power and opportunities, laying the groundwork for a new world order for the twenty-first century.
Once the current global crisis is over, nothing will ever be the same again.
The West – the United States and Europe – are in relative decline, while the emerging Asian and Latin American powers will be among the winners.
The US has responded to the decline of its global strength in an impressive manner, with the election of its first African-American president, Barack Obama.
Amidst one of the gravest crises in its history, America has proven to itself and the world its ability to reinvent itself.
And it is clear even now that this decision will have three long-term consequences.
First, the election of a black president will put to rest the tragic legacy of slavery and the American Civil War.