Bush, too, has compared Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to Hitler.
But these so-called statesmen never consider what might have happened had Germany and Britain both had nuclear weapons in 1939.
Would Hitler, wicked as he was, have gone to war had he faced an assured threat of total destruction?
Have we forgotten all about the theory of deterrence?
Of course, the world would be safer if Iran did not have nuclear weapons, not because it is a “rogue” state, but because any spread of nuclear weapons is likely to make the world more dangerous.
That is why it is worth continuing to make every effort to dissuade Iran from “going nuclear.”
Suppose, though, that it becomes clear that Iran is playing the West along, simply buying time to build a bomb and develop a delivery system to hit Israel. Would that justify a pre-emptive military strike, as certain circles in Israel and the US advocate?
Military intervention in Iran could go either way.
Iran might lie down peacefully like Libya did when America bombed it, or turn into another Iraq.
My own instinct is that it would unleash a train of uncontrollable events.
It would ignite an already incendiary part of the world, with the added risk of global economic collapse if the Strait of Hormuz, through which one-fifth to one-third of the world’s oil passes, is blocked.
On this view, if America is determined to use force to prevent Iran from becoming a nuclear weapons state, it would have to establish a quasi-permanent empire in the Middle East.
It is to avoid this imperialist logic that sensible Americans like Henry Kissinger and George Shultz have revived the dream of a nuclear-free world.
However, since the Non-Nuclear Proliferation Treaty (NPT) came into force in 1970, only three new nuclear states have emerged – India, Pakistan, and Israel.
There are two reasons for this.
First, the control system established by the NPT made it very hard for non-nuclear states to acquire nuclear weapons capability.
Second, most non-nuclear states were happy enough to live under the security umbrella provided by the superpower nuclear duopoly.
Given the huge obstacles – technological, economic, and political – to acquiring nuclear weapons, states must have quite specific reasons for wanting to go nuclear, such as the need for security against a regional threat or a perception that a superpower itself threatens the state’s political independence.
Large barriers to nuclear proliferation thus exist independent of the NPT. There is no reason to believe that they would fall if Iran built its own weapon.
It seems that fear of the US rather than Israel has been the main reason for Iran’s nuclear ambition.
That is why the attractive idea of a nuclear-free Middle East, in which Iran would renounce nuclear weapons in exchange for a similar move by Israel, appears unrealistic.
It is the US, not Israel, that Iranian hardliners want to deter, using Israel as a hostage.
They see going nuclear as a way of limiting US military and geopolitical involvement in the Middle East. They bank on eventual American acquiescence, as happened with India.
Where do we go from here?
While voluntary Iranian renunciation of nuclear weapons would be the best outcome for the West, there is no reason to believe that a nuclear-armed Iran would be a danger to the world.
The floodgates to nuclear proliferation would not open; a more likely outcome would be a “balance of terror” between Israel and Iran, as exists between India and Pakistan.
However, if Iran were allowed to become a nuclear weapons state, it should be done by agreement with the five “legal” nuclear powers (the US, Russia, Britain, France, and China) – that is, by an officially sanctioned enlargement of the nuclear club, which would include India, Pakistan, and Israel.
This would be the best way to bind Iran to acceptable rules of behavior.
At the very least, we should be clear that military intervention is the third-best (that is, worst) option.
We might be driven to it if the other two fail, but it would be utterly wrong to contemplate it now.
The Creeping Public-Pension Debacle
LONDON – If developed countries acted rationally, and in the interest of electorates that understood how their tax money is spent, they would set their public-pension retirement age at or above 70.
But most developed countries have retirement ages below this mark, and, despite some progress, it will be decades before they catch up.
In the meantime, Western welfare states will remain financially unviable, economically sickly, and politically strained.
Demographic aging is the social and economic equivalent of climate change: it is a problem that we all know must be addressed, but which we would rather leave for future generations to solve.
The impulse to put things off for a later day is understandable, given current economic and political troubles; but when it comes to public pensions, procrastination comes at a high cost – even more so than in the case of global warming.
In 1970, the average effective retirement age for French male workers was 67, which was roughly the same as male life expectancy at that time.
Now, the effective retirement age in France is just below 60 (the official retirement age is 65, but in practice public pensions can be drawn much sooner), even though male life expectancy is nearly 83.
It is no wonder that France spends the equivalent of nearly 14% of its GDP annually on public pensions.
Early retirement is even costlier for Italy, which tops OECD rankings of public-pension spending, with an annual outlay equivalent to nearly 16% of its GDP.
In all, 13 OECD countries – including Japan, Germany, Poland, and Greece – devote the equivalent of 10% or more of their GDP to public pensions every year.
These and other countries are taking money mainly from working taxpayers and giving it to retirees.
When German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck invented the world’s first statutory pension scheme in 1889, he set the eligibility age at 70; few people were expected to live long enough to collect benefits, and certainly not for many years.
Now, Italians who retire on average at 61-62 can expect to receive their pensions for several decades, and in some cases, for almost as many years as they worked.
With around one-fifth of advanced economies’ populations over 65 (a proportion that is expected eventually to rise to one-third), public-pension expenditures will increasingly crowd out other public spending.
Moreover, reducing public-debt levels will become more difficult unless there is a miraculous revival in economic growth, which current pension policies makes less likely every year.
This is not just a question of how we treat older people.
Tax revenues transferred to pensioners could have been invested in infrastructure, education, scientific research, defense, and all the other urgent causes that politicians claim to support.
Pensioners do spend the money they receive, so this revenue isn’t wasted; but it could be better spent to propel stronger economic growth.
Developed countries have been raising their retirement ages gradually, but trade unions and pensioner groups lobby hard against any increase.
In fact, in 2014 Germany’s governing coalition yielded to union pressure and actually reduced the retirement age for some manual workers, despite frequently lecturing other eurozone countries to do the opposite.
Beyond lobbying, the current system is upheld by mythology: the belief that keeping older people in the workforce worsens unemployment.
It does not, and this is what economists call the “lump of labor fallacy” – the idea that handing out pensions frees up employment for younger people, as if there were a fixed number of jobs to go around.
In reality, more people earning, consuming, and paying taxes leads to more economic growth.
Delaying retirement does not steal jobs; it creates them.
On August 29-31, I moderated the World Demographic & Aging Forum in St. Gallen, Switzerland, where attendees arrived at a clear conclusion: although we have increasingly rich data and sophisticated knowledge about future population trends, our concerted action to address those trends falls woefully short.
Public policy is one part of the problem, but corporate behavior has been an even bigger obstacle to commonsense pension reforms.
For starters, corporate pay and promotion structures are biased toward early retirement, because companies tend to push out older workers first when they need to cut costs.
Even companies catering to the “silver market” (elderly consumers) have barely begun to develop more age-friendly employment practices.
The slow recovery following the 2008 financial crisis has obscured the long-term reality that developed countries now face.
Any country required by its public-pension policy to transfer billions of dollars to citizens for decades-long retirement periods risks bankruptcy or, at best, stagnation.
One of the most urgent tasks for governments, companies, and individuals today is to rethink the length and pattern of our working lives.
Reversing Brexit
LONDON – How should the European Union respond to the narrow decision by voters in the United Kingdom to leave?
European leaders are now focusing, rightly, on how to prevent other countries from leaving the EU or the euro.
The most important country to be kept in the club is Italy, which faces a referendum in October that could pave the way for the anti-euro Five Star Movement to take power.
Europe’s fear of contagion is justified, because the Brexit referendum’s outcome has transformed the politics of EU fragmentation.
Before, advocates of leaving the EU or euro could be ridiculed as fantasists or denounced as fascists (or ultra-leftists).
This is no longer possible.
Brexit has turned “Leave” (whether the EU or the euro) into a realistic option in every European country.
Once Britain gives the Union formal notice (by invoking Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon), that option will enter the mainstream of political debate everywhere.
Research by the European Council on Foreign Relations has found 34 anti-EU referendum demands in 18 other countries.
Even if each of these challenges has only a 5% chance of success, the probability of at least one succeeding is 83%.
Can the genie of disintegration be put back in its bottle?
The EU’s breakup may well prove unstoppable once Britain leaves; but Britain has not yet invoked Article 50.
The bottle could still be sealed before the genie escapes.
Unfortunately, Europe is using the wrong threats and incentives to achieve this.
France is demanding that Britain accelerate its exit.
Germany is playing the “good cop” by offering access to the single market, but only in exchange for immigration rules that Britain will not accept.
These are exactly the wrong sticks and carrots.
Instead of rushing Brexit, Europe’s leaders should be trying to avert it, by persuading British voters to change their minds.
The aim should not be to negotiate the terms of departure, but to negotiate the terms on which most British voters would want to remain.
An EU strategy to avoid Brexit, far from ignoring British voters, would show genuine respect for democracy.
The essence of democratic politics is responding to public dissatisfaction with policies and ideas – and then trying to change the judgment of voters.
That is how numerous referendum outcomes – in France, Ireland, Denmark, the Netherlands, Italy, and Greece – have been reversed, even when deeply emotional issues, such as abortion and divorce, were involved.
If European leaders tried the same approach with Britain, they might be surprised by the favorable response.
Many Leave voters are already having second thoughts, and Prime Minister Theresa May’s uncompromising negotiating position will paradoxically accelerate this process, because voters now face a much more extreme version of Brexit than they were promised by the Leave campaign.
May has stated unequivocally that immigration control is her over-riding priority and that Norway or Switzerland can no longer be models for Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Her new “Brexit Ministry” has defined Britain’s main objective as tariff-free access to Europe and free-trade agreements with the rest of the world.
That means abandoning the interests of Britain’s financial and business services, because services are unaffected by tariffs and are excluded from most free-trade deals.
As a result, the new government will soon be politically vulnerable.
In fact, most British voters already disagree with its negotiating priorities.
Post-referendum polls show voters giving priority to single-market access over immigration restrictions by a two-to-one margin or more.
Making matters worse for May, her slender parliamentary majority depends on disgruntled “Remain” rivals.
As the British economy sinks into recession, trade deals prove illusory, and legal and constitutional obstacles proliferate, May will find it hard to maintain the parliamentary discipline needed to deliver Brexit.
A strategy to avert Brexit therefore has a good chance of success.
The EU could advance this strategy by calling May’s bluff on “Brexit means Brexit.”
May should be told that only two outcomes are possible: either Britain loses all single-market access and interacts with Europe solely under World Trade Organization rules, or it remains an EU member, after negotiating reforms that could persuade voters to reconsider Brexit in a general election or a second referendum.
This binary approach, provided EU leaders showed genuine flexibility in their reform negotiations, could transform public attitudes in Britain and across Europe.
Imagine if the EU offered constructive immigration reforms – for example, restoring national control over welfare payments to non-citizens and allowing for an “emergency brake” on sudden population movements – to all members.
Such reforms would demonstrate the EU’s respect for democracy in Britain – and could turn the tide of anti-EU populism across northern Europe.
The EU has a long history of adapting in response to political pressures in important member states.
So why is this strategy not being considered to counter the existential threat of Brexit?
The answer has nothing to do with supposed respect for democracy.
The Brexit vote is no more irreversible than any other election or referendum, provided the EU is willing to adopt some modest reforms.
The real obstacle to a strategy of persuading Britain to remain in the EU is the EU bureaucracy.
The European Commission, once the EU’s source of visionary creativity, has become a fanatical defender of existing rules and regulations, however irrational and destructive, on the grounds that any concessions will beget more demands.
Concessions to British voters on immigration would inspire the southern countries to demand fiscal and banking reforms, eastern countries would seek budget changes, and non-euro countries would demand an end to their second-class status.
The Commission is right to believe that demands for EU reform would extend well beyond Britain.
But is this a reason to resist all change?
That type of rigidity broke up the Soviet Union and nearly destroyed the Catholic Church.
It will destroy the EU if the bureaucracy remains incapable of reform.
It is time for Europe’s politicians to overrule the bureaucrats and re-create a flexible, democratic EU capable of responding to its citizens and adapting to a changing world.
Most British voters would be happy to remain in that kind of Europe.
India’s Antiquated Penal Code
NEW DELHI – A number of seemingly unrelated controversies in India actually have one important element in common: They all relate to criminal offenses codified by India’s British imperial rulers in the mid-nineteenth century that India has proved unable or unwilling to outgrow.
The problematic features of the British-drafted Indian Penal Code include the prohibition of “sedition,” defined loosely as speech or actions promoting “disaffection against the government established by law”; the criminalization of homosexual acts; and the uneven prosecution of adultery.
The first two, in particular, have lately been the source of considerable public outrage – and rightly so.
These provisions – as I argued when introducing amendments to them in the lower house of parliament (of which I am a member) – can easily be misused by the authorities in ways that infringe upon Indians’ constitutional rights.
Consider sedition, against which a draconian law that was established in 1870 to suppress any criticism of British policies – even criticism that, as one Briton candidly put it, did not involve “an absolute breach of the peace.”
The result was Section 124A of the penal code, under which any person who used “words, signs, or visible representation … to excite disaffection against the government” could be charged with sedition and potentially sentenced to life imprisonment.
In other words, no free speech for Indians.
But even that was not sufficient for Britain’s leaders, who tightened the law further in 1898, making it even harsher than the sedition law in England.
The British had concluded, in the words of the British lieutenant governor of Bengal, that “a sedition law which is adequate for a people ruled by a government of its own nationality and faith may be inadequate, or in some respects unsuited, for a country under foreign rule.”
Sedition was thus explicitly intended as an instrument to terrorize Indian nationalists; indeed, Mahatma Gandhi was among its prominent victims, though far from its last.
In fact, just last month, students at New Delhi’s Jawaharlal Nehru University were arrested on charges of sedition, for using “anti-Indian” slogans in their protests against the execution of the convicted terrorist Afzal Guru.
These arrests, which shocked many Indians, would not have been possible without the loose wording of the law.
My amendment would limit sedition charges to situations where an individual’s words or actions lead directly to the use of violence or incitement to violence, or where they constitute an offense – such as murder or rape – that, under the Indian Penal Code, is punishable by life imprisonment.
By clarifying that simply criticizing the government’s actions does not constitute sedition, such an amendment would reinforce freedom of speech – fundamental to any democracy – while safeguarding against speech that actually incites violence.
Then there is Section 377 of the penal code, which was enacted in 1860 and criminalizes “carnal intercourse against the order of nature” – wording so archaic that it would invite derision in most modern societies.
Even in the past, there was no taboo against homosexuality in Indian culture and social practice; it was the British Victorians who introduced it.
By criminalizing sexual acts in private between consenting adults, Section 377 violates the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21 (life and liberty, including privacy and dignity), Article 14 (equality before the law) and Article 15 (prohibition of discrimination) of India’s constitution.
The real-world consequences of this are jarring: In the last two years, 58 Indians have been arrested under Section 377 for acts carried out in the privacy of their homes.
My amendment to Section 377 would have decriminalized sex between consenting adults of any gender or orientation.
Unfortunately, conservative members of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) voted against the bill’s introduction in parliament, citing a 2013 Supreme Court judgment upholding the law.
But there is still some reason for hope: The Supreme Court has agreed to hear a curative review petition against its earlier judgment.
The Indian Penal Code is not much easier on heterosexual women than it is on homosexuals.
According to Section 497, a husband can prosecute his adulterous wife, and the man with whom she had sexual relations, but a woman cannot sue her adulterous husband, unless his partner is underage or married.
This is an appalling and outdated double standard.
It is time for India’s government to get out of its citizens’ bedrooms, and also to recognize that a pernicious sedition law has no place in a lively and contentious democracy.
Indeed, the British, who created these problematic offenses, have since eliminated all of them at home – a reflection of the changing times.
(One of the worst legacies of colonialism is that its ill effects outlasted the empire – in India, occupied Palestine, the Caribbean, and elsewhere.)
President Pranab Mukherjee, for one, feels it is time to take India’s penal code into the twenty-first century, underscoring last month, on the code’s 155th anniversary, the need to revise it thoroughly.
India’s criminal law, he declared, was largely “enacted by the British to meet their colonial needs,” and must be revised to reflect our “contemporary social consciousness.”
Only then can it be a “faithful mirror of a civilization underlining the fundamental values on which it rests.”
With that speech, Mukherjee threw down the gauntlet to the right-wing BJP government.
One hopes that its leaders respond, though their fondness for autocratic measures and indulgence of illiberal and intolerant statements by their supporters – behavior that has spurred serious concern across the political spectrum – raises serious doubts that they will.
As long as they exist, laws that can be misused will be misused.
In order to prevent this, and to create a liberal legal framework fit for a modern democratic country, homosexuality and adultery must be decriminalized, and sedition must be approached from a far more liberal perspective.
As the recurring debates consuming the country indicate, it is manifestly time for a change.
Taking On Revisionist Russia
MADRID – For some countries, military or political defeat is so intolerable, so humiliating, that they will do whatever it takes to overturn what they view as an unjust international order.
One such revisionist power was Egypt, which resolved to undo its 1967 defeat by Israel and regain the Sinai Peninsula.
This was ultimately achieved, but only after President Anwar Sadat embraced a strategy of peace by journeying to Jerusalem.
The most ominous case, however, was Germany in the 1930s, which systematically shredded the European order that had emerged after World War I.
History suggests that a revisionist power can be disciplined in two ways.
It can be opposed with equal fervor, like that which enabled Europe's conservative powers to defeat Napoleon in 1815 and the Allies to defeat Germany in World War II.
Or it can reach the limits of its military and economic strength, as in the case of the Soviet Union at the time of its disintegration.
At that point, the country has a choice.
It can, as Germany did, opt for reconciliation with the international order.
Or it can take the route of President Vladimir Putin's Russia, and develop a new revanchist strategy – in this case, to overturn the order that emerged from the Soviet Union's Cold War defeat.
Though Putin is undoubtedly the main actor driving this strategy, Ukraine's pursuit of closer ties with the European Union – a move that Europe and the United States generally welcomed – was bound to accelerate it.
Putin knew that he could take advantage of Ukraine's ethno-religious division (the eastern regions are overwhelmingly Russian Orthodox and loyal to the Kremlin) to undermine these efforts.
Europe, it seems, underestimated Russia's determination to uphold what it considers a core interest in Ukraine.
The struggle for influence in Ukraine is a game that Putin cannot afford to lose.
For the West, the principle of not redrawing borders by force is a vital political concern – indeed, it is a pillar of a civilized world order.
But both the US and Europe have made it clear that Ukraine's sovereignty is not worth dying for, with the EU disinclined even to follow America's lead in imposing increasingly tough sanctions.
Putin gained the upper hand early in the crisis with the annexation of Crimea.
Now, in eastern Ukraine's Donbas region, he is shrewdly forcing a divided and risk-averse West to choose between war and accommodation.
While neither option is particularly appealing, the dangers of a war with Russia cannot be overestimated.
After all, in such a fight, both sides would possess large nuclear arsenals.
That is why, as Sir Adrian Bradshaw, NATO's second in command, recently suggested, war can be contemplated only if Russia invades a NATO state – a step that Putin is unlikely to take, even as he ramps up his provocations, including cross-border kidnappings.
And, even then, there would be reasons for hesitation.
The Western powers' aversion to war raises risks of its own.
Russia's blatant disregard for the 1994 Budapest Memorandum – in which it, the US, and the United Kingdom promised that Ukraine's territorial integrity would be respected if it surrendered its own nuclear weapons – is sending a dangerous message to nuclear states like Iran, North Korea, India, and Pakistan.
They know that if Ukraine still had its nukes, it would almost certainly still have Crimea.
Nonetheless, the West's views about a war over Ukraine are unlikely to change.
And sanctions, despite having crippled Russia's economy, have proved inadequate, thus far, to breaking Putin's will.
This leaves only accommodation – which means effectively granting legitimacy to the Kremlin's claim to authority over Ukraine and, presumably, the rest of its “near abroad."
In this scenario, Russia would avoid attempting to govern Ukraine directly but would insist that Ukraine refrain from joining hostile blocs and alliances.
As then President-elect Dmitri Medvedev said in 2008 “no country would be happy about a military bloc to which it did not belong approaching its borders."
If the West acquiesces on this critical point, Putin will be eager to end the current war, which Russia's economy is losing badly.
But the Kremlin-driven crisis would not be over.
Indeed, Putin's revisionist agenda extends far beyond Ukraine to include the “Finlandization" of other nearby states, including EU members like Hungary and Romania.
If Putin's dangerous brinkmanship is to be stopped, Western leaders will need to find a way to initiate strategic cooperation with Russia.
Specifically, they must devise a grand bargain for peace that addresses the fundamental questions relating to global security norms and arms control that have so far impeded such cooperation.
Of course, Russia is no longer a global superpower.
But it retains the vocation and characteristics of a major power: a rich culture and history, vast size, formidable nuclear capabilities, strong influence across Eurasia, and the capacity to be a spoiler in many conflicts.
Any realistic grand bargain would have to account for this.
As for Ukraine, the way forward is difficult to discern – not least because of the conflicting experiences of buffer states in the past.
Kaiser Wilhelm II invaded neutral Belgium to start WWI.
Hitler swallowed Austria and Czechoslovakia when it suited him; but Austria's neutrality after 1955 was enough to satisfy the Cold War's two blocs, and now it is part of the EU.
Likewise, since 1967, Jordan has served as an informal buffer state between Israel and the rest of the Arab world.
Any future Palestinian state would have to assume a similar position, as Israel would never accept its accession to some hostile military alliance.
The Franco-German plan for Ukraine calls for a demilitarized zone separating government and separatist forces, and granting what French President François Hollande defined as “rather strong" autonomy to the Russian-speaking eastern regions.
In other words, it fulfills Russia's vision of a federated Ukraine, whereby the Russian-oriented east would have a say in foreign affairs and security matters.
But such a plan cannot be counted on to curb Putin's broader revisionist ambitions.
Only a united and determined West can do that.
Reviving a Policy Marriage
WASHINGTON, DC – Not long ago, the separation of financial supervision and monetary policy was in vogue in many countries.
Some countries – like the United Kingdom and Australia – went so far as to unbundle these functions by assigning responsibility for financial stability to specialized agencies and extricating their central banks from financial supervisory issues altogether.
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, however, financial supervision and macroeconomic management have been forced to reunite.
This rapprochement is a consequence of the growing recognition that asset-price cycles must be taken into account for both macroeconomic management and financial supervision.
Prior to the crisis, asset-price cycles were seen by many as basically harmless or, at least, as a relatively insignificant monetary-policy channel.
Even when the frequent appearance of asset-price bubbles was acknowledged, most believed that efforts to detect and prick them at an early stage would be impossible – and potentially harmful.
Interest-rate cuts after bubbles burst would be a safer way to safeguard the economy.
The dominant policy blueprint looked roughly as follows: the monetary authorities’ focus on inflation-targeting in setting interest rates should suffice to maintain price stability and economic growth near its potential rate.
As for financial supervision, stability would be guaranteed by ensuring that individual financial institutions adopt sound prudential rules that preserve capital cushions commensurate with their risk exposure.
While central banks should be in charge of maintaining adequate levels of liquidity in the system, so-called “microprudential” financial regulation should independently oversee financial institutions’ soundness and the protection of depositors.
The crisis has shattered the belief that well designed microprudential rules alone are sufficient.
It is now increasingly recognized that significant asset-price increases (for example, in real estate or existing equities) may well be reinforced by the pro-cyclical nature of risk assessment embodied in those rules.
What this means is simpler than it sounds: the rising value of collateral tends to be seen as offering higher repayment probabilities.
Moreover, if financial institutions follow their own risk assessments when estimating appropriate capital cushions, the costs associated with such provisions decline.
Better repayment prospects and lower regulatory capital costs then fuel the asset-based financing of further acquisition of assets.
If asset-price bubbles develop, balance sheets may look sound individually, but the entire network of interlinked asset-liability structures will become increasingly dependent on overvalued collateral, and thus vulnerable to financial contagion.
The unraveling of such a network – through panic and runs against financial institutions, asset fire sales, credit crunches, and the like – then becomes a nightmare for financial supervisors and monetary authorities alike.
Moreover, systemic risks potentially created during periods of booming asset prices escape the purview of macroprudential rules.
In the advanced economies at the core of the recent financial crisis, the rules, implicit or explicit, of strict inflation-targeting regimes led monetary authorities to stay put while a massive pyramid of debt was built on a base of overvalued collateral.
Now financial risks are deemed to be sufficiently important for macroeconomic management to warrant regulatory arrangements going beyond that of the microprudential supervisor.
With respect to financial supervision, there has been increasing support since the crisis for countercyclical capital requirements, at least for banks.
Capital buffers to absorb losses during the downturn of the cycle can be more easily built during the upswing.
Furthermore, by raising regulatory capital costs in boom times, some counterweight to the pro-cyclical bias intrinsic to financial systems would be introduced.
Policy harmonization, rather than separation, seems to be the key to happy cyclical endings.
Reviving Arms Control in Europe
BERLIN – European security, to the surprise of many, is under threat once again.
So, once again, Europe’s security must top our political agenda.
Even before the Ukraine conflict began in 2014, there were growing signs of a brewing confrontation between rival blocs.
This new confrontation, however, is not defined by antagonism between communism and capitalism, but by a dispute over social and political order – a dispute about freedom, democracy, the rule of law and human rights – as well as by a struggle for geopolitical spheres of influence.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea violated international law and called into question the very foundations of Europe’s security architecture.
Moreover, the nature of conflict, as Ukraine has demonstrated, has changed dramatically.
So-called hybrid warfare and non-state actors are playing ever-greater roles.
New technologies – offensive cyber capabilities, armed drones, robots, and electronic, laser, and standoff weapons – carry new dangers.
New combat scenarios – smaller units, higher fighting power, faster deployment – are not covered by today’s existing arms-control regimes.
The danger of a new arms race looms large.
Ever since the Harmel Report, which redefined NATO strategy back in 1967, the West has followed a two-track approach to its relations with Russia: deterrence and détente.
NATO renewed its commitment to this dual strategy at its Warsaw Summit earlier this summer.
We adopted the necessary measures to provide military reassurance, and at the same time reaffirmed our political responsibility for cooperative security in Europe.
This dual approach is subject to an inherent difficulty: deterrence is real and visible to everyone; but détente must also be real and visible if it is to play its part.
Whenever this policy balance is lost, misperceptions arise, and little remains to counteract the risk of escalation.
To mitigate this risk, we should advance a concrete goal: the re-launch of arms control in Europe as a tried and tested means of risk-reduction, transparency, and confidence building between Russia and the West.
Arms-control agreements, history has demonstrated, are not the result of existing trust – they are a means to build trust where it has been lost.
In 1962, the Cuban Missile Crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear confrontation.
Soon after the crisis – when the US-Soviet relationship was at an all-time low – both superpowers decided that it was time to work across the divide, through small and concrete steps.
This principle was also at the heart of Willy Brandt’s Neue Ostpolitik in the 1960s and 1970s.
Today, new and deep rifts have opened up between Russia and the West, and I fear we will not be able to close them in the near future, however hard we try. No one should underestimate the challenges we face in this regard, especially given manifold crises – in eastern Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and elsewhere – at a time when we are not immune from renewed escalation or further setbacks.
Only one thing is certain: If we don’t try, peace in Europe and beyond will be tenuous. So we should heed the lesson of détente: however deep the rifts, we must try to build bridges.
Unfortunately, the existing arms-control and disarmament regimes are crumbling.
Russia is no longer implementing the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which led to the removal of tens of thousands of tanks and heavy weapons from Europe in the years after 1990.
Likewise, the transparency and confidence-building mechanisms enshrined in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s 2011 Vienna Document have grown increasingly ineffective, and Russia opposes the steps needed to modernize them.
The OSCE’s Treaty on Open Skies, too, is being limited in its application.
And Russia’s annexation of Crimea has rendered obsolete the Budapest Memorandum.
The trust that was carefully accumulated through decades of hard work has been squandered.
Yet, at the same time, Russia has repeatedly called for a new debate on conventional arms control in Europe.
In this sense, it is high time to take Russia at its word!
Re-launching conventional arms control should be based on a principle that was at the heart of Brandt’s Ostpolitik: security in Europe must not be framed as a permanently adversarial process.
Security is not a zero-sum game.
Increased security for one side must not be perceived by the other side as reducing its own security.
So, in my view, a re-launch of arms control must cover five areas.
We need agreements that:
· define regional ceilings, minimum distances, and transparency measures (especially in militarily sensitive regions such as the Baltics);
· take into account new military capabilities and strategies (smaller, mobile units, rather than traditional, large armies, taking resources such as transport capabilities into consideration accordingly);
· integrate new weapons systems (for example, drones);
· permit effective, rapidly deployable, flexible, and independent verification in times of crisis (carried out by, say, the OSCE);
· can be applied where territorial status is disputed.
On these complex issues, we want to launch a structured dialogue with all those who share responsibility for European security.
The OSCE, which Germany is chairing this year, is one important forum for such a dialogue.
It’s not certain that such an undertaking can succeed at a time when world order is eroding and relations with Russia are strained.
But it would be irresponsible not to try.
True, Russia has violated basic principles of peace – territorial integrity, free choice of alliances, and recognition of international law – that are non-negotiable for us in the West.
But we must likewise be united in seeking to avoid an upward spiral of antagonism and confrontation.
In the West, as in Russia, our world seems increasingly dangerous.
Islamist terrorism, savage conflicts in the Middle East, failing states, and the refugee crisis imply risks for all Europe.
Security capabilities on both sides are stretched to the limit.
Nobody wins and everyone loses if we exhaust ourselves in a new arms race.
By re-launching arms control we can make a tangible offer of cooperation to all those who want to shoulder responsibility for Europe’s security.
It is time to try the impossible.
Renewing the South Korean Miracle
SEOUL – South Korea’s incoming president, Park Geun-hye, takes over a country that has been a global role model for economic development.
But, with the economy slowing, it has become a model in need of renewal.
The so-called “Miracle on the Han River” took root with the reforms initiated by Park’s late father Park Chung-hee, the country’s ruler for much of the 1960’s and 1970’s.
A measure of South Korea’s success is that it was the first country to make the transition from being a recipient of OECD aid to becoming a donor, with per capita GDP today exceeding $30,000 (in purchasing power parity terms).
But the growth formula that long underpinned South Korea’s success – a form of state-guided capitalism that focuses on export-led manufacturing – is no longer working for many South Koreans.
GDP has nearly tripled over the past 20 years, but, with real wages rising at less than half this rate, growth has become decoupled from the fate of ordinary citizens.
More than half of middle-income households spend more each month than they earn.
The signs of social distress are multiplying.
South Korea’s divorce rate has doubled, fertility rates have fallen to the fourth lowest among advanced economies, and the suicide rate is the highest in the OECD.
South Korea is troubled for two key reasons. First, although some parts of the economy reached advanced industrialization in record time, other parts (and institutions) are struggling to catch up.
Manufacturing conglomerates such as Hyundai, LG, and Samsung have morphed into highly productive global giants whose growth creates fewer high-quality jobs at home than before.
Employment at the country’s largest companies is falling, and the share of South Korean jobs at such companies has dropped by one-third since 1995.
But South Korea does not have a well-developed service sector to provide a new source of high-paying jobs.
Worse, service industries are falling further behind large manufacturers in terms of productivity and wages.
This leads to the second challenge: the dire financial straits of middle-income households.
Many families now face stagnating wages, owing to the kinds of jobs now available, but are determined to cling to a lifestyle that they can no longer afford.
Families with children are engaged in an escalating “educational arms race,” devoting large shares of their income to private education and tutoring to prepare children for entrance to elite universities and a shot at a secure job at a major corporation.
Middle-income families also insist on buying homes, despite the highest multiple of home price to income among advanced economies and a housing-finance system that imposes high borrowing costs.
South Korean women still drop out of the labor force when they marry or have children; only 38% of families have two wage earners (half the OECD average).
One of the most pernicious effects of the squeeze on middle-income households and the cost of the educational arms race is a voluntary one-child policy that has reduced the country’s fertility rate to 1.2 births per woman, among the lowest in the industrialized world.
The population is aging at an accelerating rate, and the net flow of working-age citizens into the labor force has turned negative.
Without action, the economy faces the threat of declining consumption and even shrinking output.
South Korea badly needs measures to relieve the stresses on middle-income finances and a new growth formula based on a globally competitive service sector and entrepreneurial small and medium-size (SME) businesses that create well-paying jobs.
Major reforms are necessary to help middle-income families escape crushing monthly payments for housing and education.
Housing payments are higher because mortgages are of short duration (an average of ten years) and tight loan-to-value restrictions force borrowers to seek additional higher-cost loans from second-tier deposit institutions and non-financial companies.
These conditions need to change.
Because banks would need to accept higher risk, a secondary market for mortgages is necessary.
Policymakers should also consider measures to reduce demand for home ownership, including relaxing regulations on investment by insurance and other companies in residential housing, thereby creating better rental choices for middle-income households.
South Korea also needs to improve its public schools, particularly at the secondary level, and significantly upgrade vocational training.
Families invest in private education because they fear that the public education system will not get their children into elite universities and good jobs.
“Meister” high schools, introduced in 2010 specifically to prepare young people for high-skilled jobs, are a positive step.
Aggressive development of services – such as transport, retail, and restaurants, which today are dominated by low-productivity, low-paying local businesses, many run by sole proprietors – is another imperative.
South Korea has excellent opportunities to build up health-care services and to compete in the global medical-tourism business.
Other tourism, too, can expand to take fuller advantage of cultural and sports attractions.
In financial services, the government should aim to produce 3-4 regional champions.
Finally, Koreans must relearn the entrepreneurialism that built the chaebol, the family-owned industrial conglomerates that powered the economy’s development.
Today, South Korea has many small, family-owned businesses, but few entrepreneurs.
Fostering a more dynamic, innovative SME sector that will produce tomorrow’s globally competitive large companies requires removing disincentives to growth, such as the inheritance-tax exemption for family-owned businesses, which rewards owners for keeping their businesses small.
A bankruptcy system that allows entrepreneurs to survive the inevitable failures that accompany innovation, as well as stronger protection of intellectual property and improved access to equity finance, are also needed.
Park takes over at a pivotal point in South Korea’s history.
The new government needs to take the pragmatic steps that can overcome the limitations of today’s economic model and save the country from declining growth, higher unemployment, and rising inequality.
The task is no less than to achieve South Korea’s second miracle on the Han River.
Reviving Europe’s Universities
COPENHAGEN &#45;&#45; Writing at home sometime ago, with Wimbledon on TV in the background, it occurred to me that just as Britain hosts the world’s top tennis tournament but never wins it, so we Europeans are in a similar situation with education.
The world’s first university was Plato’s Academy in Athens, venerable old universities are scattered across Europe from Coimbra to Cambridge to Copenhagen, and the modern university, uniting research and education, was pioneered by Wilhelm von Humboldt in Berlin.
Yet today, universities in the United States easily outperform their European counterparts.
Less than 2% of the European Union’s GDP is devoted to research, compared to 2.5% in the US and 3% in Japan.
Spending per student on tertiary education is just over $9,000 in France, slightly under $11,000 in Germany, and almost $12,000 in the UK.
Some EU countries, such as Denmark, do better, but still lag far behind the US, which spends more than $25,000.
Measuring the quality of output is difficult, although The Times Higher Education Supplement attempts to do so every year.
Only three European universities – Oxford, Cambridge, and Imperial College in London – made it into the top ten in the most recent list; all the rest were American.
Only ten universities from the entire EU have ever made it into the top 50.
Germany’s top university, Heidelberg, ranks 58th.
As a result, roughly 400,000 European scholars currently reside in the US, and almost 60% of European citizens who received doctorates in US from 1998 to 2001 chose to remain there.
There are twice as many Europeans studying in the US as there are Americans studying in Europe.
Europe’s “education gap” doesn’t stop at the Atlantic.
China and India represent more than mushrooming factories and low-cost semi-skilled labor.
Just as in Europe, the industrial revolution in “Chindia” is also creating an ambitious new middle class that is willing and able to send its children to university.
But in today’s world, students and researchers choose a university much as consumers shop in the international marketplace.
Europe has made some modest efforts to regain university competitiveness.
In March 2000, EU leaders meeting in Lisbon set the goal of making Europe the world’s most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy by 2010, and two years later they agreed that investment in R&amp;D must reach 3% of GDP by 2010.
Such ambitious goals, however unrealistic, can have a disciplining effect, leading some EU countries to increase their spending, while the EU itself has launched a number of promising schemes.
The seventh Framework Program, worth some €50 billion – a 40% increase over the sixth program – is perhaps the most prominent funding source tool through which the EU supports R&amp;D activities.
But the EU and European governments must do more.
Overall spending is still dwarfed by US federal research and development spending, which will total $137 billion in the 2007 fiscal year.
European leaders must therefore substantially increase research funding when the EU budget is next due for revision in 2008 and 2009.
Although the core financial burden will be on the member states, the EU level can make an important contribution.
Moreover, although the European Commission clearly has a duty to prevent mismanagement and fraud, every application for EU funding requires extremely onerous procedures.
Eliminating bureaucratic red tape, as the Commission has now pledged to do, would be a substantial boon to European researchers.
Finally, Europe must place more emphasis on basic research.
Of course, our scientists should respond to current problems in society.
But if basic research is neglected, attempts to produce quick innovations through applied research will be futile.
Basic research is the primary organism in the food chain of scientific endeavor.
The European Research Council, which is to award research grants on the basis of peer-reviewed excellence, will therefore be an important step forward, and the EU should further increase its funding.
Last year, the government merged 12 universities into eight in order to achieve substantial economies of scale, and the Danish parliament approved a nearly 50% increase in government spending on research by 2010.
The Danish case highlights the pivotal role of governance reform if Europe is ever to meet its Lisbon goals.
The University of Copenhagen’s mergers with the Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University and the Danish University of Pharmaceutical Sciences have made it the largest university in Scandinavia.
We now aspire to becoming the most significant health and life science research center in Europe, owing to a remarkable cluster of knowledge based 5,000 researchers, an excellent medical school, 11 university hospitals, and a thriving biotech business environment that already includes market leaders in diabetes and neuroscience.
Until we embarked on governance reform, this would probably have been impossible.
Our experience so far has taught us that university managers should not accommodate rising student populations by inflating their core business.
However fierce the global competition, they should concentrate on safeguarding quality and achieving excellence in research and education.
Reviving Georgia’s Western Dream
Georgia’s recent instability has dealt a blow to its international reputation as a new democracy, and poses a challenge to the European Union as well.
Faced with street protests in November, President Mikheil Saakashvili claimed that Russian-Georgian tycoon Badri Patarkatsishvili was conspiring to bring down the government.
So he closed the opposition-leaning private Imedi TV station (owned by Patarkatsishvili) and introduced a state of emergency for nine days, before calling an early presidential election for January 5.
Ever since Saakashvili’s inauguration in January 2004, following the 2003 “Rose Revolution,” Georgia’s government has displayed EU flags on official occasions.
Georgians share that enthusiasm.
A poll conducted by the International Republican Institute in September 2007 indicated that 81% of Georgians support joining the EU.
But, regardless of the election’s outcome, the recent crisis exposes a lack of commitment by the EU to security and democracy in Georgia.
Despite Georgia’s strategic location on the Black Sea, bordering Russia, Azerbaijan, and Turkey – and on a key trade route linking the EU, Iran, Russia, and Central Asia – Europe has dragged its feet on the country’s most enduring political problems.
On the Georgian side, It is well understood – at least by the political elite – that EU membership is a distant prospect at best.
This weakens the political importance of the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP), an initiative developed in 2004 to avoid the emergence of new dividing lines between the enlarged EU and its neighbors.
An EU-Georgia ENP Action Plan was signed in November 2006, but it is unlikely to meet expectations.
Indeed, the ENP comes second to co-operation with NATO as a priority for Georgia, in part because Georgians, feeling threatened by Russia, crave security above all.
Moreover, while the recent state of emergency was a serious setback, NATO membership, unlike EU accession, is still within reach.
This makes all the difference.
The security interests of Georgia and the EU coincide least when it comes to the so-called “frozen conflicts” in the Kremlin-backed breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia – it is no accident that “Promoting Peaceful Resolution of Internal Conflicts” ranks only sixth among the ENP Action Plan’s priorities.
Georgia wants a reluctant EU to be more engaged, but each side understands engagement differently.
The EU supports politically uncontroversial confidence-building measures that can reap results only in the long term, if ever.
The Georgian government views the Abkhazian and Ossetian conflicts as the country’s principal security threat and impediment to development.
It expects bolder moves from the EU, such as explicit endorsement of the Georgian-Ossetian working group, which includes the alternative, pro-autonomy South Ossetian government of Dmitri Sanakoyev, but is boycotted by the pro-Russian separatist government in Tskhinvali.
The EU has avoided any such gesture, seeking to avoid further tension with Russia.
On the other hand, there are better prospects for strengthening the EU’s role in democracy development.
“Strengthening the Rule of Law, Building State Institutions, Protecting Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms” occupies first place in the ENP Action Plan.
Though judicial independence and protection of human rights remain conspicuously weak, Saakashvili’s government has increased the civil service’s efficiency, improved public infrastructure, fought corruption, reduced crime, and created an attractive investment environment.
However, the opposition’s shortcomings pose a further obstacle to democratic development.
The government’s opponents can mobilize public protests, as they did in November, but they are much less capable of formulating alternative policy agendas and attracting support for them.
With no internal system of checks and balances in Georgia – the only way to sustain democratic institutions – the international community becomes a compensating actor, with the EU well placed to take the lead.
In fact, while the Saakashvili government’s clampdown showed the structural weaknesses of Georgia’s democracy, the aftermath has also shown that Georgia’s Western ambition remains intact, because the government understands that it cannot afford any long-term deviation from democratic norms.
The EU’s special representative in the South Caucasus, Swedish diplomat Peter Semneby, played a crucial role in bringing back Imedi TV in time to restore media balance ahead of the presidential election – possibly the first time that the EU took a leading role in seminal political events in Georgia.
This was not part of any prefigured Action Plan, but it shows that, given the political will, the EU can play an active role in promoting democracy and stability.
Reviving Muslim Democracy
DAKKA – As fears about the Islamization of politics in the Muslim world grow, Bangladesh, with the world’s fourth-largest Muslim population (126 million), has moved dramatically in the opposite direction.
Bangladesh is usually heard about only when cyclones and tsunamis ravage its low coastline, but the country’s relatively anonymous international stature belies its strategic importance.
Its secular politicians’ ability to defeat the country’s Islamists decisively in the recent parliamentary election may, indeed, have revived the viability of “Muslim democracy” around the world.
The recent landslide victory (with a huge turnout) for the Awami League in Bangladesh’s first election in seven years, after two years of a military-backed caretaker government, has moved the country to the forefront of the battle between secular democrats and Islamists that is now underway across South Asia.
The election was a credit to the country's democratic yearnings – and I say that as the chairman of the European Parliament's short-term election observation mission to Bangladesh.  
The new electoral register was more robust than in many Western countries, with a photo ID picture alongside each elector.
The violence that had been widespread in previous Bangladeshi elections was entirely absent, with the security services’ professionalism in policing the elections – and the army’s willingness to return voluntarily to its barracks – playing a key role.
In Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh now has a charismatic leader whose massive electoral mandate augurs well for creating the type of strong, secular government that the country needs.
She returned to Bangladesh from exile, which the army had imposed on her.  After her return she still had to endure imprisonment and trumped-up murder charges.
Hasina’s enormous popularity as a former prime minister, and her status as one of only two surviving daughters of Bangladesh’s founder, Sheikh Mujib Rahman, always ensured that she would be a leading contender in the election.
Her overwhelming triumph has vindicated her belief that ordinary Bangladeshis want a secular and stable future for their country – one that, in contrast to Pakistan, is characterized by warm relations with their giant neighbor, India.
The comprehensive defeat of the Islamist parties that sought to take Bangladesh away from its democratic and secular roots, and which had sought in 1971 to impose Urdu as a national language and suppress Bengali language and culture, is the real story of the election.
The vote demonstrated that Bangladesh’s 153 million people have little appetite for bringing Islamism into politics.
Bangladesh needs only to look west to India and Pakistan to see the threat posed by Islamist terrorism.
But if Hasina is to succeed in continuing to blunt Islamism, she must address the fundamental problems that have destabilized Bangladeshi society for decades.
Chief among these is the poverty endured by the majority of her country’s population.
To some extent, it is surprising that the Islamist parties did not do better, considering their success elsewhere in mobilizing the most marginalized and vulnerable in society.
If the Awami League is unable to address the country’s systematic poverty and social inequality, Islamism may well yet succeed in rallying the impoverished to its banner.
The Jamaat-e-Islami Party, indeed, told me during my stay that they had a 30-year agenda to introduce Sharia law into Bangladesh.
The example of Hamas and Hezbollah provide a salutary reminder of the challenges faced by the new government in Bangladesh.
Although these terrorist groups are better known internationally for atrocities against Israel, they have established strong political support by providing organized social services such as schools and clinics for poor people.
Hamas and Hezbollah prospered in this way because the governing authorities were either unable or unwilling to address grassroots poverty.
In the case of Hamas, this displacement was due largely to the massive corruption of the Palestinian Authority under Yassir Arafat, whose cronies pocketed billions of dollars intended to alleviate poverty and suffering in the Gaza Strip.
Given that endemic corruption in Bangladesh is perhaps the primary obstacle to providing essential services for poor people, it is essential that Hasina adopt a tough approach to corruption from the outset.
Corruption is also a potential trigger for intervention by the military, a recurring feature of Bangladesh’s history that has consistently impeded the country’s development.
Beyond fighting corruption, Hasina must also ban all foreign donations to political parties, in particular the “Wahhabi gold” that Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states use to fund Islamist parties.
The challenges facing the Awami League are many and varied, but it is not without resources.
Bangladesh is in a better position to weather the global financial storm than most Asian countries, because its banks are not over-exposed and its garment industry focuses on the lower end of the market, which, so far, appears to be holding up.
But chief among Bangladesh’s opportunities is the chance to show the world that a Muslim-majority country can freely embrace liberal democracy and make it work by confining religion to the private sphere.
With its constitutional majority, the government should ensure this outcome by restoring the 1972 Constitution, which established Bangladesh as a secular democratic state.
Bangladesh is a country rich with human potential, but that potential can only be realized by making poor people’s needs – which Islamists around the world have previously made their own political territory – the new government’s top priority.
A Europe of Solidarity, Not Only Discipline
BERLIN – Originally, the European Union was what psychologists call a “fantastic object,” a desirable goal that inspires people’s imaginations.
I saw it as the embodiment of an open society – an association of nation-states that gave up part of their sovereignty for the common good and formed a union dominated by no one nation or nationality.
The euro crisis, however, has turned the EU into something radically different.
Member countries are now divided into two classes – creditors and debtors – with the creditors in charge.
As the largest and most creditworthy country, Germany occupies a dominant position.
Debtor countries pay substantial risk premiums to finance their debt, which is reflected in their high economy-wide borrowing costs.
This has pushed them into a deflationary tailspin and put them at a substantial – and potentially permanent – competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis creditor countries.
This outcome does not reflect a deliberate plan, but rather a series of policy mistakes.
Germany did not seek to occupy a dominant position in Europe, and it is reluctant to accept the obligations and liabilities that such a position entails.
Call this the tragedy of the European Union.
Recent developments seem to offer grounds for optimism.
The authorities are taking steps to correct their mistakes, especially with the decision to form a banking union and the outright monetary transactions program, which would allow unlimited intervention by the European Central Bank in the sovereign-bond market.
Financial markets have been reassured that the euro is here to stay.
That could be a turning point, provided it is adequately reinforced with additional steps toward greater integration.
Unfortunately, the EU’s unfolding tragedy characteristically feeds on such glimmers of hope.
Germany remains willing to do the minimum – and nothing more – to hold the euro together, and the EU’s recent steps have merely reinforced German resistance to further concessions.
This will perpetuate the division between creditor and debtor countries.
A widening gap in economic performance and political dominance is such a dismal prospect for the EU that it must not be allowed to become permanent.
There must be a way to prevent it – after all, history is not predetermined.
The EU, originally conceived as an instrument of solidarity, is today held together by grim necessity.
That is not conducive to a harmonious partnership.
The only way to reverse the trend is to recapture the spirit of solidarity that animated the European project from the start.
To that end, I recently established an Open Society Initiative for Europe (OSIFE).
In doing so, I recognized that the best place to start would be where current policies have created the greatest human suffering: Greece.
The people who are suffering are not those who abused the system and caused the crisis.
The fate of the many migrant and asylum seekers caught in Greece is particularly heart-rending.
But their plight cannot be separated from that of the Greeks themselves.
An initiative confined to migrants would merely reinforce the growing xenophobia and extremism in Greece.
I could not figure out how to approach this seemingly intractable problem until I recently visited Stockholm to commemorate the centenary of Raoul Wallenberg’s birth.
This reawakened my memories of World War II – the calamity that eventually gave birth to the EU.
Wallenberg was a hero who saved the lives of many Jews in my home city of Budapest by establishing Swedish safe houses.
During the German occupation, my father was also a heroic figure.
He helped to save his family and friends and many others.
He taught me to confront harsh reality rather than to submit to it passively.
That is what gave me the idea.
We could set up solidarity houses in Greece, which would serve as community centers for the local population and also provide food and shelter to migrants.
There are already many soup kitchens and civil-society efforts to help the migrants, but these initiatives cannot cope with the scale of the problem.
What I have in mind is to reinforce these efforts.
The EU’s asylum policy has broken down.
Refugees must register in the member country where they enter, but the Greek government cannot process the cases.
Some 60,000 refugees who sought to register have been put into detention facilities where conditions are inhumane. Migrants who do not register and live on the street are attacked by the hooligans of the neo-fascist Golden Dawn party.
Sweden has made migration and asylum policy a high priority, while Norway is concerned about the fate of migrants in Greece.
So both countries would be prime candidates to support solidarity houses.
And other better-off countries could join them.
OSIFE is ready to provide support for this initiative, and I hope other foundations will be eager to do the same.
But this has to be a European project –&nbsp;one that eventually must find its way into the European budget.
Currently, Golden Dawn is making political headway by providing social services to Greeks while attacking migrants.
The initiative that I propose would offer a positive alternative, based on solidarity – the solidarity of Europeans with Greeks and of Greeks with migrants.
It would provide a practical demonstration of the spirit that ought to infuse the entire EU.
As soon as possible, I will dispatch an OSIFE needs-assessment team to Greece to contact the authorities – and the people and organizations already helping the needy – to work out a plan for which we can generate public support.
My goal is to revive the idea of the EU as an instrument of solidarity, not only of discipline.
Revolts of the Righteous
It has become fashionable in certain smart circles to regard atheism as a sign of superior education, of a more highly evolved civilization, of enlightenment.
Recent bestsellers suggest that religious faith is really a sign of backwardness, the mark of primitives stuck in the dark ages who are yet to catch up with scientific reason.
Religion, we are told, is responsible for violence, oppression, poverty, and many other ills.
It is not difficult to find examples to back up such assertions.
But can religion also be a force for good?
Indeed, are there cases where religious faith comes to the rescue even of those who don’t have it?
Since I have never had either the benefits or misfortunes of adhering to any religion, it might smack of hypocrisy for me to defend those who have.
But watching the Burmese monks on television defy the security forces of one of the world’s most oppressive regimes, it is hard not to see some merit in religious belief.
Burma is a deeply religious country, where most men spend some time as Buddhist monks.
Even the most thuggish Burmese dictator must hesitate before unleashing lethal force on men dressed in the maroon and saffron robes of their faith.
The Burmese monks, together with nuns in pink robes, were soon joined by students, actors, and others who want to be rid of the military junta.
But it was the monks and nuns who took the first step; they dared to protest when others had mostly given up.
And they did so with the moral authority of their Buddhist faith.
Romantics might say that Buddhism is unlike other religions – indeed, more a philosophy than a faith.
But Buddhism has been a religion in different parts of Asia for many centuries, and, like any other belief, it can be used to justify violent acts.
One need only look at Sri Lanka, where Buddhism is lashed to ethnic chauvinism in the slow-burning civil war between Buddhist Singhalese and Hindu Tamils.
Just as the Buddhists risked their lives to stand up for democracy in Burma, Christians have done so in other countries.
The Marcos regime in the Philippines was doomed in the mid-1980’s from the moment the Catholic Church turned against it.
Thousands of ordinary citizens defied the tanks when Marcos threatened to crush “People Power” with force, but the presence of priests and nuns gave the rebellion its moral authority.
Many political dissidents in South Korea were inspired by their Christian beliefs, and the same is true in China.
And no one can deny the religious authority of Pope John Paul II as a spur to Poland’s rebellion against Communist dictatorship in the 1980’s.
True believers would no doubt see the hand of God in these stirring events.
Ferdinand Marcos’s main opponent, Cory Aquino, actually boasted of having a direct pipeline to the Lord.
As a non-believer, I am bound to treat such claims with skepticism.
But the moral power of religious faith does not need a supernatural explanation.
Its strength is belief itself – belief in a moral order that defies secular, or, indeed, religious dictators.
Active resisters to the Nazis during World War II were often devout Christians.