Jaroslaw Kaczynski is an intelligent politician who understands the link between currency stability and political success.
So he will not allow government largesse to become excessive and thus risk a negative reaction in the financial markets.
Yet the strong link between the fate of the coalition (and that of the Fourth Republic) and a fickle electorate addicted to social benefits will block the serious reforms that are needed to put the economy on a sound footing in the long term.
This will likely result in a gradual loss of economic competitiveness ­– all the more dangerous for being obscured by the temporary boost from EU funds, which will help maintain the government’s popular support.
In that case, life with the twins could become more interesting than Poland needs.
Europe Moves East
PARIS – Madrid and Warsaw recently looked very similar: both were the sites of massive demonstrations.
But the crowds gathered at Europe’s western and eastern extremities had very different agendas in mind.
In Spain, citizens were united by economic and social despair.
They took to the streets to express their rejection of a European Union-imposed austerity policy that they believe is leading them into an abyss.
They want jobs and the dignity and salaries that go with them.
The indignation of some had a clear anti-capitalist and anti-globalization tone.
In the Polish capital, Catholic and conservative parties, together with the “Solidarity” Trade Union, inspired by a reactionary Christian radio network, “Radio Maria,” gathered for political and cultural, rather than economic, reasons.
In the name of the defense of media freedom, they were denouncing a government that they found too “centrist” and insufficiently “Polish.”
Ten years ago, then-US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld famously distinguished between “Old” and “New” Europe on the basis of their attitudes toward the United States and the war in Iraq.
New Europe (at least its governments), understanding the need to exercise power, was from Mars, whereas Old Europe (with the main exception of Great Britain), having decayed into a culture of weakness, was from Venus.
The differences between the demonstrations in Madrid and Warsaw suggest that the distinction between Old and New Europe remains valid, though not in the way that Rumsfeld meant.
Of course, it would be inaccurate to oppose a thriving Poland to a collapsing Spain.
Given the overall European crisis, even Poland’s economy is no longer booming.
Unemployment is around 10% (still less than half the Spanish rate), and annual GDP growth is around 1% (Spain’s growth rate is negative).
But the moods in the two countries, as well as their perceptions of Europe and their role in it, contrast starkly.
Poland, which is not yet part of the eurozone, sees no alternative to the EU.
The country has fully reconciled itself with America’s strategic shift away from the European continent, even though Poles are as obsessively fearful of Russia as ever.
And can one blame them, given that Russia seems more nostalgic for its imperial tradition than ever?
But, given the political evolution of Ukraine, not to mention Belarus, Poland can no longer dream of an Eastern future.
Poland’s only way is West – but the European West more than the American one.
Poland is benefiting from economic growth and prosperity in Germany, its immediate western neighbor and closest ally.
Reconciliation between the two countries has been one of their greatest achievements, and Poland may, for the first time in its history, be in the right place – close to Berlin – at the right time.
By contrast, Spain seems to be moving south, figuratively if not literally (witness the desertification affecting some parts of Andalusia).
But Spain adamantly – and legitimately – refuses to be compared with Greece.
Consider its modern infrastructure, the dynamism of its young entrepreneurs, and the internationally recognized quality of its cultural goods. The Spaniards are right.
But Spain increasingly regards Europe more as a problem than as a solution.
It is not so much that its people want to leave the eurozone (or, for that matter, that many want their regions to leave Spain); rather, the country wants to remain itself – that is, to maintain a lifestyle that is largely the product of climate.
For Poles, the EU is still a tool for modernization, whereas Spaniards increasingly consider it synonymous with an attack on their dignity, if not on their essence.
How can one unite member countries with such different emotional calendars?
And how can Europe move ahead with such vivid pecking orders?
Spaniards are offended when they are compared to Greeks, Poles are shocked when they are compared with Spaniards, the French refuse to be compared to Italians, and so on, in an infernal spiral.
Yet not long ago – after the fall of Franco – Poles looked with envy at Spain.
Here I am reminded of a conversation with the Polish historian, statesman, and politician Bronisław Geremek in 1978, when we shared an office in Washington, DC.
For him, Poland and Spain had long had a somewhat parallel history.
Both were unable to integrate modernity into their institutions, and both had fallen into decline after a brilliant historical period between the late fifteenth and early eighteenth centuries.
Poland had even disappeared from the map of Europe – the victim of its immediate neighbors’ virulent greed.
Democracy returned to Spain in 1975, and the country soon recovered its place within Europe, just when Poland seemed trapped in its tragic history.
But, 11 years after my conversation with Geremek, communism collapsed in Poland, and in 2004 the country’s “return” to Europe was complete.
Today’s Poles do not believe that Europe has cheated them.
Nearly everywhere, you can see tangible signs of the EU’s support: a bridge here, a school there.
In Spain, by contrast, disillusion with the Union has replaced the early enthusiasm of the “movida” period.
Whether that remains true will most likely determine the future of Europe.
Building Stability for Indian Growth
MUMBAI – In their efforts to stimulate demand by pursuing increasingly aggressive monetary policies, advanced economies have been imposing risks on emerging-market countries such as India.
Indeed, one day we face surging capital inflows, as investors go into “risk-on” mode, and outflows the next as they switch risk off.
India has responded to this external volatility by trying to create a domestic platform of macroeconomic stability on which to build growth.
India’s latest central budget emphasizes fiscal prudence, adheres to past commitments, and aims at structural reforms, especially in agriculture.
Fiscal consolidation has also helped to keep the current-account deficit under 1% of GDP.
Moreover, inflation has been brought within the official target range.
And parliament has created a monetary-policy committee for the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which should ensure that multiple views are embedded in policy and improve continuity.
We must also address banks’ non-performing loans so that their balance sheets have room for new lending.
Unlike more developed countries, India does not have an effective bankruptcy system (though a bill to create one has just cleared the lower house of Parliament).
But, using some “out-of-court resolution” mechanisms devised by the RBI, and with capital support from the government, banks should have well-provisioned balance sheets by March 2017.
Perhaps the hardest challenge has been to persuade the public, impatient for rapid growth, of the need to ensure stability first.
Growth, it is argued, is always more important, regardless of the looming economic risks.
Yet, despite the focus on stability, inhospitable global growth conditions, and two successive droughts (any of which would have thrown the economy into a tailspin in the past), growth is above 7%.
The task is to build on this base.
For the first time in decades, global trade has grown more slowly than global output.
As countries become richer, non-traded services constitute a greater share of output, causing GDP to grow faster than trade, while global overcapacity has restrained trade growth further.
And, as advanced economies become more competitive, and as China moves up the value chain, more inputs are being sourced within countries.
For all these reasons, the heady days of double-digit growth in Indian trade in goods and services will not return soon.
Many emerging markets have been hit by lower prices for their commodity exports, but India’s exports of goods seem to be doing worse recently than those of other emerging markets.
At the same time, India’s exports of services are doing somewhat better, perhaps because of demand from the United States.
Of course, these differences are over very short periods, so it is probably unwise to draw too many conclusions – except that India is not alone in suffering a fall-off in trade.
That does not stop industry bodies from demanding that the authorities “do something” – especially by lowering the value of the rupee.
The rupee seems to have weakened by about 6% against the dollar since the beginning of 2015.
This depreciation should have helped our merchandise exports, and yet it coincides with their relative underperformance, because other currencies have depreciated against the dollar, too.
For this reason, economists focus on the “nominal effective exchange rate,” which compares the rupee’s value to that of other currencies by weighing their share in trade.
In trade-weighted terms, the rupee has remained relatively flat since early 2015.
That said, inflation in India is higher than in most other countries.
If a widget cost a dollar to make a year ago in the US, and cost 63 rupees to make in India, the Indian producer would have been competitive with the US because the dollar was worth 63 rupees.
But if inflation in India is 5% and zero in the US, it will cost the Indian manufacturer 66.2 rupees to make it today – and still just a dollar for American competitors.
Hence the need to look at the “real effective exchange rate,” or the nominal effective exchange rate adjusted for inflation.
The higher the index is, the less the exchange rate has depreciated to offset inflation – and the more uncompetitive India is.
Interpretation is in the eye of the beholder.
Someone who wants to blame the exchange rate for India’s export slowdown can look at the index from the low point of September 2013 and argue that it has appreciated 20% (based on the IMF measure).
But, over the past year, as goods exports have slowed, the real effective exchange rate has been rather flat.
So someone who wants to absolve the exchange rate of blame will point to the recent period.
But exchange rates are only one measure of competitiveness.
Productivity also matters.
In a rich country, firms typically can improve productivity only through innovation.
In India, productivity can be improved simply by building a better road from a factory to the railhead.
Much of the appreciation in the real exchange rate is offset by increased productivity.
India’s trade has certainly been slowing – but not necessarily because of the rupee’s value.
Non-economists typically advocate a strong rupee: Not only does it convey national strength, but it also allows one to buy more stuff when one travels abroad, and imports are cheaper.
Of course, it is precisely because domestic tourism and production are disadvantaged relative to tourism and production abroad that many economists prefer a weak rupee.
Yet these modern-day mercantilists do not acknowledge that undervaluation is a subsidy to India’s producers, financed by India’s consumers and savers.
The ideal exchange rate for India is neither strong nor weak; it is the “Goldilocks rate” produced by market forces, with the RBI focusing on attracting long-term capital inflows and intervening only to maintain orderly movement of the rupee versus other currencies.
To ensure such an orderly market, in good times we must resist the temptation to open up too much to short-term foreign-currency debt.
Our rules now encourage investors in infrastructure and other projects with limited foreign earnings to issue Masala bonds (whereby Indian companies can borrow abroad in rupees), or to borrow long term, thereby limiting their risk when the exchange rate moves against them.
Our job as policymakers is to enable business activity, not to dictate its course.
Mengapa Polio Sulit Diberantas?
BERN, LONDON, GENEVA – 24 Oktober 2016, sepatutnya menjadi hari istimewa dalam sejarah polio.
Jika semua berjalan sesuai rencana, segera dunia akan memperingati World Polio Day atau Hari Polio Sedunia yang terakhir sebelum penyakit tersebut lenyap.
Namun sekarang belum waktunya merayakan atau berpuas diri; meski kita tahu cara menghentikan polio, kerja keras kita belum selesai.
Misalnya: bulan Agustus 2014, Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO) menerbitkan status untuk krisis Ebola di Afrika Barat sebagai Darurat Kesehatan Internasional atau Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC); kemudian mencabut status tersebut pada bulan Maret 2016.
Bulan Mei 2014, WHO juga mengeluarkan status yang sama yaitu PHEIC atas penyebaran global virus polio liar; namun status tersebut masih berlaku sekarang, sehingga publik bertanya-tanya apakah para pemimpin dunia sudah memberi perhatian yang cukup atau belum.
Isu ini patut mendapat sorotan.
Status PHEIC yang terus diberlakukan akan mengancam keberhasilan program pemberantasan polio di seluruh dunia yang disebut Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), yang didirikan pada tahun 1988 dan menghabiskan dana 15 miliar AS; juga membahayakan kesehatan dunia secara umum.
Pertama, upaya GPEI untuk menghentikan penularan virus polio bisa meleset dari tenggat waktu terakhir; sayangnya, ini bukanlah yang pertama.
Sesuai target awal di tahun 2000, angka kejadian polio turun lebih dari 99% dari perkiraan 350.000 kejadian di tahun 1988.
Akan tetapi sejak saat itu, laju infeksi tak kunjung hilang, terutama di daerah terpencil, miskin, dan dilanda konflik.
Upaya melawan infeksi yang terus menghantui ini sangat melelahkan dan memakan banyak sumber daya, tapi belum juga berakhir, walau mendapat status PHEIC.
Memang benar ada sejumlah kisah sukses, contohnya di India yang dinyatakan bebas polio pada tahun 2014, juga Nigeria yang tidak melaporkan kasus penyakit itu sejak 2014.
Tetapi ada beberapa hambatan; tahun 2016, Nigeria tiba-tiba menemukan dua kasus baru pada anak-anak dari kawasan yang baru dibebaskan dari kelompok militant Boko Haram.
Dua negara endemik virus polio lainnya, Afghanistan dan Pakistan, gagal memenuhi target pemberantasan mereka pada tahun 2015 dan harus menambah satu tahun lagi, dengan biaya 1,5 miliar dolar AS.
Penyelesaian terhadap akar penyebab masalah kedua negara luput dari tenggat waktu yang ditetapkan akan memerlukan penanganan politik yang terampil dan penuh kehatian-hatian.
Hal ini termasuk mengakhiri konflik-konflik internal yang menjadikan akses anak-anak pada layanan kesehatan publik menjadi terbatas, mengatasi penolakan dari beberapa pemuka agama, dan rendahnya kepercayaan masyarakat terhadap pemerintah pusat dan inisiatif-inisiatif global.
Pemberantasan polio memang tidak murah, tapi dibutuhkan biaya lebih dari puluhan miliar dolar dalam upaya mengakhiri penyakit yang terus bermunculan.
Politisi dan pembuat kebijakan harus sadar bahwa dunia bebas polio penting bagi kesejahteraan dunia, bahwa pemberantasan adalah jalan terbaik, maka pendanaan berkelanjutan dan dukungan politik sangat diperlukan untuk menjamin kesuksesan GPEI.
Tidak hanya itu, perlu dipastikan agar aset-aset dan praktik-praktik berharga yang dibangun dari GPEI selama ini tidak akan terbuang sia-sia ketika polio sudah diberantas.
Ini termasuk sarana cold chain untuk penyimpanan vaksin selama distribusi dari pabrik ke pasien; hari-hari yang ditetapkan sebagai “hari imunisasi” dan “hari tenang” di zona-zona konflik selama gencatan senjata; staf medis terlatih; dan sistem-sistem surveilans, analisis laboratorium, dan respon cepat.
Segala aset yang ada terbukti ampuh melawan penyakit-penyakit lainnya: Nigeria menghentikan penyebaran Ebola ketika wabah di Afrika Barat berkat sistem pelacakan polio yang efektif.
Namun pada kenyataannya, negara-negara tersebut bisa memanfaatkan aset-aset GPEI dalam sistem kesehatan mereka jika menerima dukungan finansial, logistik, dan politik.
Upaya besar diperlukan untuk memindahkan material ke lokasi-lokasi yang membutuhkan, dan mengkoordinasikan surveilans dan operasi laboratorium.
Dengan demikian, selain meningkatkan keamanan kesehatan dunia dan ketahanan menghadapi kemungkinan wabah yang akan datang, ini akan membantu kita mewujudkan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (atau SDG) PBB tentang jaminan kesehatan nasional.
Selain itu, pembelajaran dari GPEI dan upaya pemberantasan lainnya jangan sampai dikesampingkan.
Pada tahun 1980, cacar (smallpox) merupakan penyakit menular pada manusia pertama yang berhasil dihilangkan, dan sebelumnya banyak upaya lain yang kurang berhasil dalam mengakhiri penyakit seperti cacing tambang, yaws atau frambosia, demam kuning, dan malaria.
Namun beberapa pembelajaran yang sudah diketahui sebelum tahun 1980an umumnya diabaikan – seperti pentingnya menanggulangi reservoir infeksi dan mempertahankan tingkat imunisasi yang tinggi di semua tempat agar sistem kesehatan tidak kewalahan.
Gabungan dari tekanan politik, dorongan, dan harapan menentukan pelajaran apa yang dipetik dari sejarah, serta target-target baru apa di bidang kesehatan global yang akan ditetapkan.
Hari Polio Sedunia menjadi momentum untuk menggerakkan politisi dan menuntut komitmen pemberantasan polio, dan menerapkan pembelajaran dari GPEI untuk menguatkan sistem kesehatan di mana pun juga.
Dalam perang melawan polio, dunia sangat mengandalkan kemurahan hati Amerika Serikat, Rotary International, the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation, dan negara-negara Eropa seperti Jerman, Norwegia, dan Inggris (serta dukungan politik tambahan dari negara seperti Monako).
Negara-negara Eropa lainnya dan Komisi Eropa pun selayaknya berkontribusi lebih besar pada upaya tersebut.
Walaupun negara-negara anggota G7 memperbarui janji mengakhiri polio pada pertemuan di Jepang awal tahun ini, pertemuan G20 terakhir di Hangzhou, Cina, sebagai forum yang mewakili dua pertiga penduduk dunia, tidak berkomentar tentang isu ini; sama halnya dengan pertemuan G77 yang beranggotakan 134 negara berkembang, pun tidak membahasnya.
Ini belum optimal.
Setelah bertahun-tahun berusaha, semakin jelas bahwa komitmen internasional yang kuat dan konsisten lah yang mampu mengakhiri darurat polio sepenuhnya dan untuk selama-lamanya.
Squashing the Superbugs
LONDON – Current antibiotics are becoming increasingly ineffective, not only at fighting common illnesses like pneumonia and urinary tract infections, but also at treating a range of infections, such as tuberculosis and malaria, which now risk again becoming incurable.
With the G-7 leaders having committed, in a recent joint declaration, to tackle “antimicrobial resistance” (AMR), it is time for the more inclusive G-20 – and China, as it chairs the group for the first time – to take the fight to the next level.
Failure to address AMR will affect everyone, regardless of their nationality or their country’s level of development.
Indeed, by 2050, ten million people could be dying as a result of AMR, up from around 700,000 today, with China and India each housing about one million sufferers.
At that point, an estimated $100 trillion in global GDP will already have been lost.
No G-7 strategy, however well crafted, can succeed without the involvement of the rest of the international community.
After all, if infections travel with the people who carry them, so does resistance, meaning that the only solution to AMR is a shared one.
That is why members of the World Health Organization have agreed to implement a “global action plan on AMR,” and have called upon the United Nations to convene a high-level meeting of political leaders in 2016.
In this effort, the emerging economies – with their large populations, rising wealth, and growing international clout – have a particularly important role to play, with China leading the way.
We at the Review on Antimicrobial Resistance (which I chair) have already recommended such a role for China, including in discussions with some Chinese policymakers.
Between now and 2016, the stage must be set for China to act.
The G-7 countries should drive this effort forward by taking concrete steps to fulfill the commitments they made in their joint declaration.
One such commitment is to reduce the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry.
Some European governments have already made significant progress in regulating this practice.
The United States has been slower to act, but has lately made some important policy moves.
But perhaps the best way to change the way livestock are raised is by putting pressure on major food companies – a feat that consumers could achieve most effectively.
Indeed, rising demand for healthier foods, including antibiotic-free meat, has already compelled major food-industry players like McDonald’s, Costco, and KFC to declare their intention to phase out antibiotic-laden meat.
Governments should capitalize on this trend by implementing a major social-media campaign highlighting the smarter, healthier habits that all people should adopt – habits that would indirectly reduce demand for antimicrobials.
The low cost and potentially high payoff of such a campaign makes it all the more appealing.
A second commitment included in the joint declaration – to help ensure that medicines are used only when they are needed – may seem obvious, but in fact represents a major problem driving AMR.
The key to addressing this problem is, as the declaration recognizes, to develop and improve access to rapid point-of-care diagnostic tools.
Improved diagnostic technologies are undoubtedly within the reach of the world’s top technology firms.
But they will invest only if they are confident that health systems will use their innovations.
If governments, say, mandated that particular diagnostic tests must be conducted before antibiotics could be prescribed, companies would have the necessary incentive.
Such a requirement would face criticism, with some claiming that testing takes too long, and thus is not always possible before starting treatment.
While this may be true in rare cases, there are many areas where fast and effective tests exist, but are not yet used widely – either in developing or developed countries.
Consider one of the most common infections: sore throats.
Though they are often viral, rather than bacterial, they are frequently treated with antibiotics – an approach that not only is ineffective, but also fuels AMR.
A quick and easy swab test could solve this problem – and, indeed, one already exists.
In a trial by a British pharmacy chain (which, admittedly, used a small sample), the test reduced the number of antibiotics consumed by nearly 60%.
Investment in the development and deployment of this technology could lead to a substantial decline in unnecessary antibiotic treatments for sore throats, not to mention ease pressure on health systems and save doctors’ time.
A third imperative, recommended by the Review and recognized by the G-7, is improved surveillance of the spread of drug-resistant infections, particularly in developing countries, where such data is most sparse.
On this front, our own government is leading the way, with Chancellor George Osborne pledging in March to allocate £195 million ($307 million) to help emerging countries finance the fight against AMR.
Foundations are likely to pledge their own funds to this initiative.
Meanwhile, the US government is focusing on supporting the development of new drugs via the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority.
The world faces many challenges and crises, virtually all of which will demand strong political commitment and significant investment to resolve.
But the fact is that, when it comes to AMR, governments have a rare opportunity to preempt a major crisis, at a fraction of the cost of responding to the crisis once it has escalated.
In the scramble to address the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa, for example, the US alone had to contribute $5.4 billion in public funds.
Add to that the savings to health systems and even employers, and concerted action to combat AMR becomes even more cost-effective.
That is why the G-7 governments should intensify their efforts to address AMR.
And it is why China and the other emerging economies should join the fight.
Together, we can safeguard the curative powers of our medicines.
Political Evolution
People everywhere want a new relationship with power – more autonomy and more respect.
This reflects our current era, in which new knowledge, ideas, and possibilities have made our identities richer, more fluid, and less subject to fate.
At the same time, the information society and globalization have made ours a more insecure world, where we experience risks that politics-as-usual has been unable to address.
As the leader of a political party, the central idea for me nowadays is to empower individuals.
A traditional party leader says to his followers, “You can trust me. ”
I think the future for progressive politics lies in leaders trusting citizens .
It’s a new kind of relationship.
We in PASOK, the party that I lead, have started to think through what we want out of politics in a practical sense and how this can be delivered in a way that respects people’s lives.
We’re making changes at the top in order to open up our party to greater participation.
We need to highlight, not hide , different views, and see our parties less as “war headquarters” and more as bio-diverse think tanks or workshops.
People can easily become lost in today’s ocean of information. They will always be looking for a lighthouse, faros , as we say in Greek.
But what are these lighthouses?
In an information society they will be those who are trusted to be able to help interpret or analyse what is happening.
So I believe that the future for political parties is to develop a culture of debate, dialogue, and critical understanding of issues, where people can help set a nation’s priorities and are not simply told by experts or their leaders what is right and wrong for them.
Big issues, such as migration, narcotics, or the environment, no longer fall within a traditional left-right framework.
For example, people may see an inevitable tradeoff between tough environmental standards and jobs.
But these same people often want both.
It is no longer just one side against the other.
The nature of capitalist growth requires us to take a more holistic view and work out how we can achieve sustainable development.
Of course, bringing more democracy into our daily lives cannot mean perpetual debate, without actually making decisions.
Rather, it should mean that certain principles of respect, consultation, and deliberation become part of everyday life.
There is, by contrast, a traditional style of leadership that almost encourages fear and insecurity, so that a savior can come along and say, “I am the one who will solve this.”
President George W. Bush projects this style very openly.
I opposed the Bush administration’s policy on Iraq because this type of foreign policy is associated with a form of power – resurgent, I believe, in conservative parties around the world – that projects leadership as command.
I know this mindset well.
When I was first elected as a member of parliament in 1981, people said, “Now George, you’ve got to bang the table.”
People would say you look weak if you’re not cursing the opposition and driving around in a big black car wearing a tie.
Above all, to be “strong,” you’re supposed to be giving orders.
I said to myself, “I’m going to have to go about things in a more democratic way.”
I realized that I would have to fight to communicate what I wanted to achieve.
There was a whole political culture that had to change.
Part of my thinking concerns personal style, but also something deeper: the relationship between professional politicians and voters.
Obviously, there is a point where a leader must commit to a decision. But one can do this in ways that are not violent and aggressive, by defending the principles of that new relationship.
Power by itself has no principles.
Our societies and citizens need more freedom if we are to build a more peaceful, prosperous, and secure world.
Consider the example of Greek-Turkish relations, which had hardened under the compressed weight of “establishment” views that were long entrenched in both countries.
Only a new approach could break the mold of conventional wisdom.
Quite often in confrontational situations, people and politicians create a zero-sum game culture, which results in authoritarian and militaristic leadership.
We in the former PASOK government instead helped create a more positive framework by declaring our commitment to work for consensus, thereby creating the basis for trust and mutual understanding.
Political parties everywhere must now become an agent for similar change.
Nowadays, the framework of power itself – the old-fashioned party hierarchy that takes command of the state or municipality – is a kind of abuse.
It takes power away from people in their own names, but gives them fear rather than confidence.
Not surprisingly, my party is now seeking to return to power in the next election.
But we’re also looking deeper and further ahead.
We will not be returned to government unless we offer a better kind of democracy in the long term.
In this enedeavor, we hope to set an example to the world.
Political Islam’s Loss of Democratic Legitimacy
DURHAM – This year, Islamist politics has faced massive setbacks in two major predominantly Muslim countries: Egypt and Turkey.
But it is too soon to write political Islam off as a capable participant – even a leading force – in a pluralist democracy.
Just one year after the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi became Egypt’s first elected president, millions of Egyptians took to the street, triggering the military coup that ousted him.
Morsi’s political incompetence and lack of vision in the face of economic collapse would have been enough to diminish support for his government.
But his rejection of pluralism and pursuit of an Islamic dictatorship, exemplified by his efforts to centralize power in the hands of the Brothers and place himself beyond the review of Egypt’s judiciary, proved to be his undoing.
Similarly, Turkey’s Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), has taken to governing in a way that is unraveling a decade of progress,&#160;one marked by economic dynamism, rapid growth, and the subordination of the armed forces to civilian control.
The Erdoğan government’s recent brutal crackdown on popular protests against planned construction in Istanbul’s Taksim Gezi Park made Turkey look like a one-party dictatorship.
To make things worse, Erdoğan then spent weeks subverting pluralism through polarizing speeches that stigmatized Turks who do not share his social conservatism or subscribe to his particular interpretation of Islam.
Given that Egypt and Turkey are two of the three most populous countries of Islam’s historic core (the third is theocratic Iran), one might infer that their ongoing difficulties have destroyed any prospect of reconciling political Islam with pluralist democracy.
But the two countries’ situations include fundamental differences, as do political Islam’s prospects for renewal.
In Egypt, the economic challenges are so dire, and traditions of consensual governance so shallow, that it may be impossible for any party to rule democratically in the foreseeable future, let alone the Muslim Brotherhood, which would have to reinvent itself completely.
And non-Islamists are even less likely to trust the hardline Salafist Nour Party – the Islamist party that participated in Morsi’s ouster – to uphold democratic principles.
In contrast, Turkey’s AKP still stands a chance of re-legitimizing itself in the eyes of offended constituencies, because its retreat from pluralism is strongly identified with Erdoğan himself.
In fact, some AKP heavyweights, including Erdoğan’s longtime associate, President Abdullah Gül, believe that he badly mismanaged the recent protests.
By replacing Erdoğan as party leader, the AKP could dissociate itself from his Islamization campaign and rehabilitate its potential as a democratic political force.
Many AKP constituencies are wary of cultural conflict, if only because it threatens their economic interests.
Hence, such a move would probably be enough to restore much of the AKP’s lost support and to calm opponents who fear that their personal freedoms will continue to erode under its governance.
An opportunity to replace Erdoğan will arise next year, when Gül’s term expires.
Erdoğan wants to deny Gül a second term, taking his place under an amended constitution that would transfer full executive authority to the president.
By denying his wish, AKP parliamentarians would weaken Erdoğan’s standing, possibly enabling the party to push him aside.
If this proves insufficient to drive Erdoğan from power, the arrival of his self-imposed prime ministerial term limit in 2015 will allow the AKP Executive Council to force him to retire simply by holding him to his word.
With the AKP having demonstrated its disapproval of Erdoğan’s undemocratic behavior, its new leadership could begin to rebuild its legitimacy as a party that respects minority rights.
To keep it from losing its way again, the AKP must also address the root cause of Erdoğan’s metamorphosis into an intolerant autocrat.
Early in Erdoğan’s premiership, he was restrained by the president, the judiciary, and the military, which were all committed to upholding the secularism enshrined in Turkey’s constitution.
As recently as 2008, Turkey’s highest court considered shutting down the AKP for violating that principle.
But changes in the judiciary’s composition, Gül’s 2008 accession to the presidency, and a 2010 constitutional amendment allowing military officials to be tried in civilian courts contributed to the gradual loosening of restrictions on Erdoğan’s authority.
More than 400 generals have been imprisoned for allegedly plotting coups, in many cases on the basis of patently fabricated evidence.
Erdoğan has also misused the legal system to stifle the media and repress citizens’ freedom of expression.
Clearly, Turkey’s political institutions lack adequate safeguards.
They have allowed an enormous concentration of power in the hands of one person and the parliamentary majority that he leads.
Turkish policymakers must now guarantee the judiciary’s autonomy and political impartiality, restore freedom of expression for all citizens, and establish a system of checks and balances to replace the military as the guardian of secularism.
Pursuing the latter objective would require the AKP to relinquish some power voluntarily.
It might sell the requisite constitutional reforms to its conservative base by conveying that, in the long run, Islamists have as much to gain from effective political checks and balances as do the targets of Erdoğan’s social engineering.
After all, as Morsi’s overthrow demonstrated, public opinion can quickly turn against a ruling party, especially in an economic crisis.
Egypt’s recent experience offers a glimpse into Turkey’s potential future should it fail to establish effective political safeguards.
Morsi was able to rule without restraint, trampling freely on citizens’ fundamental rights, because the military regime that assumed control after Hosni Mubarak’s 2011 ouster scheduled presidential elections before a constitution was adopted.
The only way the Muslim Brotherhood can hope to regain broad acceptance as a legitimate democratic player is with a constitution that includes credible mechanisms for guaranteeing pluralism and due process.
Political Islam has reached a critical juncture on the road toward democratic legitimacy.
Its continued progress will depend on the commitment of two of its leading promoters – Turkey’s AKP and Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood – to design and implement political systems that safeguard the basic democratic principles of pluralism, freedom, and the rule of law.
What’s Wrong with Normal?
LONDON – In Britain these days, one can’t avoid hearing and seeing more and more about the wretched campaign to spit in the face of the world (and of reality) and quit the European Union.
Visiting the United States, as I recently did, provides some relief.
But it comes at a price: wall-to-wall coverage of the presidential primaries.
The Republican contest is almost egregiously distasteful, with the exception of the performance of Governor John Kasich of Ohio.
Unfortunately, he is not going to win.
His problem is simple: He is recognizably a normal human being.
Watching the incendiary, invective-filled campaigns of his opponents – Donald Trump and Senator Ted Cruz – makes one mourn for the Grand Old Party.
The first election campaign that I got involved in was some 50 years ago, in New York, where all of today’s candidates – Republican and Democrat – recently traded blows, with Trump and Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton emerging triumphant.
In the mid-1960s, the leaders of the state and city, Governor Nelson Rockefeller and Mayor John Lindsay, were Republicans, as were New York’s two senators, Kenneth Keating and Jacob Javits.
These political moderates, and many other Republicans in the 1960s, still reflected the party of Abraham Lincoln in readily defined ways.
For one thing, they were internationalists.
For another, they believed in a partnership between government and the private sector (think of President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s record, say, in building the US interstate highway system).
Above all, they understood and identified with the integrationist project that remains the country’s continuing civilizing mission (reflected in the words – E Pluribus Unum – on America’s seal).
One cannot imagine those Republicans from the 1960s campaigning alongside the two leading GOP candidates today.
Cruz is an ideological bruiser; Trump is just a bruiser, with no discernible ideology at all.
On the other hand, I don’t imagine those former Republicans would have had any difficulty endorsing Kasich, a successful conservative governor whose primary motivation is plainly not hating people, whether in his own party or in the Democratic Party.
And that appears to be the source of his weakness as a candidate.
He doesn’t froth at the mouth.
He seems – what a crime – blessedly sane.
Apparently, normal isn’t good enough in today’s Republican Party.
The party is paying the price for surrendering in panic over the years to Tea Party zealots backed by disgracefully large treasure chests of billionaires’ loot.
Acquiescence in heavily bankrolled, fearsome prejudice has left the rational and electable parts of the Republican Party in moral and political ruin.
So now there is a late-in-the-day scramble by the party’s establishment to convince themselves that Cruz, an arrogant, bullying extremist, is not as ghastly as they have always told people he is.
They fear him less as the party’s presidential candidate than they fear Trump.
On the Democrats’ side, the battle between Senator Bernie Sanders and former Secretary of State (and US Senator) Hillary Clinton is nowhere near as grubby.
It exposes some real issues of social equity and hostility to globalization that need to be addressed.
But the rest of the world will hope that the result is not to give way to protectionism and to turn America’s back on the leadership that only it can give in tackling global problems.
Watching all this close up could encourage despair.
But we should not forget that, especially in the US, all politics is local.
And, at the state and city level, there are still plenty of sane, decent, and intelligent elected officials trying to provide sensible leadership.
And some will move on to the national stage.
For example, in Los Angeles, where I spent a few days, a clever, well-educated young mayor, Eric Garcetti, combines energy, good looks, and common sense in a way that will almost certainly take him further.
There must be a lot more like him, genuinely committed to public service, not to the self-aggrandizing antics of some of today’s dangerous clowns.
But what is required in America, as in Britain these days, is for the normal and the moderate to stand up, make more noise, and be counted.
Almost a century ago, in his anguished and all too prescient poem “The Second Coming,” W.B. Yeats wrote: “Things fall apart; the center cannot hold.”
The reason the center could not hold is as relevant today as it was then: “The best,” Yeats argued, “lack all conviction, while the worst/ are full of passionate intensity.”
It is time in Western democracies for the best to show more of that “passionate intensity.”
Without it, there is always the danger of the birth of what Yeats called the “rough beast” slouching toward Bethlehem.
There are at the moment rather too many “rough beasts” around, in US and British politics alike – indeed, almost everywhere in the democratic world.
Bentham’s Fallacies, Then and Now
MELBOURNE – In 1809, Jeremy Bentham, the founder of utilitarianism, set to work on The Book of Fallacies.
His goal was to expose the fallacious arguments used to block reforms like the abolition of “rotten boroughs” – electorates with so few electors that a powerful lord or landowner could effectively select the member of parliament, while newer cities like Manchester remained unrepresented.
Bentham collected examples of fallacies, often from parliamentary debates.
By 1811, he had sorted them into nearly 50 different types, with titles like “Attack us, you attack Government,” the “No precedent argument,” and the “Good in theory, bad in practice” fallacy.
(One thing on which both Immanuel Kant and Bentham agree is that this last example is a fallacy: If something is bad in practice, there must be a flaw in the theory.)
Bentham was thus a pioneer of an area of science that has made considerable progress in recent years.
He would have relished the work of psychologists showing that we have a confirmation bias (we favor and remember information that supports, rather than contradicts, our beliefs); that we systematically overestimate the accuracy of our beliefs (the overconfidence effect); and that we have a propensity to respond to the plight of a single identifiable individual rather than a large number of people about whom we have only statistical information.
Bentham did not rush to publish his work.
An abridged version appeared in French in 1816, and in English in 1824, but the complete work remained in manuscript form until its publication this year as part of an ongoing project, under the editorship of Philip Schofield of University College, London, to publish Bentham’s collected works.
Some of the fallacies Bentham identified still make frequent appearances, while others are less relevant.
The “wisdom of our ancestors” fallacy has often been invoked in debates over same-sex marriage.
Anyone familiar with political discussion in the United States will instantly recognize a more specific version that could be called the “wisdom of the Founding Fathers” fallacy.
Another fallacy popular both in Bentham’s day and in ours is what he characterized as “What?
More jobs?”
By “jobs,” he meant government spending, and he considered this a fallacy because blanket opposition to more government spending fails to take into account the good that the extra employees will be able to achieve.
The “fallacies” that really challenge the modern reader, however, are those that characterize arguments that today are widely accepted even in the most educated and enlightened circles.
One of these, Bentham says, in a jarring juxtaposition, “may be termed Anarchy-preacher’s fallacy – or The Rights of Man fallacy.”
When people argue against a proposed measure on the grounds that it violates “the rights of man” – or, as we would say today, human rights – they are, Bentham claims, using vague generalities that distract us from assessing the measure’s utility.
Bentham accepts that it may be to the advantage of the community that the law should confer certain rights on people.
What threatens to bring us closer to anarchy, he argues, is the idea that I have certain rights already, independent of the law.
Whereas the principle of utility calls for inquiry and argument, Bentham believes that those who advocate such pre-existing rights disdain both and are more likely to stir people up to use force.
Bentham’s objection to “natural rights” is often cited.
Less frequently discussed is what he calls “the Posterity-chainer’s device.”
One example is the Act of Union between England and Scotland, which requires all succeeding sovereigns of the United Kingdom to take an oath to maintain the Church of Scotland and the Church of England.
If future generations feel themselves bound by such provisions, they are, Bentham thinks, enslaved by long-dead tyrants.
Bentham’s objection to such attempts to bind posterity applies not only to the union that created the UK, but also the one that formed the US: Why should the current generation consider itself bound by what was decided hundreds of years earlier?
Unlike the framers of the US Constitution, we have had centuries of experience to judge whether it does or does not “promote the general welfare.”
If it does, we have all the reason we need to retain it; but if it does not, don’t we have as much power and as much right to change the arrangements under which we are governed as the framers had to prescribe them in the first place?
If we do, why should provisions that make the constitution so difficult to amend bind a majority of the electorate?
In the case of the unification of two or more previously sovereign states, Bentham is sensitive to the problem of providing assurances to the smaller states that the larger ones will not dominate them.
Given what he takes to be the impossibility of tying future generations’ hands, he places his trust in the belief that sooner or later, after having been under one government, “the two communities will have become melted into one.”
Public support for independence in Scotland and Catalonia shows that this is not always the case.
Bentham, of course, would have accepted that he might be mistaken.
After all, the “Authority-worshipper’s argument” was another of the fallacies he rejected.
Conditioning the Arab Transition
CAMBRIDGE – Nowadays, International Monetary Fund missions come and go in the Middle East without reaching agreement.
Meanwhile, Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen are becoming increasingly polarized along political, social, and sectarian lines, gravely threatening their democratic future.
With the looming prospect of failed states in Iraq and Syria, the international community cannot afford to stay on the sidelines any longer.
The world urgently needs to create a political mechanism to help these countries escape the quagmire into which they are sinking.
Without adequate support, their popular uprisings for freedom, justice, and dignity will end in chaos, insecurity, and economic meltdown.
Unlike the European Community’s support for Eastern Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the tragedy for the Arab world is the absence of a useful blueprint for institutional reform and the resources to implement it.
The Deauville Partnership launched at the 2011 G-8 Summit was a half-baked initiative long overtaken by events.
The region’s financial needs are well beyond what the Deauville agreement can deliver.
More important, the support must be not only financial, but also political.
Economic reforms, on the other hand, can wait.
As in any post-revolutionary situation, the ongoing transitions are highly complex processes.
A power vacuum sucks in all political forces and creates incentives to achieve ascendancy at all costs.
As a result, the minimal consensus needed to establish rules for regulating these countries’ political transitions has failed to emerge.
In Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood has adopted non-inclusive policies – reflected, for example, in the manner in which the new constitution was finalized.
The opposition remains fragmented and ineffective.
The “street” is boiling and increasingly radicalized, with violence against women, minorities, and politicians on the rise.
Meanwhile, the economy is on the verge of collapse.
Tunisia, too, is facing profound polarization.
Ennahda, the ruling Islamist party, may once have been committed to moderation, but it has gradually succumbed to the will of its radical wing and is narrowing the space for political opposition.
And, as in Egypt, the protracted transition risks faltering under the weight of rising political violence and socioeconomic decline.
The situation is equally worrisome in Yemen and Libya.
While short-term pain is not unusual following the end of despotic regimes, long and protracted transitions can be terribly costly, requiring decades for societies to recover.
Political impasse is not only depressing economies by discouraging trade and investment; it is also preventing the formation of governments that could implement much-needed economic and institutional reforms – and thus threatening to take these countries into a long downward spiral.
Now is not the time to start on the path of economic reform.
While necessary, economic reforms are highly contentious, creating winners and losers – and thus generate social and political pressures that are impossible to manage in the absence of viable mechanisms for channeling and reconciling diverse interests and demands.
It is past time for the international community – including the international financial institutions, the EU, the United States, Gulf Cooperation Council countries, and the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) – to raise the resources needed to give these countries sufficient fiscal space to meet their people’s immediate needs.
If €250 billion ($325 billion) can be found to rescue Greece, it is certainly not too much to ask of the international community to find €100 billion to ensure successful democratic transitions in countries that are starting with low external-debt levels.
But, while support should be generous, discipline is needed as well.
In particular, populist policies that promote the parties currently in office should not be allowed, and the international community needs to speak the truth so that electoral campaigns paint a reasonable picture of reality.
The most important task will be to create a new type of political conditionality.
Political players need to be nudged to agree on the rules that organize how they compete for power.
Without taking sides, the international community needs to encourage moderation and help policymakers, civil society, and politicians reach consensus.
The financial rescue package should be linked to a time-bound process of political transition involving broadly endorsed rules – a constitution, electoral law, election finance law, and an electoral calendar.
To avoid giving undue advantage to existing political parties, the creation of a political finance fund should be part of the new deal.
A financial package conditioned on political agreements may seem ambitious.
But there are many precedents, including the post-conflict packages agreed for Sudan, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
If the transition is assisted now, the crucial economic reforms that will occupy elected governments for years to come stand a much greater chance of succeeding.
The reform agenda will, no doubt, be defined by the need to make markets more competitive, democratize credit, introduce a more progressive tax policy, improve the quality and scope of public services, and tackle large-scale and petty corruption.
It is in the interest of the international community, especially the West, to support the universal values that it holds dear – the same values that are now being embraced by millions of Europe’s neighbors.
For decades, the West gave its support to Arab autocrats, often for reasons of Realpolitik.
Now, at long last, the West has an opportunity – by providing concrete and generous support for political transition – to bring its values and its interests into alignment.
The Mealy-Mouthed West
MADRID – Among the numerous challenges the West faces, one is consistently overlooked: its addiction to meaningless rhetoric.
From US President Barack Obama’s oxymoronic first-term mantra “leading from behind” to the recent German variant “leading from the center,” empty phrases have become the currency of Western governments’ foreign policies.
Of course, the inherent complexity and unpredictability of international affairs intensify politicians’ inclination to equivocate.
And today, with the geopolitical environment more complicated and less predictable than ever, our leaders have even less incentive to offer the kind of boldness and clarity that effective policymaking demands.
Unfortunately, the result has been to make a bad situation worse.
Strategic statements play an important role in signaling a country’s direction and intentions to its adversaries, allies, citizens, and government agencies.
When such statements require endless interpretation and explanation, their impact is weakened dramatically.
This is not to say that there is no place for ambiguity in international affairs.
History abounds with episodes when strategic ambiguity would have been beneficial.
For example, some historians suggest that then-US Secretary of State Dean Acheson’s decision in 1950 to exclude South Korea from America’s “defense perimeter” signaled to North Korea and the Soviet Union that the United States would not defend the South in the event of an attack.
The problem with today’s ambiguity is that it is not particularly strategic.
Consider Obama’s underlying rationale for his foreign policy – the so-called “Obama doctrine” – which he finally provided following the announcement of the framework agreement on Iran’s nuclear program.
“We will engage,” Obama declared, “but we preserve all our capabilities.”
On the surface, that statement makes sense.
But it leaves us with more questions than answers.
What has Obama really signaled?
What, in his view, are the boundaries for US engagement?
Under what conditions would the US use its capabilities?
Nearly 70 years ago, when George Orwell examined the tendency toward ambiguity, he offered the rather simple explanation that “political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible.”
In other words, hazy language is necessary to obscure unsavory realities.
Massive violence against civilian populations is “pacification,” and ethnic cleansing is a “transfer of population.”
As Orwell noted, “[t]he great enemy of clear language is insincerity.”
To some extent, Orwell’s observations still ring true.
But the issue today is different: politicians are using vague rhetoric less because their policies are fundamentally indefensible than because they fear having to defend any position at all.
While there are myriad reasons for this reticence, when it comes to international relations, two stand out.
The first is the hyperbolic political atmosphere in Western democracies, where the 24-hour news cycle and social media have made “gotcha politics” the order of the day.
Add to that the intrinsic uncertainty of foreign affairs, and it is unsurprising that politicians would rather spout empty lines than risk saying something that might blow up in their faces.
Indeed, one need only consider the years-long stream of commentary – characterized by partisanship, hearsay, and hostility – following the 2012 attack on the US diplomatic compound in Benghazi to understand leaders’ angst.
The second reason is more fundamental: the waning sense of purpose and conviction that characterizes Western democracies today.
Whereas, say, Presidents John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan clearly confronted the Soviet Union in their speeches at the Berlin Wall, a succession of Western leaders has spoken in nods and winks about the crisis in Ukraine and China’s aggressive stance toward its neighbors.
The difference is not difficult to discern.
During the Cold War, the West’s certainty that it occupied the moral high ground inspired confidence in both word and deed.
Though the West still occupies the moral high ground on many important issues – such as the Islamic State and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – the global system is far less clear-cut today.
Internal social challenges, which have called into question the justness of Western countries’ liberal model, have exacerbated politicians’ reticence.
As diffident Western leaders offer garbled messages or, worse, mere verbal fluff, they allow cynical actors with simpler and more forceful narratives, often based on lies and distortions, to win support more easily.
In Europe, the rise of demagogic populists on both ends of the political spectrum exemplifies this phenomenon.
Likewise, Russian President Vladimir Putin, unburdened by facts or guilt, has taken advantage of domestic and international audiences’ deep-seated resentments and insecurities to craft compelling narratives in support of his policy toward Ukraine.
Western leaders should see no need to dispense with the truth; the facts are on their side.
What is needed is the confidence to defend the liberal rules-based international order – and to back up arguments with action.
After all, powerful declarations mean nothing if leaders do not follow through; worse, they undermine the credibility of the speaker’s future statements.
Obama learned this the hard way, when he drew a “red line” against Syria’s use of chemical weapons and then failed to act forcefully when Syria crossed that line.
The Obama doctrine cannot be credible if the US is not willing to use the capabilities that the president has pledged to preserve.
This imperative is not limited to Obama.
All Western policymakers will, before long, have to move beyond their parochial political considerations and anxieties to present a clear strategic vision.
The habit of bland rhetoric is a hard one to break.
Indeed, Orwell warned of its potential to weaken one’s capacity for critical thought, because “every such phrase anaesthetizes a portion of one’s brain.”
But, as the global balance of power shifts toward the East and the South, the West must do what it takes to secure its continued influence – and that means taking a firm, clear, and credible stance on the strategic challenges it faces.
The Great Populists
WARSAW – The first challenge to the Western hegemony that followed the collapse of Communism in Europe was the emergence of the so-called BRICS countries – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa – in the 2000s.
Rapidly growing and collectively accounting for nearly half of the world’s population, the rise of the BRICS seemed set to tip the balance of power away from the United States and Western Europe.
Today, the BRICS look like less of a geopolitical threat to the West.
Russia, Brazil, and South Africa are in severe economic straits, and China is wobbling.
Only India maintains its luster.
And yet the West is coming under pressure again, including in its own backyard.
This time, the challenge is political, not economic: the rise of politicians who relish conflict and disdain national and international law and democratic norms.
I call such leaders “PEKOs,” after the four most prominent examples of their kind: Russian President Vladimir Putin, Turkish President Recep Tayyep Erdoğan, the Polish politician Jarosław Kaczyński, and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán.
PEKOs do not view politics as the management of collective emotions in order to achieve broad policy goals: faster economic growth, a more equitable distribution of income, or greater national security, power, and prestige.
Instead, they regard politics as an endless series of intrigues and purges aimed at preserving personal power and privilege.
The PEKOs share the Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin’s belief that “politics must take precedence over economics.”
Indeed, they value it over every other kind of policy consideration.
Politics is not a means to an end, but the air they breathe, and policies are merely instruments in their endless struggle to stay alive.
It would be a mistake, however, to think of the PEKOs as today’s equivalent of the “Great Dictators” of the 1930s.
The PEKOs may be nationalists, but their opinions would not have been out of place in the drawing rooms of Europe before World War I (the same cannot be said of the Nazis or the Spanish Falange).
Nor is their economic approach necessarily statist.
Putin certainly has strong dirigiste leanings, but if Orbán and Kaczyński are deserving of the label, then so was French President Charles de Gaulle.
And Erdoğan has actually dismantled Kemalist statism in Turkey and introduced free-market policies.
The biggest difference between the Great Dictators and the PEKOs is that the latter regularly have to face their electorates.
Indeed, their confrontational politics is the central element of their survival strategy.
Each one of them has gained (or maintained) power by polarizing their societies and mobilizing their electoral base.
The PEKOs’ political style has been enabled by modern news media, which, scrambling for audience share, simplify and sensationalize issues.
Starkly antagonistic statements and positions tend to gain the most exposure.
This gives confrontational politicians a powerful advantage, and produces the electoral polarization on which the PEKOs have fed.
This political strategy is undoubtedly effective.
In Russia, for example, real wages fell by more than 9% in 2015, and the share of Russian families that cannot afford adequate food or clothing has increased from 22% to 39%.
And yet Putin’s approval rating remains at 80%.
Unlike the emergence of the BRICS, which ultimately was a boon to the world economy, the rise of the PEKOs poses a real threat – especially as they begin to apply their confrontational approach to foreign affairs and global economic governance.
International firms should be particularly concerned.
Having spread their operations across the world during the quarter-century since the fall of Communism, they have become dependent on rules-based stability and economic integration.
Their fortunes will increasingly depend on developing strategies to avoid (or at least hedge) the new risks posed by PEKOs.
To make matters worse, the PEKO phenomenon seems to be capable of spreading even to the heart of the West.
Examples include Scottish and Catalan nationalists and British politicians campaigning to pull the United Kingdom out of the European Union.
Those who champion these causes have been shockingly dismissive of the massive economic damage their proposals would likely cause their own societies.
Similarly, in at least two major Western democracies, serious candidates for the highest office are acting like PEKOs: US Presidential candidate Donald Trump and the French National Front leader Marine Le Pen, who will seek her country’s presidency in 2017.
If their bids for power succeed, the dangers posed to global stability will rise by an order of magnitude.
No Hiding From Sustainable Development
NEW YORK – One year ago, I was in Brazil to launch the Brazilian chapter of the United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), an initiative of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The main message I heard that day was that São Paulo was suffering from a mega-drought, but that state and local politicians were keeping it quiet.
This is a reality around the world: too many political leaders are ignoring a growing environmental crisis, imperiling their own countries and others.
In the case of Brazil, state and local officials had other things on their mind in 2014: hosting the World Cup soccer tournament in June and July and winning elections later in the year.
So they relied on a time-tested political tactic: hide the bad news behind a “feel-good" message.
Some places have been even more foolish than simply ignoring the risks.
North Carolina's coastlands, like coastal areas around the world, are threatened by rising sea levels caused by human-induced climate change.
Yet in 2012, land developers convinced the state legislature to bar the use of scientific evidence on rising sea levels in the state's coastal management policies, at least until 2016.
The issue is equally flagrant at the federal level: US Congress members, on the take from Big Oil, simply deny the reality of climate change.
But growing environmental threats are forcing their way into the headlines whether politicians and land developers like it or not.
The bad news about mega-droughts and freshwater scarcity stretches from Brazil to California to conflict-ridden countries in the Middle East.
São Paulo's metropolitan region of 20 million people is now on the verge of water rationing, an unprecedented threat for one of the world's leading cities.
In California, this winter has been another dry season in a bitter four-year drought, one of the most severe in the region's history.
In Pakistan, the minister of water and energy recently declared that, “Under the present situation, in the next six to seven years Pakistan can be a water-starved country."
In Iran, the Hamoun wetlands bordering Afghanistan are disappearing, posing a grave threat to the local population.
Looking back, it is also clear that a decade-long drought in neighboring Syria helped to trigger the unrest that escalated into a catastrophic civil war, with at least 200,000 Syrians dead and no end to the violence in sight.
The drought had displaced an estimated 1.5 million people and caused food prices to soar, leading to a spiral of protest, crackdown, and eventually war.
Though drought does not explain all of the ensuing violence, it certainly played a role.
Each of these droughts reflects a complex mix of factors: long-term climate change, short-term or decade-long weather patterns, growing populations' rising demand for freshwater, mismanagement of local resources, and, of course, a lack of political attention and will.
Every drought must therefore be confronted locally, addressing local realities.
Yet the global message is also clear: the world's growing population (now at 7.3 billion, but likely to reach eight billion by 2024 and nine billion by around 2040), human-induced climate change, and the overuse of freshwater for irrigation and urban needs (especially when cities are built up in dry regions) are all fueling the potential for catastrophe.
Recent research indicates that these trends are likely to intensify.
Almost all studies of human-induced climate change show that the Mediterranean region, including security hotspots like Libya, Egypt, Israel, Palestine, and Syria, is likely to experience a further significant decline in rainfall, compounding the drying trend that has occurred during the past quarter-century.
Likewise, a recent study by my colleagues at Columbia University's Earth Institute has shown that human-induced climate change is likely to cause increasingly frequent mega-droughts in the American southwest and Great Plains states in the second half of this century.
In September of this year, world leaders will gather at the United Nations to adopt a set of Sustainable Development Goals to address these rising threats.
The SDGs will not ensure global action, but, as US President John F. Kennedy once said about UN agreements, they can serve as a lever to help move the world toward action.
That is why it is so important to start planning for the SDGs now.
Ban launched the SDSN to help countries achieve the new goals.
Its key members include universities and think tanks around the world, with leading businesses and NGOs serving as important partners.
National and regional SDSN chapters are being formed worldwide, in the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, South Asia, East Asia, Africa, and Oceania.
The goal is to ensure strong participation in the SDSN in every country by the time the SDGs are adopted in September.
This spring and summer, in countries around the world, SDSN-affiliated institutions will invite governments to begin brainstorming about how to achieve sustainable development in their cities, countries, and regions.
Many politicians, no doubt, will be grateful for the support of their universities, NGOs, and leading businesses.
And those who want to hide from reality will find that they no longer can.
That is because our new reality is one of droughts, heat waves, extreme storms, rising sea levels, and unstable climate patterns.