Summers has more or less abandoned his belief that central banks can, will, and perhaps even should attempt to prevent the return of depression economics.
Central banks might have been able to attain the technocratic ideal of macroeconomic business-cycle management that Summers hoped for back in 1991, but they failed to do so.
And few central bankers, if any, seem to have good ideas concerning institutional changes that could strengthen their ability to accomplish that mission.
In Summers’s view, with which I concur, governments need to assume greater responsibility for risk-bearing, long-term planning, and investment.
Indeed, those governments lucky enough to issue the world’s reserve currencies are able to take on this role without overloading future taxpayers with inordinate debt burdens.
But, although Summers and Krugman now believe that more expansionary fiscal policies could accomplish a great deal of good, Rogoff continues to adhere to the Minskyite position that has underpinned his thinking since at least 1998: successful macroeconomic performance requires regulating finance and curbing debt accumulation during boom times.
Attempting to cure an overhang of private debt by issuing mountains of “safe” government debt is too dangerous.
After all, when the private debt was issued, it, too, was considered safe.
Whichever policies – macro or micro – turn out to work best for addressing today’s economic problems, one thing has become abundantly clear: optimism is out of fashion.
Economy, Insure Thyself
NEW HAVEN – The basic principle of financial risk management is sharing.
The more broadly diversified our financial portfolios, the more people there are who share in the inevitable risks – and the less an individual is affected by any given risk.
The theoretical ideal occurs when financial contracts spread the risks all over the world, so that billions of willing investors each own a tiny share, and no one is over-exposed.
The case of Japan shows that, despite some of our financial markets’ great sophistication, we are still a long way from the theoretical ideal.
Considering the huge risks that are not managed well, finance, even in the twenty-first century, is actually still rather primitive.
A recent World Bank study estimated that the damage from the triple disaster (earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear crisis) in March might ultimately cost Japan $235 billion (excluding the value of lives tragically lost). That is about 4% of Japanese GDP in 2010.
Given wide publicity about international charitable relief efforts and voluntary contributions to Japan, one might think that the country’s economic loss was shared internationally.
But newspaper accounts suggest that such contributions from foreign countries should be put in the hundreds of millions of US dollars – well below 1% of the total losses.
Japan needed real financial risk sharing: charity rarely amounts to much.
Insurance companies operating in Japan repaid some of the losses.
The same World Bank study estimates that total claims accruing to insurers in Japan might ultimately cost these companies $33 billion.
Clearly, the insured risks were a small part of the total risk.
Moreover, much of that risk, even if insured, continues to be borne in Japan, rather than being spread effectively to foreign investors, so Japan is still alone in bearing the costs.
Before the disaster, Japan issued about $1.5 billion in earthquake-related catastrophe bonds as a risk-management device: the debt is canceled if a precisely defined seismic event occurs.
This design helped spread the earthquake risk from Japan to foreign investors, who could accept the risk and were enticed by higher expected yields.
Unfortunately, $1.5 billion is little better than what charity could do – and still only a drop in the bucket compared to the extent of the damage.
Worse yet, even this triple disaster often did not fit the definition of the seismic event defined by the bond indentures.
We need far more – and better – catastrophe bonds.
Though no country has ever practiced risk management on such a massive scale, it is important to consider such an innovation now.
I (among others) have been arguing for years that countries should cover their risks by issuing a different kind of national debt, tied to their own GDP or a similar measure of economic success.
In its simplest form, the securities could be shares in GDP.
My Canadian colleague Mark Kamstra and I have proposed issuing shares called “trills,” which would pay a dividend each year equal to a trillionth of that year’s GDP, in domestic currency.
If the Japanese government had issued trills in 1990, when Japan’s nominal GDP was ¥443 trillion, the dividend paid to investors the first year would have been ¥443.
Every year thereafter, the dividend paid would fluctuate in response to changes in GDP.
Investors around the world would take on Japanese GDP risk in return for an expected yield, just as with catastrophe bonds.
The trills would most likely have sold for a very high price in 1990, perhaps with a dividend yield under 1%.
After all, people in 1990, witnessing recent high growth rates, would have expected Japanese GDP to grow rapidly in subsequent decades.
In 2010, when GDP was still only ¥479 trillion, the same trills would pay a dividend of ¥479, not much larger than the initial yield and no doubt disappointing many investors.
So, with lower growth expectations, the trills would likely have a much lower price now.
That lower price would be a bane to investors but a boon to Japanese, compensating them for the losses that they have suffered.
When considering today’s concern about Japan’s high public debt-to-GDP ratio, now at 202% on a gross basis, one needs to reflect that the ratio would most likely be profoundly lower if Japan had in the past financed more of its deficit spending with trills instead of conventional debt, and issued them to investors around the world.
A lower debt burden would certainly help Japan deal with its economic slowdown.
There is nothing we can do now to compensate for failures to manage risks in the past.
But disasters and economic crises can have a silver lining if they spur fundamental innovation by forcing us to think about how to manage risks in the future.
Edmund Phelps’s Journey
The winner of this year’s Nobel prize for economics, Edmund Phelps, is a giant in the field.
His contributions have been, and remain, so important as that they have altered traditional ways of thinking.
According to the social science citations index, he ranks well among the most important economists since Adam Smith.
Economists working on the macro economy, its micro foundations, exogenous and endogenous growth theory, the formation of expectations and problems of information and discrimination all refer back to Phelps.
After a brilliant secondary education, Phelps entered Amherst College in Massachusetts without any specific idea about which discipline to embrace or which career to follow.
He was passionate about philosophy but, at the insistence of his father, took classes in economics.
As nearly always happens, Phelps’s choice of vocation came after meeting an important professor, in this case the Harvard economist James Nelson.
After some hesitation, Phelps decided to pursue graduate education.
Paul Samuelson admits that he agreed to do a conference at Amherst with the sole aim of recruiting Phelps to MIT.
But Phelps chose Yale, where he came into direct contact with James Tobin and Thomas Schelling.
He wrote his thesis under Tobin’s supervision.
With Ph.D. in hand, Phelps spent a year at the Rand Corporation in Los Angeles before returning to Yale.
He spent another year at MIT, where he taught with Robert Solow and met Samuelson and Franco Modigliani.
Stints at the University of Pennsylvania and Columbia University followed.
By this point, Phelps had already acquired an international reputation through his work on the golden rule of capital accumulation (he was 28).
This concept now appears in the toolbox of every economist, is taught in all classes on growth, and serves as a reference in all works on the macro economy.
Later, Phelps developed a long-term growth theory based on education and technical advances.
However, this contribution was so far ahead of its time that the profession did not discover its importance until a quarter-century later, when theorists were developing endogenous growth theories.
Phelps was also 10 to 20 years ahead of the profession when he developed the theories of wage efficiency and inflation targeting, which are now considered to be the state of the art concerning the labour market and monetary management.
In the late 1960’s and early 1970’s, Phelps’s encounters with Amartya Sen, John Rawls, and Kenneth Arrow at Stanford revived his philosophical streak.
He had extremely valuable intellectual conversations with Rawls, prompting him to write several essays on the theory of economic justice and publish a book on the subject in 1974 – a book still used today.
Phelps was behind the modern reworking of the macro economy – and, according to Samuelson, the micro economy, too.
His research programme consisted of introducing the imperfection of information and knowledge into economic theory, which he then reformulated, giving serious consideration to agents’ expectations.
In 
 Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory
 , a famous work that he published and to which he made three major contributions, he set the scene for what would become the greatest revolution in economic theory of the last 50 years.
It is to Phelps that we owe the theory of the natural unemployment rate – a cornerstone of modern macroeconomic theory and economic policy that Milton Friedman rediscovered a year later, albeit heuristically.
Phelps was also responsible for the “island parable,” which helped explain why monetary policy can have temporary real effects as a result of imperfect information.
The bulk of Phelps’s current work consists of a new reworking of structuralist theory, in an effort to show how changes in interest rates and asset prices affect the equilibrium unemployment rate over the medium term.
Phelps’s new theory provides a logical backdrop against which we can assess the consequences of fluctuations in share prices, exchange rates, and, more generally, the value of physical assets and human capital under the powerful influence of new technologies and innovation.
These are, of course, the main phenomena that economic theory struggles to explain nowadays.
So it is easy to understand why Phelps still leads the way.
Indeed, we can expect his new theoretical framework to become a reference point in a decade or two.
When recommending an Indian mathematician to a Harvard colleague, Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote that: “scientific geniuses generally have one great idea in their life; he has had two.”
What could we say about Phelps?
Educating Americans about Muslim Voices
NEW YORK – President Barack Obama has extended an open hand of friendship in his landmark Cairo speech to the Muslim world – seeking to engage Muslims with a commitment of mutual respect. No one can doubt his sincerity.
From his first days in office, he has emphasized the importance of embarking on a new chapter in relations between the United States and the world’s Muslims.
But this aspiration will remain elusive without acknowledging the sad fact that most Americans remain woefully ignorant about the basic facts of Islam, and about the broad geographic and cultural diversity of Muslim cultures.
A majority of public opinion polls taken in the last four years show that the views of Americans about Islam continue to be a casualty of the attacks of September 11, 2001.
Washington Post/ABC News polls from 2006, for example, found that nearly half of Americans regard Islam “unfavorably,” while one in four admits to prejudicial feelings against Muslims.
American views of the Muslim world are so colored by the conflict in the Middle East and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan that US citizens have no collective appreciation of the fact that most Muslims live in Asia. Or that the four countries with the largest Muslim populations – Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh – are all cultures with millennia-old histories of coexisting with other religions and cultures.
A 2005 report by the US State Department’s Advisory Committee on Cultural Diplomacy called for a new vision of cultural diplomacy that “can enhance US national security in subtle, wide-ranging and sustainable ways.”
In 2008, a bipartisan group of American leaders—the US-Muslim Engagement Project— convened by Search for Common Ground and the Consensus Building Institute, issued a report calling for a new direction for US relations with the Muslim world. A primary goal of this effort would be “to improve of mutual respect and understanding between Americans and Muslims around the world.”
It is time for US citizens to commit themselves to working alongside the Obama administration to turn a new leaf in relations with the Muslim world.
The first step is to make a concerted effort to become better educated about the multifaceted societies that comprise the one billion-strong Muslim population throughout the world.
The power of culture resides in its ability to transform perceptions.
From June 5-14, New Yorkers are experiencing the rich diversity of Muslim cultures through a city-wide initiative, entitled “Muslim Voices: Arts and Ideas.”
More than 300 artists, writers, performers, and scholars from more than 25 countries, including the US, are gathering for this unprecedented festival and conference.
Presentations include a dizzying variety of artistic forms from the Muslim world, ranging from the traditional (calligraphy, Sufi devotional voices) to the contemporary (video installations, avant-garde Indonesian theater, and Arabic hip-hop).
A companion policy conference has attracted scholars and artists from around the world exploring the relationship between cultural practice and public policy and suggesting new directions for cultural diplomacy.
A critical goal of this project is to help break stereotypes and create a more nuanced understanding of Muslim societies.
Despite our enthusiasm for the possibilities of what this initiative can do to broaden understanding, a performance, a film, or an art exhibition cannot find solutions to all of the problems that divide Americans and the Muslim world.
The current distance is rooted as much in ignorance as in hard political issues, many of which go beyond what arts and culture can realistically address.
However, cultural diplomacy and initiatives such as “Muslim Voices” can open the door to the reality of the Muslim world as a rich space for world-class artistic production.
That, in turn, can encourage an interest in addressing the harder political issues with respect and a sense of equity.
For too long, the differences between the US and the Muslim world have been framed not in terms of diversity, but as the foundations of a permanent global conflict.
But when people participate in an aesthetic experience that both addresses and transcends a particular culture, perceptions are bound to change.
America has reached a pivotal moment in its national and global history, with new hopes for intercultural exchange, dialogue, and mutual understanding.
President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton say that theirs will be an age of “smart power” that will effectively use all tools of diplomacy at their disposal, including cultural diplomacy.
The US must focus once again on the arts as a meaningful way to promote stronger cultural engagement and, ultimately, to find new channels of communication with the Muslim world.
Doing so will show that relations need not be defined only through political conflict. Rather, there is now an opportunity to define connections between America and the Muslim world by sharing the richness and complexity of Muslim artistic expressions – as a vital step in finding grounds for mutual respect.
Educating Europe
Education has played a big part in healing Europe's divisions.
Four decades ago, Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer approved the creation of new textbooks that children in both countries would use to help heal the century-long Franco-German antagonism.
Today's challenges call for such a dynamic use of educational policy.
With the May accession of the ten central, eastern, and southern European candidate states, the European Union will be more politically, economically, and socially diverse than ever.
This entails new opportunities, no doubt, but also new risks.
Because an enlarged Union will become a reality in just two months, it is imperative to develop concepts for cultural understanding that contribute to the successful integration of the new members.
Some values, long espoused by the Union, should be relatively easy to convey.
A decade ago, with the Maastricht Treaty, EU members agreed to respect the history, culture, and traditions of all of their constituent peoples.
The draft constitution that recently failed to gain acceptance in the first round of negotiations not only promises to respect cultural heritage; it obliges the Union actively to protect, maintain, and develop the wealth of Europe's cultural and linguistic diversity.
But Europe can succeed in this task only if its various constituent cultures do not seal themselves off from one another.
Within a mobile and open Europe, there can be no fencing off of foreign cultures; contact cannot be avoided.
Diversity has to be lived, which means establishing one's own uniqueness and learning to cope in and with other regions and mindsets.
Goethe already spoke of this in his play "Torquato Tasso," when he cried out: "Compare yourself!
Discover what you are!"
Indeed, Europeans will only succeed in building the wider Europe if they are open to what is foreign to them.
Xenophobia is a sign of education gone wrong - an expression of narrow-mindedness and the inability to put oneself in the position of others.
So, rather than embarking on a search for a European identity, we should agree on mutual educational objectives to increase the awareness of all Europeans of the "others" who are their brethren in Europe.
A thirst for knowledge, a delight in engaging with the world, and empathy with people from different cultures are qualities that can ensure diversity in unity, and unity in diversity.
The same is true for the virtue of tolerance and for multilingualism.
Only those who are familiar with European history and who engage in discussion with the candidate countries about what Europe is and should be will be able to bridge the gap between different cultures and religions.
This implies critical faculties and the ability to tolerate criticism.
Moreover, the current EU member states will not only have to be able to tolerate the criticism by central, eastern, and southern Europeans of western civilization, but also to take such criticism into consideration as they ponder policy.
A successful education teaches us to treat others with dignity, regardless of religion, race, origin, or gender.
A significant element of a successful education is the willingness to be tolerant of others.
Psychologically, this virtue implies the ability to put oneself in others' position.
Communication between members of different cultures fails so often because we know too little about one another.
Travel broadens the mind, they say, but for that to happen, more is required than merely frequent changes of location.
To acquire an insight into how people from other cultures perceive the world, what is required is knowledge of how they live and experience life.
A newer insight would be: multilingualism broadens the mind.
Language is not just a means of communication.
Language is culture.
The very question of which states of mind, characteristics, and circumstances a language has words for tells us something about cultural peculiarities.
For the German language, let me point here to Weltschmerz , Weltgeist , Zeitgeist , Schadenfreude , Realpolitik , or Bildung - all of them words for which other languages often lack precise equivalents.
Moreover, by learning a foreign language, one acquires a new understanding of one's own.
Most importantly, though, language provides access to the other culture.
Calls for attendance in a foreign school - if possible for at least one year - as part of a future European curriculum should be heard and seriously considered.
Of course, multilingualism, empathy, tolerance, and the acquisition of knowledge about foreign cultures cannot be decreed like taxes.
But the state can and should organize a good ethical and political education that affords young people the opportunity to interact with others and recognize and accept their equality.
Liberal democracy, in its search for civic-mindedness, depends on people and institutions that can guide the way by their example, beliefs, or worldview.
Time and again throughout the course of our lives, we must bring ourselves to tolerate opinions and behaviours that seem contrary to our own.
In this effort, we are sustained only by education.
The actor and writer Peter Ustinov found a graphic image for this: "Education is important, especially when it comes to dismantling prejudices.
You can't help being a prisoner within your own mind, but the least you can do is ensure that the cell is decently furnished."
The Education Myth
TIRANA – In an era characterized by political polarization and policy paralysis, we should celebrate broad agreement on economic strategy wherever we find it.
One such area of agreement is the idea that the key to inclusive growth is, as then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair put in his 2001 reelection campaign, “education, education, education.”
If we broaden access to schools and improve their quality, economic growth will be both substantial and equitable.
As the Italians would say: magari fosse vero. If only it were true.
Enthusiasm for education is perfectly understandable.
We want the best education possible for our children, because we want them to have a full range of options in life, to be able to appreciate its many marvels and participate in its challenges.
We also know that better educated people tend to earn more.
Education’s importance is incontrovertible – teaching is my day job, so I certainly hope it is of some value.
But whether it constitutes a strategy for economic growth is another matter.
What most people mean by better education is more schooling; and, by higher-quality education, they mean the effective acquisition of skills (as revealed, say, by the test scores in the OECD’s standardized PISA exam).
But does that really drive economic growth?
In fact, the push for better education is an experiment that has already been carried out globally.
And, as my Harvard colleague Lant Pritchett has pointed out, the long-term payoff has been surprisingly disappointing.
In the 50 years from 1960 to 2010, the global labor force’s average time in school essentially tripled, from 2.8 years to 8.3 years.
This means that the average worker in a median country went from less than half a primary education to more than half a high school education.
How much richer should these countries have expected to become?
In 1965, France had a labor force that averaged less than five years of schooling and a per capita income of $14,000 (at 2005 prices).
Moreover, much of this increase cannot possibly be attributed to education, as workers in 2010 had the advantage of technologies that were 50 years more advanced than those in 1960.
Clearly, something other than education is needed to generate prosperity.
As is often the case, the experience of individual countries is more revealing than the averages.
China started with less education than Tunisia, Mexico, Kenya, or Iran in 1960, and had made less progress than them by 2010.
And yet, in terms of economic growth, China blew all of them out of the water.
The same can be said of Thailand and Indonesia vis-à-vis the Philippines, Cameroon, Ghana, or Panama.
Again, the fast growers must be doing something in addition to providing education.
The experience within countries is also revealing.
In Mexico, the average income of men aged 25-30 with a full primary education differs by more than a factor of three between poorer municipalities and richer ones.
The difference cannot possibly be related to educational quality, because those who moved from poor municipalities to richer ones also earned more.
And there is more bad news for the “education, education, education” crowd: Most of the skills that a labor force possesses were acquired on the job.
What a society knows how to do is known mainly in its firms, not in its schools.
At most modern firms, fewer than 15% of the positions are open for entry-level workers, meaning that employers demand something that the education system cannot – and is not expected – to provide.
When presented with these facts, education enthusiasts often argue that education is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for growth.
But in that case, investment in education is unlikely to deliver much if the other conditions are missing.
After all, though the typical country with ten years of schooling had a per capita income of $30,000 in 2010, per capita income in Albania, Armenia, and Sri Lanka, which have achieved that level of schooling, was less than $5,000.
Whatever is preventing these countries from becoming richer, it is not lack of education.
A country’s income is the sum of the output produced by each worker.
To increase income, we need to increase worker productivity.
Evidently, “something in the water,” other than education, makes people much more productive in some places than in others.
A successful growth strategy needs to figure out what this is.
Make no mistake: education presumably does raise productivity.
But to say that education is your growth strategy means that you are giving up on everyone who has already gone through the school system – most people over 18, and almost all over 25.
It is a strategy that ignores the potential that is in 100% of today’s labor force, 98% of next year’s, and a huge number of people who will be around for the next half-century.
An education-only strategy is bound to make all of them regret having been born too soon.
This generation is too old for education to be its growth strategy.
It needs a growth strategy that will make it more productive – and thus able to create the resources to invest more in the education of the next generation.
Our generation owes it to theirs to have a growth strategy for ourselves.
And that strategy will not be about us going back to school.
The Lost Generations
NEW YORK – A country’s economic success depends on the education, skills, and health of its population.
When its young people are healthy and well educated, they can find gainful employment, achieve dignity, and succeed in adjusting to the fluctuations of the global labor market.
Businesses invest more, knowing that their workers will be productive.
Yet many societies around the world do not meet the challenge of ensuring basic health and a decent education for each generation of children.
Why is the challenge of education unmet in so many countries?
Some are simply too poor to provide decent schools.
Parents themselves may lack adequate education, leaving them unable to help their own children beyond the first year or two of school, so that illiteracy and innumeracy are transmitted from one generation to the next.
The situation is most difficult in large families (say, six or seven children), because parents invest little in the health, nutrition, and education of each child.
Yet rich countries also fail.
The United States, for example, cruelly allows its poorest children to suffer.
Poor people live in poor neighborhoods with poor schools.
Parents are often unemployed, ill, divorced, or even incarcerated.
Children become trapped in a persistent generational cycle of poverty, despite the society’s general affluence.
Too often, children growing up in poverty end up as poor adults.
A remarkable new documentary film, The House I Live In, shows that America’s story is even sadder and crueler than that, owing to disastrous policies.
Starting around 40 years ago, America’s politicians declared a “war on drugs,” ostensibly to fight the use of addictive drugs like cocaine.
As the film clearly shows, however, the war on drugs became a war on the poor, especially on poor minority groups.
In fact, the war on drugs led to mass incarceration of poor, minority young men.
The US now imprisons around 2.3 million people at any time, a substantial number of whom are poor people who are arrested for selling drugs to support their own addiction.
As a result, the US has ended up with the world’s highest incarceration rate – a shocking 743 people per 100,000!
The film depicts a nightmarish world in which poverty in one generation is passed on to the next, with the cruel, costly, and inefficient “war on drugs” facilitating the process.
Poor people, often African-Americans, cannot find jobs or have returned from military service without skills or employment contacts.
They fall into poverty and turn to drugs.
Instead of receiving social and medical assistance, they are arrested and turned into felons.
From that point on, they are in and out of the prison system, and have little chance of ever getting a legal job that enables them to escape poverty.
Their children grow up without a parent at home – and without hope and support.
The children of drug users often become drug users themselves; they, too, frequently end up in jail or suffer violence or early death.
What is crazy about this is that the US has missed the obvious point – and has missed it for 40 years.
To break the cycle of poverty, a country needs to invest in its children’s future, not in the imprisonment of 2.3 million people a year, many for non-violent crimes that are symptoms of poverty.
Many politicians are eager accomplices to this lunacy.
They play to the fears of the middle class, especially middle-class fear of minority groups, to perpetuate this misdirection of social efforts and government spending.
The general point is this: Governments have a unique role to play to ensure that all young members of a generation – poor children as well as rich ones – have a chance.
A poor kid is unlikely to break free of his or her parents’ poverty without strong and effective government programs that support high-quality education, health care, and decent nutrition.
This is the genius of “social democracy,” the philosophy pioneered in Scandinavia, but also deployed in many developing countries, such as Costa Rica.
The idea is simple and powerful: All people deserve a chance, and society needs to help everybody to secure that chance.
Most important, families need help to raise healthy, well-nourished, and educated children.
Social investments are large, financed by high taxes, which rich people actually pay, rather than evade.
This is the basic method to break the intergenerational transmission of poverty.
A poor child in Sweden has benefits from the start.
The child’s parents have guaranteed maternity/paternity leave to help them nurture the infant.
The government then provides high-quality day care, enabling the mother – knowing that the child is in a safe environment – to return to work.
The government ensures that all children have a place in preschool, so that they are ready for formal schooling by the age of six.
And health care is universal, so the child can grow up healthy.
A comparison of the US and Sweden is therefore revealing.
Using comparable data and definitions provided by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the US has a poverty rate of 17.3%, roughly twice Sweden’s poverty rate of 8.4%.
And America’s incarceration rate is 10 times Sweden’s rate of 70 people per 100,000.
The US is richer on average than Sweden, but the income gap between America’s richest and poorest is vastly wider than it is in Sweden, and the US treats its poor punitively, rather than supportively.
One of the shocking realities in recent years is that America now has almost the lowest degree of social mobility of the high-income countries.
Children born poor are likely to remain poor; children born into affluence are likely to be affluent adults.
This inter-generational tracking amounts to a profound waste of human talents.
America will pay the price in the long term unless it changes course.
Investing in its children and young people provides the very highest return that any society can earn, in both economic and human terms.
Asia’s Invention Boom
BELLEVUE, WASHINGTON – For more than a century, the United States has been the dominant global force for innovation.
But China and other Asian countries are now testing that dominance, and the West should welcome the challenge.
China’s move from imitation to innovation has been a matter of national policy in recent years.
In 2011, for example, the government established a set of ambitious targets for the production of patents.
Almost immediately, China became the world’s top patent filer.
China soon surpassed the US in other important measures.
Each year, Chinese universities award more PhD’s in science and engineering than US institutions do – and more than twice as many undergraduate degrees in these fields.
Moreover, China is set to outpace the US in investment in research and development.
Since 2001, China’s R&amp;D expenditure has been growing by 18% annually and has more than doubled as a share of GDP.
In the US, that ratio has remained relatively constant.
To be sure, such metrics can easily be manipulated – a fact that critics are quick to point out.
But statistics from the US National Science Foundation reveal a genuine drive to innovate across much of Asia, with East, South, and Southeast Asian countries together&nbsp;spending more on R&amp;D than the US.
And technology-intensive activity in the region is fast approaching that of North America and Western Europe.
In fact, Asian countries are helping to fuel one another’s innovative success.
China’s invention initiative has produced such rapid results in part because the government actively cooperates with its Asian competitors.
Indeed, despite territorial disputes and other divisive issues, the commissioners of the patent offices of Japan, South Korea, China, and, to a lesser extent, Singapore and Taiwan meet often to define and coordinate their intellectual-property (IP) policies.
China’s leaders know that they can learn from countries like Japan and South Korea, which implemented policies to encourage innovation and protect IP rights long before China did.
The precise impact of Asia’s IP expansion is impossible to predict.
But its transformative potential is obvious.
Asian countries are essentially giving tens of thousands of top minds the opportunities and incentives to tackle today’s most pressing challenges, such as developing cost-effective sustainable-energy solutions, ensuring affordable health care for aging populations, and improving the quality of life in overcrowded cities.
These complex problems demand a plurality of innovative talent and long-term international collaboration – not just to find solutions, but also to deploy them.
In an increasingly knowledge-based global economy, partnerships and cooperation will be the natural order.
In this context, the West would be foolish to resist Asia’s IP emergence.
Instead, Western governments should support, learn from, and reap the rewards of the invention boom in the East.
For example, the US, which leads the world in bringing innovative products to the market, should offer commercialization channels to innovative Chinese universities and small companies.
And Chinese and Western companies should be encouraged to invest in one another’s IP.
Such cooperation has already begun.
For example, in 2008 Intellectual Ventures (which I helped found) established a presence in China and other countries with emerging innovation cultures in order to focus their inventors’ talent and energy.
The resulting global network of more than 400 institutions and over 4,000 active inventors has produced more patent applications than many R&amp;D-intensive companies do.
In this ecosystem, everyone wins.
The inventors gain access to the company’s expertise in IP development and to an international community of experienced problem-solvers.
Intellectual Ventures gets a stake in valuable solutions.
And the world benefits from those solutions.
Imagine if more such initiatives were launched, not only by companies, but also by governments.
A cooperative approach could help to improve the troubled trade dynamics between Asia and the West, characterized by disagreement over China’s lax enforcement of IP laws.
Instead of shaking its fist, the West could provide incentives that encourage China to become a responsible actor in the existing IP regime.
These could include, for example, efforts to organize viable alternatives to piracy for the tens of thousands of Chinese companies that currently earn a living from it.
Some Western entrepreneurs already turn to these so-called Shan Zhai enterprises to manufacture their prototypes at scale, creating a kind of cross-border Kickstarter culture.
Eventually, many Shan Zhai companies will evolve into legitimate businesses with their own IP.
Given that Asian countries naturally will uphold and defend IP rights more vigorously when they have more at stake, the West should look for ways to hasten this transition.
The West can also take some lessons from the various models Asian countries are experimenting with as they ramp up domestic innovation.
In South Korea, LG recently launched a program to solicit invention ideas from the public, promising inventors a hefty 8% stake in the proceeds of any ideas the company commercializes.
That is probably not an approach that many American companies have considered.
But maybe they should.
Asia is also experimenting with creative ways to finance innovation, such as China’s IP exchanges and Malaysia’s IP loan programs.
The West should pay attention to these efforts, because they could offer alternatives to traditional avenues for sourcing and financing invention, such as venture capital, that are producing lackluster results.
Finally, Western companies should be willing to supply inputs to Chinese businesses selling innovative products.
This recommendation may seem radical, but only because the view of a one-way flow of innovation from West to East has become so entrenched.
In fact, there is no good reason for Western businesses to stand on the sidelines as Asia produces whiz-kid entrepreneurs and high-tech start-ups.
These pioneers are building ecosystems with points of entry at every level, and the West should enter at all of them.
As Asian innovation comes into its own, the US and other developed countries must find ways to participate – or risk missing the opportunity of the century in a vain bid to recapture bygone supremacy.
The Ingenious General
WASHINGTON, DC – Had Ariel Sharon never entered politics, he would still be known around the world as a military commander and tactician.
In both roles, he was extraordinary, because his methods diverged from normal military practices, even in the unconventional Israeli army.
Consider the Yom Kippur War.
On October 16, 1973, ten days after Egypt’s army surprised the Israelis by crossing the Suez Canal, Sharon turned defeat into victory by leading his own troops across the canal through a narrow gap in the Egyptian front.
The Israelis swiftly spread out behind the Egyptians, overrunning anti-aircraft batteries and blocking supply and reinforcement routes.
Within six days, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat had to plead for an immediate, unconditional ceasefire: so many Egyptian units were cut off, wrecked by air strikes, under attack, or fully encircled that no major forces were left to stop the advancing Israelis – not even to guard the road to Cairo.
The Egyptian high command was convinced that Sharon’s crossing was only an overnight raid by light forces.
Their reasoning was sound: The Israelis did not control even their own side of the canal, so they could not possibly reinforce the first wave of a few hundred men with a handful of tanks.
Rather than pulling their units back across the canal to chase the raiding Israelis, the Egyptian commanders believed that their forces could capture all of them by converging toward one another, thus closing the two-mile gap that Sharon had exploited.
Sharon’s superiors agreed with their Egyptian counterparts.
They ordered Sharon to stop sending forces across the canal, and instead to widen the gap on the Israeli side.
Sharon did not obey, pleading communications difficulties while sending as many of his forces as possible across the canal.
He calculated that attacking the Egyptians from their own rear – destroying the missile batteries that impeded the Israeli air force, ambushing reinforcements and supplies, and simply causing massive confusion across the entire front – would induce organizational collapse in the Egyptian army.
That is exactly what happened.
But Sharon’s fellow generals were furious at him, as was often the case.
In 1953, at the age of 25 and already a wounded veteran of the 1947-49 War of Independence, Sharon was recalled to active duty to establish Israel’s first commando unit.
Arab raiders were crossing Israel’s unfenced borders to rob cattle and steal farm implements, sometimes attacking civilians.
Guarding Israel’s elongated borders would have required 20 times more troops than Israel had.
So Israel chose to mount punitive raids against Egyptian and Jordanian military outposts and villages that harbored marauders.
Sharon was given a free hand to raise and train his unit.
Instead of insisting on discipline, his men wore whatever they liked, never saluted anybody, and never drilled.
But they launched devastating night raids while suffering few casualties, even when going up against Jordan’s Arab Legion, by far the best Arab military force.
Sharon sought natural fighters rather than dutiful soldiers, and he carefully planned each raid, always sending some men well beyond the target of the attack to ambush any reinforcements.
The main assault force advanced toward the target in the darkness until detected, then rushed forward, firing every weapon, while mortar and machine-gun emplacements remained in the rear, firing just ahead of the advancing troops.
Within three years, Sharon commanded an entire brigade in the 1956 Sinai campaign, which he led in a swift advance across the desert to link up with a paratroop battalion that had been dropped deep into Egyptian territory at the entrance to the strongly defended Mitla Pass.
There Sharon was to stop but did not, instead fighting a bloody battle to conquer the pass.
His immediate superiors wanted him out, but the top leadership instead promoted him to command a division.
That is how Sharon came to plan and fight the extraordinary battle of Umm Katef in the June 1967 war.
The battle lasted only one night, but it was unique in its complexity.
The Egyptian defenses blocked the central highway across the Sinai with a fortified box containing powerful artillery and more than a hundred tanks, fronted by three parallel trench-lines manned by thousands of infantrymen and anchored on sand dunes and high ground at each end.
Sharon had his troops climb over the sand dunes to enter the trench lines at their top end and attack down their length – a simple maneuver that the Egyptians could have defeated had they not been pinned down by an artillery barrage and Israeli tanks firing directly at them.
The Israeli infantrymen had taped flashlights to their helmets so that the tank gunners could direct their fire at the Egyptians just ahead of them.
Still, the Egyptian artillery was superior, and should have at least silenced the tanks firing at the trench line.
But paratroopers, flown in by helicopters, suddenly jumped the Egyptian gun crews, who never had a chance in hand-to-hand combat.
The Egyptians’ tanks could still have counter-attacked, but they were engaged by an Israeli tank battalion that appeared from well behind the trench lines, having crossed supposedly impassable sand dunes.
Then the Israeli tanks that had been shooting up the trench lines crossed over them to enter the box, and finish off Egyptian resistance.
The road through Umm Katef was opened.
Sharon had once again broken the basic rules of warfare, yet won total victory.
But, even for the unconventional Israeli army, Sharon was too unconventional.
When he was passed over for promotion to Army Chief of Staff and retired from active duty (he fought his epic 1973 battle as a reservist), a wise Israeli general warned his colleagues that he would return as Defense Minister, and that if he lost that office – as he did after the 1982 Lebanon War – he would return as Prime Minister.
Only now has Sharon met an enemy that he cannot outmaneuver.
The Snowden Time Bomb
PRINCETON – In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, world leaders repeated a soothing mantra.
There could be no repeat of the Great Depression, not only because monetary policy was much better (it was), but also because international cooperation was better institutionalized.
And yet one man, the American former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden, has shown how far removed from reality that claim remains.
Prolonged periods of strain tend to weaken the fabric of institutional cooperation.
The two institutions that seemed most dynamic and effective in 2008-2009 were the International Monetary Fund and the G-20; the credibility of both has been steadily eroded over the long course of the crisis.
Because the major industrial economies seem to be on the path to recovery –&#160;albeit a feeble one – no one seems to care very much that the mechanisms of cooperation are worn out.
They should.
There are likely to be many more financial fires in various locations, and the world needs a fire brigade to put them out.
The IMF’s resources were extended in 2009, and the organization was supposed to be reformed in order to give emerging markets more voice.
But little progress has been made.
The Fund was the centerpiece of the post-1945 global economic system.
It subsequently played a central role in the management of the 1980’s debt crisis and in the post-communist economic transition after 1989.
But every major international crisis since then has chipped away at its authority.
The 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis undermined its legitimacy in Asia, as many governments in the region believed that the crisis was being exploited by the United States and US financial institutions.
The post-2007 Great Recession discredited the IMF further for three reasons.
First, the initial phase of the crisis looked like an American phenomenon.
Second, the IMF’s heavy involvement in the prolonged euro crisis looked like preferential treatment of Europe and Europeans.
In particular, the demand that, because the world was focused on Europe, another European (and another French national) should succeed the IMF’s then-managing director, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, was incomprehensible to the large emerging-market countries.
Eventually, as in the Asian crisis, European governments and the European Commission fell out with the Fund and began to blame its analysis for having confused and unsettled markets.
On the big issues underlying the global financial crisis – the problem of current-account imbalances and deciding which countries should adjust, and reconciling financial reform with a pro-growth agenda – the IMF cannot say much more, or say it more effectively, than it could before the crisis.
The G-20 was the great winner of the financial crisis.
The older summits (the G-7 or, with the addition of Russia, the G-8), as well as the G-7 finance ministers’ meetings, were no longer legitimate.
They consisted of countries that had actually caused the problems; they were dominated by the US; and they suffered from heavy over-representation of mid-sized European countries.
The G-20, by contrast, brought in the big emerging markets, and its initial promise was to provide a way to control and direct the IMF.
Everything else that was agreed at the London summit turned sour.
The follow-up summits were lame.
The idea of coordinated fiscal stimulus became problematic when it became obvious that many European governments could not take on more debt without unsettling markets and pushing themselves into an unsustainable cycle of increasingly expensive borrowing.
And yet, however limited the London summit’s achievements proved to be, the summit process itself was not fully discredited until Snowden’s intelligence revelations.
It may be that leaders and their staffs were naive in believing that their communications were really secure.
But Snowden’s revelations that the London summit’s British hosts allegedly monitored the participants’ communications make it difficult to imagine that the genuine intimacy of earlier summits can ever be recreated.
And, with the espionage apparently directed mostly at representatives of emerging economies, the gulf between the advanced countries and those on the rise has widened further.
World leaders appear partly ignorant and partly deceptive in responding to the allegations.
They are probably right to emphasize how little they really know about surveillance.
It is in the nature of complex data-gathering programs that no one really has an overview.
But the lack of transparency surrounding data surveillance and mining means that, when a whistleblower leaks information, everyone can subsequently use it to build their own version of how and why policy is made.
The revelations thus encourage wild conspiracy theories.
The substantive aftermath of the London summit has already caused widespread disenchantment with the G-20 process.
The Snowden affair has blown up any illusion about trust between leaders – and also about leaders’ competence.
By granting Snowden asylum for one year, Russian President Vladimir Putin, will have the bomber in his midst when he hosts this year’s summit in Saint Petersburg.
The Snowden Effect
MADRID – The continued leaking of classified information by the former US National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden has provoked heated debate about privacy and international law, which, unfortunately, has overshadowed the geostrategic dimension of his actions.
In fact, Snowden’s revelations about US surveillance programs, and his own ongoing struggle to avoid extradition, reveal much about President Barack Obama’s conception of US foreign relations.
More than any other incoming American president in recent memory, Obama raised expectations worldwide.
Yet he has proved to be mainly, if not solely, interested in domestic issues, resulting in a foreign policy of reaction.
The Snowden affair highlights three elements of this: US-Russia relations, US influence in South America, and US relations with Europe.
The Kremlin’s handling of the affair is indicative of the tense state of US-Russia relations.
In the aftermath of the bilateral relationship’s ill-fated “reset,” Russia has been eager to maintain its global position as a foil to the US, causing many people on both sides to revert to a Cold War mentality.
By falling into this trap, the US has provided President Vladimir Putin with endless fodder to score political points and solidify his domestic position.
Putin regards anti-Americanism as an effective tool for short-circuiting domestic discontent.
Developments like the US Congress’s enactment of the Magnitsky Act, portrayed in Russia as an American provocation, have allowed the Kremlin to rally support at home with retaliatory measures such as a ban on foreign adoptions, while providing cover for a crackdown on domestic opponents.
Following the NATO-led intervention in Libya in 2011, which the Kremlin regarded as another example of Western overreach, Russia has been more aggressive in asserting itself internationally, mainly in opposition to the US.
This is most obvious in Russia’s dogged support for Bashar al-Assad’s regime in Syria.
And Russia’s refusal to hand over Snowden, under the pretext of strict adherence to the law, has allowed Putin to poke Obama in the eye once again – this time while posing as a defender of legality and human rights.
This coup de théȃtre was magnified by Putin’s cynical claim that Russia would allow Snowden to stay only if he stopped leaking information “aimed at inflicting damage on our American partners.”
Presumably, Putin would not object to the infliction of such damage behind closed doors, during a debriefing with the Russian security services.
Moreover, the Snowden affair reinforces the perception that the US is losing its sway in South America.
With few notable exceptions, such as US Ambassador to Brazil Tom Shannon, US diplomacy has lacked a strategic vision for Latin America.
Barack Obama’s 2008 election created high expectations in this region, too; but his administration’s approach has been reserved, at best, and often obtuse.
While China’s influence in Latin America has soared, the US has remained aloof.
Obama’s visit in May was presented as an effort to reinvigorate relations in the context of the rise of the Asia-Pacific region.
Unfortunately, the chickens of Obama’s first term have already come home to roost.
For example, the US is far and away Ecuador’s largest trading partner, accounting for more than a third of its foreign trade.
Yet, facing the possibility that Ecuador might grant Snowden asylum, the US felt the need to scramble, with Vice President Joe Biden personally pleading America’s case to Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa, even after Obama announced that he would not engage in “wheeling and dealing” over the extradition.
The threat by US officials to cut off aid to Ecuador, which would amount to a measly $12 million in 2014, further evinces a clumsy approach.
America’s traditional sources of influence – its soft power, regional alliances, and financial leverage – appear to be running dry.
The message to the world is clear: the US is not the regional power that it should be.
Finally, turning to Europe, Obama’s flippant attitude concerning alleged US surveillance of the European Union and its member states shows that American exceptionalism is alive and well.
Instead of acknowledging the legitimacy of European concerns, he shrugged them off as a frivolity: “[I] guarantee you that in European capitals, there are people who are interested in, if not what I had for breakfast, at least what my talking points might be should I end up meeting with their leaders.”
The US certainly has an interest in gaining deeper analytical insight into its European allies’ decision-making than can be gained by simply calling, say, German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Accepting that spying is realistically part of the US toolkit, we Europeans expect it to be conducted responsibly.
By dismissing European concerns about how such surveillance is carried out, Obama has demonstrated one of America’s worst habits – that of patronizing Europe.
In fact, Europeans have raised serious questions about US intelligence practices. These range from the lack of professionalism implied by allowing contractors to conduct such sensitive work to America’s hands-off approach toward certain allies, like the United Kingdom and New Zealand, while relegating many of its other allies – including most of the European Union – to surveillance-worthy status.
The bitter irony is that, at this suddenly inauspicious moment, Europe and the US are launching their most significant joint project since the creation of NATO – a transatlantic free-trade agreement.
For the sake of its success, is it really too much to ask of the US that it play its part internationally with a bit more skill and professionalism, and that it treat its partners with respect?
Reckoning With Inequality
CAMBRIDGE – When it comes to the rise in economic inequality since the 1970s in the United States and some other advanced economies, it doesn’t really matter which measure of income distribution we choose: They all show the increase.
And, while many competing explanations have been proposed, we do not need to agree about causes to concur on sensible policies to address the problem.
There are many ways to measure inequality. Each can tell us something different.
Many Asian countries’ recent economic success has reduced inequality by some measures (for example, a big fall in the poverty rate), but not by others (the high-low range has increased).
In the US, however, all measures of inequality have pointed in the same direction since the turn of the century, reflecting the fact that the benefits of economic growth have gone almost exclusively to those at the top.
The share of income received by the top 0.5% has reached 14%, where it was in the 1920s.
Normally, one would think that diagnosing the cause of such a fundamental shift would be a necessary step in prescribing a cure.
In that case, one might be discouraged by the over-abundance of plausible explanations that have been offered and the difficulty in choosing among them.
Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century emphasizes what he sees as a very long-term trend arising from a high return to capital, which causes inherited wealth to accumulate at a faster rate than earned income grows.
Piketty’s book, published in 2013, did much to put inequality back on the agenda of American economists.
But most researchers believe that the sources of widening US inequality lie primarily within earned income, rather than arising from the difference between earned income (wages and salaries) and unearned income (return on capital).
The first explanation for earned-income inequality is technological change, which raises the demand for skilled workers faster than the supply.
But, while this can explain a widening wage or income gap between skilled and “unskilled” workers (defined according to whether they are college-educated), this has little to do with the gap between the top 1% and the rest.
The second explanation is what is called “assortative mating,” according to which highly accomplished professional men no longer marry their secretaries, but instead choose highly accomplished professional women.
The third is the winner-take-all character of many professions, from dentists to university professors to movie stars.
Because modern media tell us who is the best dentist in town or the best movie actor in the world, relatively small differences in abilities win far bigger differences in income than they used to.
According to the fourth explanation, the very high compensation of corporate executives, especially in the financial sector, is not a return to services that are in demand because they are socially valuable (like having gone to medical school or having been born with acting talent).
Rather, managers essentially get to set the terms of their own pay, through compensation packages that reflect failures of corporate governance, tax law, and financial engineering.
Stock options, for example, have failed in their original goal of relating pay to performance.
Finally, an especially popular explanation is that the rich have captured the levers of power, through campaign donations.
The politicians they finance are only too eager to enact favorable policies.
But many policy prescriptions to ameliorate inequality apply regardless of the cause.
Most would make the tax system more progressive, by, for example, lowering the effective marginal tax rate for low-income workers – what US President Barack Obama has called “making work pay.”
Enhancing the earned-income tax credit is a live option today, and Obama proposed in his January 2016 State of the Union address expanding wage insurance, which currently helps workers who lose their jobs because of trade but could be extended to those who lose their jobs due to technological change.
Similarly, the payroll tax for low-income workers could be eliminated.
In light of looming deficits for America’s Social Security and Medicare programs, such changes in the tax code should ideally be revenue-neutral.
The Republican candidates for president this year, as usual, propose massive tax cuts, focused on the rich, without a plan for how to pay for them.
The US can raise additional revenue with which to address inequality in fiscally responsible ways.
The tax break for “carried interest,” by which hedge-fund managers’ income is taxed at low capital-gains rates, should be abolished (as Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton favors), and the exemption for the estate tax (originally expanded by George W. Bush) could be reduced.
At the same time, the cap on payroll taxes for upper-income workers could be raised, and distorting tax deductions, like that for mortgage interest, could be tightened for upper-income households.
A lot should be done on the spending side, too.
Examples include universal high-quality preschool, health insurance for all, and infrastructure spending.
Many of those who are upset about inequality are attracted to the banner of Bernie Sanders (or that of Donald Trump).
Many believe that one must break up banks in order to address the root cause of the problem, which is thought to be that the rich have “bought” politicians.
Money in politics is indeed a big problem.
But what do politicians use all that money for?
It doesn’t go into their pockets (at least not in the US).
It goes to running for office: campaign advertisements and mobilizing supporters.
In my view, voting for candidates who will enact the right policies is a far more direct strategy for addressing inequality – and much else – than voting for those who want to break up the banks to reduce the amount of money available to dissuade voters from supporting the right candidates.
A Perfectly Crazy Idea for the IMF
GENEVA – In the movie Dangerous Minds, the actress Michelle Pfeiffer plays a former US Marine who becomes a teacher in an inner-city high school.
In a difficult environment, where academic achievement is far from the top of the rebellious teens’ list of priorities, Pfeiffer’s character comes up with an unorthodox – and effective – new approach: each student will start the year with an “A” grade, which is theirs to lose.
At a time when many emerging-market economies are as discouraged as Pfeiffer’s students, perhaps the International Monetary Fund should take a page out of her playbook.
Emerging economies inhabit a risky world characterized by volatile capital flows.
But, rather than rely on the IMF to fulfill its mandate of protecting them from liquidity crises, they self-insure by accumulating large stockpiles of international reserves.
Emerging and developing economies now lend nearly $7.5 trillion to the US Treasury – resources that could be used to fund badly needed infrastructure projects.
What is curious about this approach is that the IMF’s record in handling financial crises, though far from perfect, is generally quite good.
So why the reluctance to count on the Fund?
Perhaps the most obvious reason is timing.
For historical reasons, most Fund facilities are better suited to managing crises than they are to preventing them.
By the time countries turn to the IMF for support, they have already lost access to international capital markets.
Yet they have to engage in protracted negotiations that allow the situation to deteriorate before it improves.
Tapping a country’s own reserves may not be an ideal option, but at least it is fast.
But the IMF does offer a fast option.
The Flexible Credit Line (FCL) facility grants immediate access to Fund resources, no questions asked.
It amounts to a pre-approved loan that eligible countries can obtain whenever they want, on the basis of the strength of their fundamentals and policy record. It is thus the perfect tool for preventing self-fulfilling liquidity crises.
Yet IMF members do not seem to be interested in the FCL.
Seven years after the facility was developed, only three countries (Colombia, Mexico, and Poland) have access to it.
While not all of the Fund’s 189 members could qualify for it, the number that do is a lot higher than three.
The FCL-like Precautionary and Liquidity Line, which has an even lower bar for eligibility, has only two takers.
The problem is stigma.
Countries fear that by applying for pre-approval – a process that they are not confident will remain confidential, as promised – they will signal potential economic problems.
Worse, they could be rejected, either the first time they apply or when their approval comes up for review (every 1-2 years); that would surely undermine confidence in their economies, if word of it were to get out.
This is where Pfeiffer’s strategy comes in.
Instead of forcing countries to work for approval, the IMF could create a new FCL-like facility for which all of its members are pre-approved, with the exception of countries that do not meet certain criteria in terms of policies and fundamentals.
Exceptions could be identified as part of the IMF’s so-called Article IV consultations with members – an approach that would strengthen IMF country surveillance.
As for the rest, pre-approval would substantially diminish the temptation to self-insure by accumulating reserves.
As with any attempt to change the status quo, this approach would raise challenges.
For starters, IMF staff could face political pressure from countries that did not qualify, particularly if those countries were among the IMF’s more influential members.
But, as Tito Cordella and Eduardo Levy Yeyati suggested in 2006, this risk could be mitigated by specific, measurable, and transparent criteria.
The disadvantage of this approach is that it would preclude more nuanced country-specific analyses involving qualitative assessments.
Moreover, if evaluations were made public, negative assessments could precipitate crises.
Ensuring that the eligibility criteria are clear and specific could help to prevent such an outcome.
A more direct approach to preventing crises in weaker economies would be to create a continuous eligibility scale, akin to the sovereign rating scale (which does not have a large effect on country risk), with countries at different points on the scale having access to different types of precautionary facilities.
The final risk is that, if many countries fulfill the criteria, the Fund might not have enough resources to meet its commitments in a crisis.
This problem could be solved by boosting the Fund’s capacity to borrow, while reducing the amount of resources that the Fund needs to set aside for FCL-like facilities.
After all, a successful precautionary credit line is one that is never (or very rarely) used.
Financial globalization demands a stronger global financial safety net.
Economists and policymakers have been tinkering with the international financial architecture since the mid-1990s, without much success.