ROME – The only thing to lament about the agreement reached by Iran and the P5+1 (the UN Security Council’s five permanent members – China, Britain, France, Russia, and the United States – plus Germany) in Vienna this month is that it was not signed and sealed a decade ago.
In the years that it has taken for diplomatic sanity to prevail, the Middle East has endured myriad avoidable tensions and lost opportunities for security cooperation.
From 2003 to 2006, Iran made clear to anyone willing to listen that it would agree to all the key elements of the recent deal, including measures to block uranium and plutonium pathways to a bomb and obtrusive monitoring mechanisms to ensure ample advance notice of a likely breakout.
All it needed in return – beyond, of course, the lifting of sanctions as implementation proceeded – was formal recognition of its “right to enrich” uranium.
In discussions with the European Union in 2003-2004, Iran voluntarily froze its then-minimal enrichment program, pending negotiation of a full accord.
Iran also declared its willingness to apply the “additional protocol,” allowing for much more far-reaching and stringent monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency than is called for under standard arrangements.
Those commitments ended in 2005, owing to the continued insistence by the EU, backed by the US, that Iran abandon uranium enrichment entirely.
This stance disregarded the “inalienable right,” clearly acknowledged in the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (as much as one might wish otherwise, in an ideal world), of NPT parties to engage in all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle as part of a peaceful nuclear energy program.
If, at that time, the West had been prepared to settle for effectively containing Iran’s nuclear program, rather than destroying every last sensitive component of it, a deal would have been possible.
And, indeed, in early 2006, the International Crisis Group published a comprehensive “delayed limited enrichment” proposal that included all of the key features of the deal that has now been signed in Vienna.
I am confident, on the basis of many hours of productive dialogue with senior Iranian officials in Tehran, New York, and elsewhere, that this proposal could have broken the deadlock.
It had all the right elements of an effective compromise.
But with the US not talking to Iran at any level, and the EU talking but not listening, the effort went nowhere.
The Iranians were never going to accept what they perceived as second-class status under the NPT.
It was only when US President Barack Obama’s administration acknowledged that, and commenced direct back-channel talks in 2011, that progress became possible.
The key was the recognition that Iran’s sense of honor had to be accommodated.
Critics of the Vienna deal in the US Congress, Israel, and the Arab world tend to assume that Iran has no honor.
They believe that Iran has always been hell-bent on building nuclear weapons, and that its leaders signed the deal, which imposes limits on the country’s nuclear program for 15 years, only to relieve the enormous sanctions pressure now crushing its economy.
Iran is biding its time, the critics charge, and will inevitably attempt to break out again.
While no one should be under any illusion that Iran has been a model international citizen, or is likely to become one any time soon, this perception of the country’s nuclear ambitions involves a fundamental misreading of the dynamics in play.
My judgment, based on more dialogue with senior Iranian officials than most of the critics have conducted, is that Iran – whatever engineering research it may have carried out in the past, and whatever fuel-making and missile-delivery capabilities it may have developed more recently – has never been close to deciding actually to build nuclear weapons.
Iran has always been keenly aware of the multiple risks involved in crossing that red line.
It knows that it would face attack by a much more heavily armed Israel, whether supported by the US or not; that Sunni powers in the region could move quickly to counter a “Shia bomb” with their own nuclear weapons; and that additional crushing international sanctions could be imposed.
And there is another factor that should not be instantly dismissed, as it usually is by cynical critics: Iranian leaders’ repeated strong rejection of weapons of mass destruction on religious grounds.
The question, then, is why has Iran walked the precipice for so long by building a visible breakout capability bound to spook the West, Israel, and its Arab neighbors?
The answer, I believe, is overwhelmingly national pride – its peoples’ desire to demonstrate that Iran is a power to be reckoned with, a country that has impressive technical prowess, and that there are limits to its willingness to suffer international humiliation.
Iranians vividly remember the overthrow, orchestrated by the CIA and British intelligence, of the elected government of Mohammad Mosaddegh in 1953.
They remember the West’s prolonged support for the hated Shah, and for Iraq in its brutal war with Iran in the 1980s, even after Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein employed chemical weapons.
And they remember when US President George W. Bush labeled their country part of an “axis of evil,” despite its cooperation with the US in Afghanistan.
It is understandable that many will not readily be persuaded of Iranian sincerity, not least because the national negotiating style – among moderates and hardliners alike – tends to be anything but frank and direct, with private reason often accompanied by public thunder that makes it hard to assess real intent.
But the Vienna agreement deserves wide support, and not just because the alternatives – continuation of acute regional tension at best, and catastrophic military conflict at worst – are so unappealing.
In fact, there is every reason to believe that the agreement captures and reflects the real interests not just of Iran, but also of the international community.
It keeps intact a global non-proliferation regime that has been showing signs of falling apart, and gives new hope for wider regional security cooperation.
Intelligent diplomacy beats brute force every time.
Saying No to the Warmongers
NEW YORK – The accord struck in Vienna to rein in Iran’s nuclear activities has warmongers fulminating.
Citizens worldwide should support US President Barack Obama’s brave effort to outmaneuver them, taking heart from the fact that the signatories include not just the United States, but all five permanent members of the UN Security Council plus Germany.
Many of the warmongers are to be found in Obama’s own government agencies.
Most Americans struggle to recognize or understand their country’s permanent security state, in which elected politicians seem to run the show, but the CIA and the Pentagon often take the lead – a state that inherently gravitates toward military, rather than diplomatic, solutions to foreign-policy challenges.
Since 1947, when the CIA was established, the US has had a continuous semi-covert, semi-overt policy of overthrowing foreign governments.
In fact, the CIA was designed to avoid genuine democratic oversight and provide presidents with “plausible deniability.”
It has gone on to topple dozens of governments, in all regions of the world, with no accountability there or at home.
I recently examined one period of CIA activity in my book To Move the World: JFK’s Quest for Peace.
Soon after Kennedy assumed the presidency in 1961, he was “informed” by the CIA of its plot to overthrow Fidel Castro.
Kennedy felt stuck: Should he sanction the planned CIA invasion of Cuba or veto it?
New to the gruesome game, Kennedy tried to have it both ways, by letting it proceed, but without US air cover.
The CIA-led invasion, executed by a motley group of Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs, was a military failure and a foreign-policy disaster, one that led to the Cuban Missile Crisis the following year.
During the missile crisis, most senior security officials advising the president wanted to launch military action against Soviet forces, a course that could well have ended in nuclear annihilation.
Kennedy overruled the warmongers, and prevailed in the crisis through diplomacy.
By 1963, Kennedy no longer trusted the advice of the military and the CIA.
Indeed, he regarded many of his putative advisers as a threat to world peace.
That year, he used diplomacy relentlessly and skillfully to achieve a breakthrough nuclear agreement with the Soviet Union, the Limited Test Ban Treaty.
The American people strongly – and rightly – supported Kennedy over the warmongers.
But three months after the treaty was signed, JFK was assassinated.
Viewed through the lens of history, the main job of US presidents is to be mature and wise enough to stand up to the permanent war machine.
Kennedy tried; his successor, Lyndon Johnson, did not, and the debacle of Vietnam ensued.
Jimmy Carter tried; Reagan did not (his CIA helped to unleash death and mayhem in Central America throughout the 1980s).
Clinton mostly tried (except in the Balkans); George W. Bush did not, and generated new wars and turmoil.
On the whole, Obama has tried to restrain the warmongers, yet he has given in to them frequently – not only by relying on weaponized drones, but also by waging covert wars in Syria, Libya, Yemen, Somalia, and elsewhere.
Nor did he truly end the US wars in Iraq and Afghanistan; he replaced troops on the ground with US drones, air strikes, and “private” contractors.
Iran is surely his finest moment, a historic milestone that demands full-throated approval.
The political difficulty of making peace with Iran is similar to that of JFK’s peacemaking with the Soviet Union in 1963.
Americans have been suspicious of Iran since the Islamic Revolution of 1979 and the subsequent hostage crisis, in which Iranian students held 52 Americans at the US embassy for 444 days.
But their suspicion also reflects jingoistic manipulation and a lack of perspective on US-Iran relations.
Few Americans know that the CIA overthrew a democratic Iranian government in 1953.
Iranians had had the temerity to elect a progressive, secular prime minister who believed that the country’s oil belonged to its people, not to the United Kingdom or the US.
And few Americans recall that after the coup, the CIA installed a brutal police state under the Shah.
Likewise, following the 1979 Iranian Revolution, the US armed Saddam Hussein’s Iraq to go to war with Iran, resulting in hundreds of thousands of Iranian deaths in the 1980s.
And US-led international sanctions, imposed from the 1990s onward, have aimed to impoverish, destabilize, and ultimately topple the Islamist regime.
Today, the warmongers are trying to scuttle the Vienna accord.
Saudi Arabia is in a violent struggle with Iran for regional supremacy, with geopolitical competition converging with the Sunni-Shia rivalry.
Israel, the Middle East’s only nuclear power, wants to retain its strategic monopoly.
The US warmongers seem to view any Islamist state as ripe for toppling.
Obama is correct that America’s true interests, and those of the world, are with peace, not continued conflict, with Iran.
The US is not a partisan in the Shia-Sunni struggle; if anything, the US confronts mainly Sunni terrorism, funded from Saudi Arabia, not Shia terrorism backed by Iran.
Obama is also right that, despite Israel’s arguments, the agreement will reduce the possibility of Iran ever becoming a nuclear state.
The best way to ensure that outcome is to normalize relations with it, help its economy recover, and support its integration into the international community.
Iran is a great and ancient culture.
Its opening to the world as a place of business, tourism, the arts, and sports would be a boon to global stability and prosperity.
The new treaty will verifiably prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon for at least a decade – and keep it bound to nuclear non-proliferation thereafter.
This is the time to begin a broader US-Iran rapprochement and build a new security regime in the Middle East and the world that leads toward full global nuclear disarmament.
To get there requires, above all, replacing war (including the CIA’s secret wars) with commerce and other forms of peaceful exchange.
Iran’s Economy After the Elections
LONDON – Recent gains by pro-government reformist candidates in Iran’s parliamentary elections have given President Hassan Rouhani a welcome midterm boost.
But huge economic challenges remain.
And in the coming months, these challenges are what will determine the battle lines between the president and his hardline adversaries inside and outside the parliament.
Elections are normally won and lost along political lines, and Iran’s recent vote is no exception.
But, on this occasion, there is reason to believe that economic concerns were a major driver of political change, as evidenced by the massive turnout at the electoral booths.
Ever since July, when Iran signed a landmark nuclear deal with the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council and the European Union, popular expectations for an improvement in the state of the economy have reached a fever pitch.
Rouhani is well aware of the importance of economic expectations; indeed, they were what swept him into the presidency in 2013.
The recent election campaign once again drew strength from the promise to fix an economy battered by years of tough economic sanctions and domestic mismanagement.
That is why he placed a high priority on reaching a deal with the outside world that would close the nuclear file and pave the road to economic recovery.
The economy that Rouhani inherited from his predecessor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, had been distorted by years of generous redistributions of oil revenues to the president’s supporters and then hit with stagflation, as what US Vice President Joe Biden called the “toughest economic sanctions in history” began to take hold.
In 2013, the year Rouhani assumed office, inflation exceeded 40%, and GDP contracted by 6%.
Rouhani’s woes were exacerbated by the economic destabilization that followed the introduction of comprehensive financial sanctions that cut Iran off from the international banking system.
Unable to sell oil, and faced with a blockade of the central bank by the United States and the EU, Rouhani faced the momentous challenge of trying to kick-start growth and tame spiraling prices.
Rouhani has had some success in lowering inflation, which is now down to 13%.
But rekindling growth has proven to be a tougher challenge.
With the International Monetary Fund predicting that GDP will either stagnate or contract this year, Iran’s economy might well be set for a double-dip recession.
With sanctions lifted, however, the IMF now expects GDP growth to reach roughly 5% next year – a rate that would make Iran the Middle East’s best-performing economy.
Attaining this level of growth will be essential if jobs are to be created; Iran habitually suffers from a double-digit unemployment rate, with official youth unemployment above 25%.
But several obstacles stand in the way.
The first is the collapse in oil prices, which have tumbled by 70% since mid-2014.
A similar misfortune occurred in 1999, when President Mohammad Khatami was attempting to carry out his own reformist experiment, and prices fell below $10 per barrel.
Then, as now, the first two years of a reformist administration were thwarted by adverse external developments in the international oil markets.
The last crisis was driven by demand-side factors relating to the Asian financial crisis.
This time, supply-side factors are creating a global oil glut, with similar results.
Failing to understand this, conspiracy theorists can be forgiven for noticing that reform-minded presidencies seem to be negatively correlated with international oil prices.
Rouhani’s main challenges, however, are internal.
They come from Iran’s complex post-revolutionary institutional architecture, which is beset by a labyrinth of decision-making entities interlaced with yet more bodies and agencies created to ensure compliance with Islamic tenets and revolutionary standards.
In recent decades, this system has produced tremendous political fragmentation, if not open factional fighting, at all levels.
It is in this labyrinth of power that Rouhani is fighting an intense battle with his conservative adversaries – a battle that may be far from over.
In fact, Rouhani’s economic remedies – attempting to open the economy to foreign trade and investment flows, and introducing economic reforms to foster the private sector following the lifting of sanctions – are at odds with the vision of Iran’s hardline conservatives.
For these so-called Principlists – who advocate a “resistance economy,” based on years of austerity marked by self-sufficiency and reliance on domestic resources – Rouhani’s desire to declare Iran “open for business” and to encourage foreigners to take an active role in Iran’s economy raises as much alarm as the nuclear deal.
The decline of the Principlists’ power bloc in the next parliament is undoubtedly a powerful message from Iran’s youthful electorate.
This resonates with what former US President Bill Clinton told Charlie Rose in 2005: Iran is the only country with elections “where the liberals, or the progressives, have won two-thirds to 70% of the vote in six elections….There is no other country in the world I can say that about, certainly not my own.”
A decade later, Clinton will no doubt find it heartening to see this trend continue.
But, while the Principlists might be down, they are certainly not out, as the looming battle over the future of the economy attests.
It is here that Rouhani will face his most difficult challenge.
His electoral victory might raise the stakes for him, by increasing pressure to deliver on popular expectations.
But, as reformists found when they lost to Ahmadinejad in 2005, growth and economic recovery cannot come at the expense of the electorate’s aspirations for greater equality and social justice.
The Drone in the Desert
TEL AVIV – A drone recently penetrated Israel’s airspace from the Mediterranean.
It was allowed to fly for about half an hour over southern Israel before being shot down by the Israeli air force over a sparsely populated area.
It is still not known who dispatched the drone and from where, but it is now assumed that it was launched from Lebanon, either by Hezbollah, acting in Iran's service, or by forces of the Iranian regime itself.
If that is indeed the case, the episode should not be regarded as yet another incident in a region fraught by conflict and violence.
On the contrary, it is a significant window into the arena in which the conflict over the future of Iran's nuclear program is being waged.
Several developments and forces are now shaping this arena.
One is Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s decision, announced in his speech to the United Nations General Assembly last month, to suspend his threat to launch unilateral military action against Iran's nuclear installations.
He has said that Israel will give the US and the rest of the international community an opportunity to stop Iran’s progress through other means by the spring or early summer of 2013.
Another development is the US presidential election.
Republican challenger Mitt Romney’s success in the first debate improves his chances and the prospect of a new administration settling in before any major decisions are made on the Iranian nuclear issue.
In Iran, the regime pushes ahead, but is clearly being hurt by an economic crisis (largely a consequence of international sanctions), popular protest, and internal bickering –&nbsp;and has turned bellicose as a result.
After several months of listening to Israeli (and, to some extent, US) war rhetoric, the regime began issuing its own menacing bombast, as a matter of substance and to defend the pride of a regime that views itself as the heir to the glorious imperial tradition of Persia.
Various Iranian spokesmen have begun threatening Israel not only with a massive response to any potential attack, but also with a preemptive strike.
Israel would not merely be punished for any attack, they say; it would be annihilated.
This position was accompanied by Iran’s harder line on military involvement in the Syrian civil war, echoed by its Lebanese proxy Hezbollah.
For some time, under the impact of the Syrian civil war – and still smarting from the 2006 war with Israel – Hassan Nasrallah, the Hezbollah leader, had lowered his profile and moderated his rhetoric.
No longer.
At the same time, the Iranian regime is sending a variety of signals that it wants to renew the nuclear negotiations.
One example was the announcement that some of its enriched uranium is being diverted to medical research; in other words, uranium enrichment, according to this message, can be slowed down.
At this point, however, there are no indications that Iran is interested in more than reducing external pressure and the impact of the sanctions.
The drone, shot down not far from Israel’s nuclear facility in Dimona, fits with these two efforts.
Iran’s war rhetoric and threat to inflict a deadly blow on Israel is served by dispatching a drone in the general direction of Dimona.
And, if the idea is to negotiate, the drone’s flight was an excellent prelude to a demand that Iran’s nuclear effort be dealt with as part of a larger effort to ban nuclear weapons throughout the Middle East.
There are two other disturbing aspects to the drone affair.
First, it is a clear indication that Hezbollah is, indeed, the long arm of the Iranian regime – its base on the Mediterranean and on Israel’s border.
The occasional argument that it is a genuine Lebanese political movement, tied to Iran but ultimately Lebanese, is simply wrong.
Second, the drone’s arrival from the Mediterranean underscored the danger that terrorist organizations, supplied with deadly modern equipment, can inflict damage “without a return address.”
Just a few weeks ago, it was feared that Syria’s crumbling regime might transfer part of its arsenal of weapons of mass destruction to Hezbollah, or that some of that arsenal might fall into jihadis’ hands.
And one of the arguments against Iran’s nuclear program has been that the regime might transfer fissile material to Hezbollah and its ilk to be used in a radioactive “dirty bomb.”
There are four components to an effective strategy for dealing with&nbsp;Iran’s nuclear program: real negotiations, rather than a leisurely meeting once every few weeks; stiff sanctions on Iran, but without today’s gaping loopholes; a credible threat of military action; and a face-saving exit for the Iranian leadership.
This is a viable strategy, but it is now clear that only the US can implement it.
Let us hope that the Americans act in time.
Iran: Last Exit for Diplomacy
The Iran crisis is moving fast in an alarming direction.
There can no longer be any reasonable doubt that Iran’s ambition is to obtain nuclear weapons capability.
However, at the heart of the issue lies the Iranian regime’s aspiration to become a hegemonic Islamic and regional power and thereby position itself at eye level with the world’s most powerful nations.
It is precisely this ambition that sets Iran apart from North Korea: whereas North Korea seeks nuclear weapons capability in order to entrench its own isolation, Iran is aiming for regional dominance and more.
Iran is betting on revolutionary changes within the power structure of the Middle East to help it achieve its strategic goal.
To this end, it makes use of Israel and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but also of Lebanon, Syria, its influence in the Gulf region, and, above all, Iraq.
This combination of hegemonic aspirations, questioning of the regional status quo, and a nuclear program is extremely dangerous.
Iran’s acquisition of a nuclear bomb – or even its ability to produce one – would be interpreted by Israel as fundamental threat to its existence, thereby compelling the West, and Europe in particular, to take sides.
Europe has not only historical moral obligations to Israel, but also security interests that link it to the strategically vital Eastern Mediterranean.
Moreover, a nuclear Iran would also be perceived as a threat by its other neighbors, which would likely provoke a regional arms race and further fuel regional volatility.
In short, nuclear Iran would call Europe’s fundamental security into question.
To believe that Europe could keep out of this conflict is a dangerous illusion.
In this crisis, the stakes are high, which is why Germany, the UK, and France began negotiations with Iran two years ago with the goal of persuading Iran to abandon its efforts to close the nuclear fuel cycle.
This initiative failed for two reasons.
First, the European offer to open up technology and trade, including the peaceful use of nuclear technology, was disproportionate to Iran’s fundamental fear of regime change on the one hand, and its regional hegemonic aspirations and quest for global prestige on the other.
Second, the disastrous US-led war in Iraq has led Iran’s leaders to conclude that the leading Western power has been weakened to the point that it is dependent on Iran’s goodwill, and that high oil prices have made the West all the more wary of a serious confrontation.
The Iranian regime’s analysis might prove a dangerous miscalculation, because it is likely to lead sooner rather than later to a “hot” confrontation that Iran simply cannot win.
After all, the issue at the heart of this conflict is this: who dominates the Middle East – Iran or the United States?
Iran’s leaders underestimate the explosive nature of this issue, and how it is answered, for the US as a global power and thus for its own future.
Nor, however, is the debate about the military option – the destruction of Iran’s nuclear program through US air strikes – conducive to resolving the issue.
Rather, it rings of a self-fulfilling prophecy.
There is no guarantee that attempts to destroy Iran’s nuclear potential and thus of its capability for a nuclear breakout will succeed.
Moreover, as a victim of foreign aggression, Iran’s nuclear weapons ambitions would be fully legitimized.
Finally, a military attack on Iran would also mark the beginning of a regional, and possibly global, military and terrorist escalation – a nightmare for all concerned.
So what should be done?
There remains a serious chance for a diplomatic solution if the US, in cooperation with the Europeans and thus certainly with the support of the Security Council and the non-aligned states of the Group of 77, offers Iran a “Grand Bargain.”
In exchange for long-term suspension of uranium enrichment, Iran and other states would gain access to research and technology within an internationally defined framework and under comprehensive supervision by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Full normalization of political and economic relations would follow, including binding security guarantees upon agreement of a regional security design.
The high price for refusing such a proposal has to be made absolutely clear to the Iranian leadership: should no agreement be reached, the West will do everything within its power to isolate Iran economically, financially, technologically, and diplomatically, with the full support of the international community.
Iran’s alternatives should be no less than recognition and security, or total isolation.
Presenting Iran with these alternatives presupposes that the West does not fear rising oil and gas prices.
Indeed, the two other options – Iran’s emergence as a nuclear power or the use of military force to prevent this – would, in addition to all of its horrible consequences, also increase oil and gas prices.
Everything speaks in favor of playing the economic-financial and technology card vis-à-vis Iran.
Knowledge of the potentially horrible consequences of a military confrontation and of the equally horrific consequences of an Iran in possession of the atomic bomb must force the US to abandon its policy of no direct negotiations and its hope for regime change.
It is not enough for the Europeans to act while the Americans continue to look on as the diplomatic initiatives unfold, partaking in discussion only behind the scenes and ultimately letting the Europeans do what they will.
The Bush administration must lead the Western initiative in harmonized, direct negotiations with Iran, and, if these negotiations succeed, the US must also be willing to agree to appropriate guarantees.
In this confrontation, international credibility and legitimacy will be the deciding factors, and ensuring them will require far-sighted and cool, calculated American leadership.
An offer of a “Grand Bargain” would unite the international community and present Iran with a convincing alternative.
Were Iran to agree to this offer, its suspension of nuclear research in Natanz while negotiations are ongoing would be the litmus test of its sincerity.
Were Iran to refuse the offer or fail to honor its obligations, it would totally isolate itself internationally and provide emphatic legitimization to further measures.
Neither Russia nor China could avoid showing solidarity within the Security Council.
But such an initiative can succeed only if the American administration assumes leadership among the Western nations and sits down at the negotiating table with Iran.
Even then, the international community would not have long to act.
As all sides must be aware, time is running out for a diplomatic solution.
After the Iran Deal
BERLIN – After 12 years of tedious negotiations, Iran and the “P5+1” countries (China, France, Russia, the United States, and the United Kingdom, plus Germany) have reached a comprehensive agreement that will limit Iran’s development of its nuclear capabilities to non-military objectives.
In exchange for its cooperation, Iran will eventually be relieved of the punishing sanctions that the United Nations, the European Union, and the US have imposed upon it for years.
This is a huge diplomatic success.
Of course, the negotiations have attracted plenty of critics, including in the US Congress and Iran’s parliament, as well as in Saudi Arabia, Israel, and even France.
But the agreement’s potential benefits cannot be denied.
For starters, the deal proves that world leaders – despite being divided on a multitude of issues, such as the conflict in Ukraine and territorial disputes in the South China Sea – can still come together to resolve a shared problem.
It will also make nuclear proliferation in the Middle East less likely, while strengthening the global nuclear non-proliferation regime.
And it will allow for the normalization of Iran’s relations with the West.
Of course, Iran’s neighbors have legitimate concerns about the impact the deal will have on the regional balance of power.
As sanctions are lifted, Iran will become stronger, challenging the influence of the Gulf States.
Anticipating this, these states have already sought reassurances from the US, while following a more hard-nosed policy in Yemen or Syria, where they consider themselves to be containing Iran’s hegemonic ambitions.
Ultimately, however, the impact of the nuclear agreement will depend on political dynamics in Iran.
Many – indeed, probably a majority – in the Iranian establishment support the resolution of the nuclear confrontation, and agree that Iran does not need to be perpetually at odds with the rest of the world.
But some still view the dispute as a key component of the country’s revolutionary identity.
This post-agreement dynamic thus could play out in two ways.
In the first scenario, events unfold according to the hopes of the P5+1 and the Iranian negotiators, with the agreement amplifying the voices of those in Iran who advocate regional and international accommodation.
In this case, Iran reaches out to Saudi Arabia with a convincing indication that it does not intend to bolster its influence at the expense of the Saudis or their allies.
This allows Saudi Arabia to join Iran in using its influence in Syria to bring about a ceasefire agreement between regime forces and rebels, paving the way for the formation of a credible transition government capable of pushing back the Islamic State.
Likewise, Saudi Arabia and Iran bring an end to the fighting in Yemen by backing a power-sharing agreement there.
Meanwhile, relief from sanctions, together with the gradual return of international companies, kick-starts Iran’s ailing economy.
Increased openness toward Europe and, more cautiously, the US encourages reform-minded members of Iran’s middle class to seek their future inside the country, rather than emigrating.
Finally, under this scenario, President Hassan Rouhani’s strong international standing helps him to overcome conservative resistance to pursue much-needed domestic reforms.
On this basis, Rouhani’s coalition of reformists and pragmatists easily wins a majority when Iran’s next parliament is elected in 2016, with Rouhani himself re-elected in 2017.
The second scenario is far less benign.
In this case, it soon becomes clear that domestic support for the nuclear agreement was broad but thin.
Whereas Rouhani’s reformist camp wants to improve Iran’s foreign relations, the conservative and nationalist forces surrounding Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei view the agreement as a necessary tool to eliminate economic sanctions and strengthen Iran’s conventional military capabilities.
The hardline clerics then undermine whatever confidence Rouhani is building with Iran’s neighbors by declaring repeatedly that the agreement represents an implicit acknowledgement of Iran’s might by the world’s major powers.
This stance vindicates the skeptics, spurring Saudi Arabia to continue its efforts to build a “Sunni coalition” to contain Iranian influence and uphold the fight against what it views as Iranian proxies in countries like Syria and Yemen.
Furthermore, with regional tensions high, the economic impact of the removal of sanctions turns out to be negligible, while conservatives gain ground in resisting reform.
Rouhani and his allies are unable to offer ordinary Iranians economic hope – a failure that causes them to lose both the legislative and presidential elections.
Paradoxically, in the pessimistic scenario, Iran’s new government, controlled by conservatives and hardliners, actually fits into the region better than the current one.
After all, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and many other Arab states are also ruled by authoritarian hardliners with little interest in de-escalating regional conflicts.
This would make the resurgence of reform-oriented leadership in Iran extremely difficult.
Of course, the most likely scenario is a combination of both dynamics.
But, given that it is in everyone’s interest to ensure that developments hew more closely to the reform-oriented path, it should be clear to all that the diplomatic work with regard to Iran is far from complete.
The Case for Peace With Iran
NEW YORK – The nuclear framework agreement between Iran and the five permanent UN Security Council members (the United States, the United Kingdom, France, China, and Russia) plus Germany is an important achievement in global diplomacy.
The deal announced earlier this month represents the triumph of rational hope over irrational fear, and it deserves to be implemented.
But now the race is on against hardliners in the US, Iran, Israel, and elsewhere, who want to kill the deal before the deadline for a final agreement in June.
The framework agreement benefits all parties.
Iran scales back its nuclear activities, especially the enrichment of uranium fuel, in exchange for an end to economic sanctions.
Its government is kept further away from developing a nuclear bomb – which it denies pursuing – and gains room for economic recovery and normalization of relations with the major powers.
It is a smart, pragmatic, and balanced approach, subject to monitoring and verification.
It does not require that the US and Iranian governments suddenly trust each other; but it does offer an opportunity to build confidence, even as it allows for specific steps that are in each side’s interests.
Crucially, it is part of international law, within the framework of the UN Security Council.
By propounding the idea that the other side can never be trusted, the hardliners are advancing a self-fulfilling theory of politics and human nature that makes war far more likely.
These purveyors of fear deserve to be kept on the sidelines.
It is time to make peace.
The great divide between the West and Iran today, it should be noted, is largely the result of malign Western behavior toward Iran (Persia until 1935) in the past.
From the start of the twentieth century, the British Empire manipulated Persia in order to control its vast oil reserves.
After World War II, that job fell increasingly to the US.
Indeed, from coup to dictatorship to war to sanctions, the US has racked up more than 60 continuous years of trying to impose its will on Iran.
The CIA and Britain’s MI6 jointly toppled Mohammad Mossadegh’s democratically elected government in 1953, in order to block Mossadegh’s attempts to nationalize Iran’s oil reserves.
The US then installed the brutal dictatorship of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, which ruled the country until the Islamic Revolution of 1979.
Following the revolution, the US helped to arm Iraq in the Iran-Iraq War of the 1980s, in which an estimated one million Iranians died.
Since 1987, the US has imposed economic sanctions against Iran on a variety of premises, including claims of Iranian terrorism and the alleged nuclear threat.
And the US has worked hard to internationalize these sanctions, leading the push for UN measures, which have been in place since 2006.
The US hardliners have their own long list of grievances, starting with the 1979 seizure of America’s embassy in Tehran, in which 66 US diplomats and citizens were held for 444 days.
Then there is Iran’s involvement in Islamist insurgencies, and its support for anti-Israel political movements and groups deemed to be terrorist.
Still, the British and American abuses vis-à-vis Persia and Iran started earlier, lasted longer, and imposed far higher costs than Iran’s actions vis-à-vis the US and UK.
Moreover, much of what the US categorizes as Iranian “terror” is a product of the region’s sectarian struggles between Shia, backed by Iran, and Sunnis, backed by Saudi Arabia.
“Terror” is a term that obscures rather than clarifies these long-standing clashes and rivalries.
That is why Iran, called a “terrorist state” by US hardliners, is now America’s de facto ally in the fight against Sunni jihadists in Iraq and Syria.
Iran’s confrontation with the UK and the US is part of the much broader saga of the West’s use of its military and economic dominance to project its power and political will over much of the world during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Today’s low- and middle-income countries are only now entering a period of true sovereignty.
The proposed agreement with Iran will not overcome a century of distrust and manipulation, but it can begin to create a new path toward peace and mutual respect.
Mutual benefit will be achieved by honest appraisals of mutual interests, and step-by-step progress backed by verification, not by hardliners on both sides claiming that the other side is pure evil and insisting on complete triumph.
The success of US President John F. Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in reaching the 1963 Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, at the height of the Cold War, provides an instructive lesson.
At the time, hardliners on both sides denounced the LTBT as a weakening of national defense in the face of an implacable enemy.
In fact, both sides fully honored the treaty, and it led to the landmark 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
JFK’s words a half-century ago apply to the Iran agreement today.
The LTBT, said Kennedy in 1963, “is not a victory for one side – it is a victory for mankind.”
This treaty, he said, “will not resolve all conflicts, or cause the Communists to forgo their ambitions, or eliminate the dangers of war.
It will not reduce our need for arms or allies or programs of assistance to others.
But it is an important first step – a step towards peace – a step towards reason – a step away from war.”
Grand Bargaining with Iran
STOCKHOLM – Slowly but surely, Iran’s talks with the international community about its nuclear program are approaching the make-or-break point.
But, more important, the outcome could mark a turning point for the wider – and increasingly volatile – Middle East.
The rapprochement between Iran and its negotiating partners on the core nuclear issue is obvious.
No one at this point seriously believes that Iran is maintaining an active program to develop nuclear weapons, though not long ago it was almost conventional wisdom that the country was close to having them.
Now the focus is on ensuring that Iran would need a year or so to assemble a nuclear device if it ever decided to do so.
But the concept of “breakout time” is dubious.
If trust were to collapse, and the Iranian regime decided to abrogate all of the relevant international agreements, it is highly likely that it would get its weapon, even if the country itself was bombed repeatedly.
The strategic emphasis on “breakout time” is thus misplaced.
The key to progress is to help turn Iran from a cause into a country, to paraphrase Henry Kissinger.
Iran needs to focus on developing all of its human and material resources to become part of a region moving from confrontation to cooperation.
The deal on the core nuclear issues is central to this approach, but so is a credible process for developing the trade and investment links that will facilitate Iran’s move from isolation to integration.
As the talks enter the final phase, the issue of sanctions is likely to be at the forefront.
This is because the Joint Plan of Action to which the parties agreed in November 2013, while addressing virtually all of the West’s immediate nuclear concerns, does not map out the necessary pathway to Iran’s normalization.
Just as conservative forces in Iran can be expected to try to stop an agreement, forces thriving on confrontation in the United States and elsewhere will do the same.
Iran’s hardliners play up doubts that the West will ever agree to lift the sanctions, while their Western counterparts will do whatever they can to support that presumption.
A spiral of mutually destructive diplomacy might result.
Here, the European Union should clearly signal its readiness to take the lead in easing and lifting restrictions on Iran, though this obviously must be done in close coordination with Europe’s partners.
The EU oil sanctions, for example, could be suspended almost immediately if an agreement were reached.
An agreement should also be followed by sustained political engagement on other mutually important issues.
Developments in Afghanistan and Iraq are obviously urgent.
And, based on close consultation with both Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries, it may yet be possible to move toward more cooperative arrangements in that strategically vital region.
That will require putting the issue of Syria squarely on the table.
Four years after the outbreak of the country’s civil war, and despite the horrific humanitarian consequences of the fighting, international diplomacy to stop the violence has achieved nothing.
The United Nations Security Council has been split and ineffective, and even Russia seems to be gradually losing the leverage it once had in Damascus.
Iran, the US, and the EU all share an interest in stopping a war that is causing the Syrian state to collapse – with all of the consequences seen in Iraq since 2003 – and strengthening the forces of Sunni jihadism across the region.
Whether this is enough common ground for a constructive dialogue with Iran on ending Syria’s civil war remains to be seen, but it is an option that must be pursued.
The talks now reaching their endgame in Lausanne are confined to the nuclear issue; but beyond the agreement loom larger possibilities and risks.
A breakthrough might compel a phase of intense diplomacy, giving Iran a pathway to diplomatic normalization and opening the door for grand bargains that could begin to restore order and stability to the rest of the region.
A breakdown, by contrast, though unlikely to lead immediately to war, could easily foment developments that lead in that direction, and the region as a whole could be pulled even deeper into the current vortex of chaos and violence.
With the core nuclear issue more or less settled, it is now imperative to resolve sanctions and normalization issues and grasp the opportunity for regional grand bargains that might then become possible.
The nuclear deal must mark the beginning of the international community’s efforts to engage Iran in addressing the Middle East’s toughest challenges.
A Belated Victory for Non-Proliferation
LONDON – Let us give praise where it is richly deserved.
Despite all the criticism they faced, US President Barack Obama and his Secretary of State, John Kerry, stuck doggedly to the task of negotiating a deal with Iran to limit its nuclear program.
Together with representatives of the United Kingdom, Russia, China, France, and Germany, they have now succeeded.
The main terms of this historic agreement, concluded in the teeth of opposition from Israel, Iran’s regional competitors (particularly Saudi Arabia), and the political right in the United States, seek to rein in Iran’s nuclear activities so that civil capacity cannot be swiftly weaponized.
In exchange for inspection and monitoring of nuclear sites, the international economic sanctions imposed years ago on Iran will be lifted.
This is a significant moment in the nuclear age.
Since 1945, the terrifying destructive force of nuclear weapons has encouraged political leaders to search for ways to control them.
Not long after the destruction of Hiroshima, President Harry S. Truman, together with the Canadian and UK prime ministers, proposed the first non-proliferation plan; all nuclear weapons would be eliminated, and nuclear technology for peaceful purposes would be shared and overseen by a United Nations agency.
Truman’s initiative subsequently went further, covering most of the non-proliferation issues that we still discuss today.
But the proposals ran into outright opposition from Joseph Stalin, who would accept no limit to the Soviet Union’s ability to develop its own nuclear weapons.
So the nuclear arms race began, and in 1960 President John F. Kennedy warned that there would be 15, 20, or 25 nuclear states by the mid-1960s.
“I ask you,” he said in 1963, “to stop and think for a moment what it would mean to have nuclear weapons in so many hands, in the hands of countries large and small, stable and unstable, responsible and irresponsible, scattered throughout the world.”
Two developments averted the nightmare of reckless nuclear proliferation.
First, several countries capable of developing nuclear weapons concluded – in some cases, even after launching programs – that to do so would not increase their security.
To their credit, South Africa and a number of Latin American countries took this route.
Second, self-denial was greatly reinforced by the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), negotiated after the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis and administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Since entering into force in 1968, the NPT has been central to holding the line on the spread of nuclear weapons.
Nowadays, apart from the original nuclear powers – the US, the UK, France, and Russia – the only other countries with these weapons are China, Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea.
The Iran negotiations were vital to ensuring the integrity of the system.
The danger, of course, was that Iran would move from developing civil nuclear power to making its own weapons.
This would inevitably have caused other countries in the region, probably beginning with Saudi Arabia, to go the same way.
There is an important lesson to be learned from more than a decade of negotiation with Iran.
Iran’s current president, Hassan Rouhani, was his country’s chief nuclear negotiator from 2003 to 2005.
Iran’s president at this time was the scholarly moderate Mohammed Khatami, with whom I at one time attempted to negotiate a trade and cooperation agreement on behalf of the European Union.
Progress was stopped by disagreement over nuclear matters.
Khatami’s attempts to open a dialogue with the West fell on stony ground in President George W. Bush’s Washington, and eventually he was replaced by the populist hardliner Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
But in Rouhani’s discussions on proliferation back then, Iran had offered the three EU countries with which it had begun negotiations a reasonable compromise: Iran would maintain a civil but not a military nuclear capacity.
This would have capped the number of centrifuges at a low level, kept enrichment below the possibility of weaponization, and converted enriched uranium into benign forms of nuclear fuel.
The British representative to the IAEA at this time, Ambassador Peter Jenkins, has said publicly that the negotiators from the EU were impressed by the Iranian offer.
But the Bush administration pressured the UK government to veto a deal along these lines, arguing that more concessions could be extracted from the Iranians if they were squeezed harder and threatened with tougher sanctions and even a military response.
We know how the Bush strategy turned out.
The talks collapsed: no compromise, no agreement.
Today, a deal has been concluded; but it is less good than the deal that could have been reached a decade ago – a point worth keeping in mind as the likes of former Vice Present Dick Cheney and Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu start hollering from the sidelines.
As it is, not only will an agreement add cement to the NPT; it could also open the way to the sort of understanding with Iran that is essential to any broad diplomatic moves to control and halt the violence sweeping across western Asia.
The Future of the Iran Nuclear Deal
NEW YORK – “There’s many a slip twixt the cup and the lip,” goes the old English proverb.
Something seemingly resolved and certain in fact is neither.
If no such expression exists in Farsi, I predict one soon will.
The reason, of course, is the “Parameters for a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action Regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s Nuclear Program,” the framework just adopted by Iran and the P5+1 (the UN Security Council’s five permanent members – China, Britain, France, Russia, and the United States – plus Germany).
The agreement constitutes an important political and diplomatic milestone, and it contains more detail and is broader in scope than many anticipated.
But, for all that, the text leaves unanswered at least as many questions as it resolves.
In reality – and as the coming weeks, months, and years will demonstrate – major issues have yet to be settled.
It is closer to the truth to say the real debate about the Iran nuclear accord is just beginning.
The framework places significant limits on Iran’s nuclear program, including the number and type of centrifuges, the sort of reactors, and the amount and quality of enriched uranium that the country may possess.
Standards are set for the inspections needed to provide confidence that Iran is fulfilling its obligations. And provision is made for easing economic sanctions once Iran has verifiably met its commitments.
The bottom line is that the agreement will provide an estimated one-year warning from the moment that Iran might decide to build one or more nuclear weapons to the point at which it could achieve that goal.
This assessment assumes that the monitoring called for in the accord will detect any Iranian non-compliance early enough to enable a coordinated international response, particularly the reintroduction of sanctions, before Iran could acquire nuclear weapons.
There are no less than five reasons not to assume the deal will enter into force or have the desired impact.
The first involves the next 90 days.
What was announced was an interim framework; a formal, comprehensive accord is supposed to be completed by the end of June.
In the meantime, there could easily be changes of heart and mind as those who negotiated the interim deal return home and face criticism from their governments and publics over its terms.
Already, significant differences are emerging in how the US and Iranian sides are representing what was negotiated.
A second concern stems from the specific issues that remain to be resolved.
The most difficult might be the timing of when various economic sanctions are to be removed – the issue of greatest concern to Iran.
But these same sanctions are also the source of the greatest leverage over Iranian behavior, which means that many in the US and Europe will want them to remain in place until Iran has fully met its critical obligations.
A third source of doubt is whether the various parties will approve any long-term pact.
The two main uncertainties involve Iran and the US.
So-called hardliners in Iran will undoubtedly object to an agreement with the “Great Satan” that places limits on their country’s nuclear ambitions.
But there is also a widespread desire among Iranians to get out from under economic sanctions, and Iran will approve a pact if Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei favors it, which he presumably does.
The uncertainties are greater in the US.
President Barack Obama must contend with a far more complex political environment, beginning with the US Congress.
There is widespread and understandable concern about leaving Iran with any nuclear capabilities, about the adequacy of provisions for monitoring and inspection, and about what will happen in ten or 15 or 25 years when various limits on Iran expire.
Persuading Congress to approve the final pact and/or lift sanctions is anything but assured.
This question of gaining political approval is closely tied to a fourth area of concern: how any final agreement is implemented.
The history of arms control suggests there will be occasions when Iran, which has a record of withholding relevant information from UN weapons inspectors, is suspected of not living up to the letter, much less the spirit, of what was negotiated.
Agreement is needed on the process for judging Iranian behavior and for determining appropriate responses.
The fifth concern stems not so much from the accord as from everything else about Iran’s foreign and defense policies.
The agreement is only about Iran’s nuclear activities.
It says nothing about Iran’s missile programs or support for terrorists and proxies, much less about what it is doing in Syria or Iraq or Yemen or anywhere else in the turbulent Middle East, or about human rights at home.
Iran is a would-be imperial power that seeks regional primacy.
Even a nuclear agreement that is signed and implemented will not affect this reality and might even make it worse, as Iran could well emerge with its reputation enhanced and a long-term option to build nuclear weapons intact.
Obama is right: A nuclear agreement of the sort outlined is preferable to Iran possessing nuclear weapons or going to war to prevent that outcome.
But any agreement must also generate widespread confidence in the US and the region that it will place a meaningful ceiling on Iran’s nuclear program, and that any cheating will be discovered early and dealt with firmly.
This will not be easy; indeed, it is no exaggeration to predict that the effort to generate such confidence may well prove as demanding as the negotiations themselves.
Where Obama Went Wrong on Iran
JERUSALEM – The pros and cons of the accord with Iran over its nuclear program will be debated extensively over the next two months, in the run-up to a vote on the deal by the US Congress.
But the so-called Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will be judged by its implementation, which will take years.
Nonetheless, two things are already clear.
First, the JCPOA’s weakest provisions – both cumbersome and open to competing interpretations – are those covering compliance and verification.
So some skepticism about implementation is in order.
Second, and more immediately, the very achievement of an agreement between Iran and the five permanent members of the UN Security Council plus Germany (the P5+1) has already begun to affect the regional balance of power.
Indeed, it is legitimate to ask whether Western (and especially US) negotiators were aware of the geopolitical implications of the deal.
Even at this early stage, it is apparent that the agreement has empowered Iran regionally.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s minority Alawite regime lavished praise on the agreement, rightly recognizing that enhanced international legitimacy and financial resources will enable Shia Iran to provide greater backing.
Assad’s other major regional ally, Lebanon’s Hezbollah (which the US classifies as a terrorist organization) also supports the deal.
Vladimir Putin’s Russia is also happy to have received US assistance, however indirectly, in strengthening Assad’s hold on power.
Understandably, Iran’s empowerment has made America’s closest allies in the region extremely uncomfortable.
In their different ways, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and some of the smaller, more vulnerable Gulf states have let their unease be known.
Turkey – an uncertain US ally nowadays, yet still a NATO member – may be too preoccupied with domestic political turmoil to respond in detail.
But President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan certainly is skeptical of an agreement that Obama describes in almost messianic terms.
The Egyptian leadership, also fighting internal challenges, is similarly unhappy with the JCPOA.
And, whether Israel benefits or loses, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu is sure to come out ahead.
A crafty fear monger, he will be able to present the agreement as further proof of Israel’s isolation and abandonment by the world, enabling him to leverage public anxiety into enhanced political support for his government.
Netanyahu may even succeed in bringing Yitzhak Herzog’s Zionist Union into his government, thereby shoring up his shaky coalition.
His comparison of the Iranian threat to the Holocaust may be absurd and obscene, but it is politically effective.
Nothing helps the Israeli right more than heightening the electorate’s sense of being under siege.
Obama’s defense of the JCPOA may be helping Netanyahu in this regard, thanks to some historical claims that may be even more dubious than his arguments regarding Iran’s nuclear policies.
In some of his statements, and in his recent interview with Thomas Friedman of the New York Times, Obama compared the deal with Iran to Richard Nixon’s opening to China in 1972.
This is a savvy and enticing claim. But it is also a misleading one.
Nixon’s secretary of state, Henry Kissinger, was pursuing a brilliant strategy to weaken Communism by exploiting the Sino-Soviet split.
Emulating the French statesman Cardinal Richelieu, Kissinger helped the weaker power against the stronger one.
No such overarching strategy underlies Obama’s policy, even if it may be justified on the more limited grounds of nuclear non-proliferation.
In this interview with Friedman, Obama also maintained that one should try to understand Iranian history and culture.
This sounds unexceptional, even innocuous, until one realizes what Obama means.
“The fact is that we had some involvement in overthrowing a democratically elected regime in Iran,” he says, referring to the 1953 coup that toppled Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh’s government.
Moreover, the US “had in the past supported Saddam Hussein when he used chemical weapons against Iran.”
Therefore, according to Obama, the Iranians have “their own security concerns and their own narratives.”
This is an extraordinarily ahistorical claim.
Similarly, one could claim that Germany had its own “security concerns and narratives” during the 1938 Munich crisis.
Is Obama suggesting that the US should have supported Mosaddegh in the midst of the Cold War, or tilted toward Iran during the Iran-Iraq War in the 1980s?
All of this may say something essential about Obama’s approach to the nuclear deal with Iran.
Above all, while his negotiators’ unremitting focus on the issues before them – centrifuges, enrichment levels, the fate of spent fuel, and so on – undoubtedly permitted the deal to be done, the “success” of this approach has left the future of the region blurrier than ever.
Diplomacy’s Long-Distance Race
MADRID ‒ The successful outcome of the negotiations on Iran’s nuclear program provides a splendid validation for those who put their faith in diplomacy.
The agreement – concluded after more than a decade of talks – highlights the value of persistence in addressing impasses that seem insurmountable, and provides hope for the many other initiatives that will be needed to bring lasting peace to the Middle East.
The European Union, which initiated the talks, should be proud of its effort.
And the United States’ role was remarkable, from Secretary of State John Kerry’s incessant work, even on crutches, to end the 35-year standoff between his country and Iran, to President Barack Obama’s critical push to complete the negotiations.
Likewise, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani should be commended for his determination to complete the undertaking he began more than a decade ago, when he served as Secretary of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council.
Rouhani and I met in 2003, sitting across from each other at the first nuclear talks, when our negotiating team was made up of only Europeans.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s election as President of Iran in 2005 derailed those talks and ultimately led to the imposition of sanctions.
But I had seen how determined Rouhani was to reach an agreement.
And, indeed, when Rouhani succeeded Ahmadinejad in 2013, a door opened.
Rouhani invited me to his inauguration in August 2013.
During that visit, I was able to attend meetings with him and other top Iranian leaders, including Mohammad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister and, later, its chief negotiator in the negotiations in Vienna.
I quickly saw that with these men at Iran’s helm, an agreement would be possible.
The agreement – known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) – limits Iran’s nuclear program to peaceful purposes in exchange for lifting all international sanctions on the country.
For the next 15 years, Iran will not be permitted to enrich uranium to more than 3.67% (to build a nuclear bomb requires uranium enriched to at least 85%).
Enrichment will be permitted only at the nuclear facility at Natanz – not at the subterranean Fordow installation.
And Iran will have to keep its stock of 3.67%-enriched uranium to below 300 kilograms.
Moreover, the JCPOA will oblige Iran to reduce its number of centrifuges, which are used in the enrichment process, progressively for the next ten years.
Likewise, the heavy-water reactor at Arak will have to be redesigned to produce only radioisotopes for medicinal and industrial purposes, or for research into other peaceful uses of nuclear energy, with the spent fuel it produces shipped out of the country.
Most important, Iran has committed itself to apply the Additional Protocol of the International Atomic Energy Agency, providing the organization with round-the-clock access to all components of its nuclear program for 15 years.
The IAEA will also monitor the production of centrifuges for 20 years.
The agreement was made possible by the fact that Iran’s interlocutors – the permanent members of the UN Security Council, Germany, and the EU (E3/EU+3) – were able to maintain a common position during a process that played out for more than ten years.
This was true even during the negotiating push, when a debate over the sanctions against Iran’s trade in conventional arms and ballistic missiles threatened to open a breach between the partners.
While Russia and China asserted that signing an agreement would render any kind of sanction legally unjustifiable, the US sought to allay the fears of Iran’s neighbors as much as possible.
The consensus among the negotiating partners – one of the few points of agreement regarding the Middle East among the Security Council’s permanent membership – was crucial in convincing Iran to take the negotiations seriously.
And, at a time of persistent tension between Russia and the US and Europe, which has resulted in chronic political gridlock in the Security Council, the parties’ ability to remain united justifies greater optimism about the future.
Indeed, it is worth considering whether cooperation between the permanent members of the Security Council and the EU might be useful for moving forward on other matters.
The West and Russia share an interest in stability in the Middle East, as does China, which is particularly concerned with the security of its energy supplies.
What is most needed – and most difficult to achieve – is a rapprochement between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Many of the conflicts in the Middle East have their roots in the tension between Sunni and Shia Islam.
Cooperation between Sunnis and Shias will be vital to defeat the extremism of the Islamic State, as well as to bridge gaps between combatants in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and Lebanon.
Iran must demonstrate that it is a responsible player in the region – not simply a backer of Shia power.
The reestablishment of ties between the US and Iran will, no doubt, have repercussions in Israel and Palestine.
Although the agreement with Iran objectively makes Israel safer, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu considers it a historic error.
To assuage its traditional ally’s sense of abandonment, the US, may – mistakenly – withhold support for the initiatives recognizing the State of Palestine in the coming months.
But it is essential that the EU, which finances and maintains Palestine’s provisional institutions, not relent in its determination to make them permanent.
The historic agreement with Iran is just one of many that will be required to bring peace and stability to the Middle East.
The first hurdle has been overcome.
We must now run the rest of the race.
Living With the Iran Nuclear Deal
NEW YORK – It is probable that after 60 days of intense debate in Washington, DC, and conceivably Tehran, the “Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,” signed on July 14 by Iran and the UN Security Council’s five permanent members plus Germany (the P5+1), will enter into force.
But no one should confuse this outcome with a solution to the problem of Iran’s nuclear ambitions or its contributions to the ongoing turmoil in the Middle East.
On the contrary, depending on how it is implemented and enforced, the agreement could make matters worse.
This is not to suggest the JCPOA makes no contribution.
It places a ceiling for the next decade on the quantity and quality of centrifuges Iran is allowed to operate and allows the country to possess only a small amount of low-enriched uranium for the next 15 years.
The agreement also establishes, in US President Barack Obama’s words, a “where necessary, when necessary” inspections mechanism that has the potential to verify whether Iran is meeting these and other commitments.
The net result is that the accord should lengthen the period it would take Iran to produce one or more nuclear weapons from several months to as much as a year, making it more likely that such an effort would be discovered in time.
The prospect that the JCPOA could keep Iran without nuclear weapons for 15 years is its main attraction.
Sanctions alone could not have accomplished this, and using military force would have entailed considerable risk with uncertain results.
On the other hand (there always is another hand in diplomacy), the agreement permits Iran to keep far more nuclear-related capacity than it would need if it were interested only in civil research and in demonstrating a symbolic ability to enrich uranium.
The agreement also provides Iran with extensive relief from economic sanctions, which will fuel the regime’s ability to support dangerous proxies throughout the Middle East, back a sectarian government in Baghdad, and prop up Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
Moreover, the accord does not rule out all nuclear-related research and does not constrain work on missiles.
Sales of ballistic missiles and missile parts to Iran are banned for no more than eight years.
Sales of conventional arms to Iran are prohibited for no more than five years.
There is also the danger that Iran will fail to comply with parts of the agreement and undertake prohibited work.
Given Iran’s record, this has understandably been the focus of much concern and criticism regarding the pact.
What matters is that non-compliance be met with renewed sanctions and, if needed, military force.
A bigger problem has received much less attention: the risk of what will happen if Iran does comply with the agreement.
Even without violating the accord, Iran can position itself to break out of nuclear constraints when the agreement’s critical provisions expire.
At that point, there will be little to hold it back except the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a voluntary agreement that does not include penalties for non-compliance.
It is important that the United States (ideally, joined by other countries) let Iran know that any action to put itself in a position to field nuclear weapons after 15 years, though not explicitly precluded by the accord, will not be tolerated.
Harsh sanctions should be reintroduced at the first sign that Iran is preparing a post-JCPOA breakout; this, too, is not precluded by the accord.
Iran should likewise be informed that the US and its allies would undertake a preventive military strike if it appeared to be attempting to present the world with a fait accompli.
The world erred in allowing North Korea to pass the nuclear-weapons threshold; it should not make the same mistake again.
In the meantime, a major effort must be launched to assuage the concerns of Iran’s neighbors, several of which will be tempted to hedge their bets against Iran’s potential breakout in 15 years by pursuing nuclear programs of their own.
The Middle East is already nightmarish enough without the added risks posed by a number of would-be nuclear powers.
Obama’s claim that the agreement has “stopped the spread of nuclear weapons in this region” is premature, at best.
It will also be essential to rebuild strategic trust between the US and Israel; indeed, this will need to be a high priority for Obama’s successor.
And the US should push back as warranted against Iran’s foreign policy or treatment of its own people.
None of this rules out selective cooperation with Iran, be it in Afghanistan, Syria, or Iraq, if interests overlap.
But here, too, realism should prevail.
The notion that the nuclear agreement will lead Iran to moderate its radicalism and rein in its strategic ambitions should not be anyone’s baseline scenario.
In fact, the emergence of an ever more capable Iran, not a transformed one, is likely to be one of the main challenges confronting the Middle East, if not the world, in the coming years.
Iran in the Middle
PARIS – International negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program have been taking place, in one form or another, for more than a decade.
So it is not surprising that the deadline for a final deal has been extended once again.
Iran and its interlocutors – the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany (the P5+1) – now have until the end of June to reach an accord.
It is a dispiriting development, and it would be easy to say that the process seems doomed to fail.
But there is reason for hope.
In the ongoing round of negotiations, the two key players, Iran and the United States, have seemed willing – if not desperate – to bring the talks to a successful conclusion.