For one thing, this time was different with regard to fiscal behavior, as Luis Felipe Céspedes and I show in a recent paper.
Commodity-rich governments did not spend the entire windfall and more, as they had done during earlier commodity booms.
So government debt and the resulting financial vulnerability are not as high as they were in the past.
These countries’ private sectors have borrowed significantly; but, as the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman has been pointing out, leverage and dollar debt are lower (as a share of national income) than they were at the outset of the 1990’s Asian crisis – and at the start of the 1980’s Latin American crisis, for that matter.
So, in my view, the question is not whether these countries’ financial sectors will explode, but whether their growth trajectories will implode.
When commodity prices are sky-high and money is cheap and plentiful, economic growth is almost inevitable.
In Latin America over the last decade, countries with sound macroeconomic policy frameworks, like Colombia, Peru, and Chile, grew rapidly.
But so did Argentina, a country whose government seems to start every day wondering what more it can do to weaken economic institutions and damage long-term growth prospects.
Now that nirvana is over, where will growth come from?
To answer that question, it helps to note, as Harvard University’s Ricardo Hausmann has done recently, that some of the emerging economies’ recent growth was illusory.
Wall Street became enamored with the rapidly rising dollar value of these countries’ national income, but that rise had more to do with strong commodity prices and appreciating exchange rates (which raised the value of their output when measured in dollars) than with sharp increases in actual output volumes.
During the boom years, structural transformation in many emerging economies, particularly in Latin America, was limited.
Countries like Ireland, Finland, and Singapore – and also South Korea, Malaysia, and Indonesia – export different goods (and to different markets) than they did a generation ago.
By contrast, Chile’s export basket is pretty much the same as it was in 1980.
There is nothing wrong with exporting copper, wine, fruit, and forest products.
But economic history suggests that countries seldom – if ever – get rich by doing just that.
Commodity-rich advanced economies like Canada, Norway, or Australia export lots of natural resources, of course, but they also export many other goods and services.
That is not true of Chile, Peru, or Colombia – or even of Brazil, with its much larger population and more developed industrial base.
To make matters worse, unlike their Asian counterparts, Latin America’s economies are not integrated into regional and global value chains.
A producer in Indonesia, Malaysia, or the Philippines can easily take advantage of the local currency’s depreciation to sell more electronic components to an assembly plant in China with which it has a long-standing and well-developed supply relationship.
A business in Concepción, Arequipa, or Medellín, by contrast, must seek new customers in new countries, which takes time and money – and may not succeed.
Latin American governments could have used the opportunities afforded by the global commodity and liquidity booms to diversify their economies, working with local business communities to move into new products and sectors.
They did not.
In some of these countries, conservative governments viewed industrial promotion as some dirigiste relic from the past, and avoided it.
In others – Brazil comes to mind – left-leaning governments practiced industrial promotion in such a heavy-handed and erratic way that they ended up weakening whatever it was they wanted to promote.
The time has come to pay for these mistakes.
“Nirvana” is defined as the state of freedom from suffering.
For emerging markets, that state is over; but, in some cases, their citizens – still feeling rich from cheap money and high export prices – have no inkling of the suffering that may be upon them.
For the sake of political stability, governments would be well advised to inform them.
The Abuse of History and the Iranian Bomb
TEL AVIV – Saturated with their often tragic history, Jews tend to pay great reverence to the past.
But the past, especially when not handled with care, can be the enemy of the future and distort our reading of the challenges of the present.
This is certainly the case with the analogy that Israeli leaders insist on drawing between the destruction of European Jewry in the Holocaust and the threat posed to the Jewish state by a nuclear-armed Iran.
Holocaust Remembrance Day in Jerusalem this year again saw Israeli leaders competing with each other in feeding the gloom of the national psyche and public hysteria surrounding Iran’s intentions.
President Shimon Peres, who, unlike Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, is skeptical of the utility of an attack on Iran’s nuclear installations, spoke of the “threat of extermination” facing Israel.
Even Defense Minister Ehud Barak, usually a coolly rational thinker, chose Yad Mordechai, a Kibbutz named after Mordechai Anilewitz, the leader of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, to alert world opinion against “Holocaust deniers, first and foremost the Iranian president, who calls for the destruction of the Jewish people.”
Netanyahu, not surprisingly, was especially outspoken.
To him, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is another Hitler, and the world is now facing the same challenges that it faced on the eve of Hitler’s rise to power.
Iran’s race to develop nuclear weapons, Netanyahu warned, can be understood only in the context of its leaders’ “repeated vows to wipe the Jewish state off the face of the earth.”
Supposedly, now, as then, the world is criminally indifferent.
Netanyahu’s Holocaust analogy would have been a mere intellectual curiosity if he were not the person who would be responsible for taking the decision about whether to attack Iran’s nuclear installations and thus drive the Middle East into an apocalyptic confrontation.
The career of his political mentor, Menachem Begin, demonstrated that distorted analogies between past and present can inspire irresponsible policies.
In his disastrous 1982 invasion of Lebanon, Begin perceived himself as a God-sent vindicator of the legacy of the Holocaust.
He chose to portray what was a cynical alliance of convenience between Israel and the Christian Phalange as a lesson to humanity and a rebuke of that hypocritical Christian Europe which had betrayed the Jews during the Holocaust.
He would show them how the Jewish state, created by Holocaust survivors and now led by one, would come to the rescue of a Christian minority threatened with destruction.
To Begin, Arafat in Beirut was Hitler in his Berlin bunker.
Indeed, Abba Eban ridiculed Begin for behaving “as if Israel were a kind of disarmed Costa Rica and the PLO was Napoleon Bonaparte, Alexander the Great, and Attila the Hun all wrapped into one.”
Begin was the best proof that Israel’s critics needed that the Zionist revolution, although it created a state out of the ashes of the Holocaust, had failed to eradicate the collective self-image of the Jew and the Israeli as victim.
Netanyahu seals the image of Israel as a nation totally incapable of breaking out of the prison of its past.
Israel is not wrong to cast serious doubts on the efficacy of the measures that the United States pretends to take in the hope of curtailing Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Neither the planned sanctions nor the recently published US Nuclear Posture Review, a far less revolutionary document than expected, will curb Iran’s nuclear appetite.
Instead of believing in its capacity to stop Iran’s nuclear program, the world is preparing to live with a nuclear-armed Iran.
But this would not be Israel’s problem alone.
Such a resounding collapse of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty would pose a formidable challenge to the world community, particularly to the Middle East.
Iran’s viciously anti-Semitic rhetoric is a transparent attempt to deceive its terrified Arab neighbors by presenting its military might as the spearhead of an all-Muslim confrontation with Israel.
In fact, a nuclear Iran would launch the entire region into nuclear anarchy.
Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Turkey would all seek their own “Sunni” bomb to counter the threat of a Shia nuclear empire on their doorsteps.
When he did not feel the need to exploit the solemnity of Holocaust remembrance ceremonies, Barak conveyed the right message to the rising Iranian power.
A year ago, knowing full well that Iran was irreversibly on its way to getting the bomb, he soberly challenged Netanuyahu’s dangerous distortion of history.
“Israel is not European Jewry,” Barak said at the time.
“We are a strong country to which the whole world attributes nuclear capabilities, and in regional terms we are a superpower.”
He then expressed his dislike for comparing the Iranian threat to the Holocaust, “because it cheapens the Holocaust and stretches current challenges beyond their proper place.
There is none that will dare to destroy Israel.”
History has not come full circle.
Israel needs to decide whether it is a regional superpower or a Jewish ghetto waiting for an imminent pogrom to begin.
History in the hands of manipulative politicians and incorrigible ideologues can be either a dangerously inebriating weapon to mobilize the masses, or, as James Joyce put it in Ulysses, “a nightmare” from which it is difficult to wake.
By obsessively filtering their conflict through the nightmare of the Holocaust and the Nakbah, Israelis and Palestinians have doomed the chances of a peaceful settlement of their dispute.
Viewing the current conflict between such formidable military powers as Israel and Iran through a similar lens can only breed untold catastrophe.
A Year of Reckoning for France and Europe
PARIS – France is at a crossroads.
It has numerous valuable assets, but it cannot postpone long-overdue reforms, or else it will become increasingly irrelevant in a fiercely competitive global economy.
This is the economic challenge that President François Hollande, Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault, and all of us in the French government must confront.
We face a historic responsibility: we need to modernize the French economy, and introduce in a few months a decade’s worth of reforms to generate stronger, more inclusive growth, create more jobs, and shrink public deficits.
This is precisely what the government has been doing since the election earlier this year; indeed, no French government has ever carried out so many reforms in such a short period of time.
France’s economic performance has been lackluster during the past ten years, particularly with respect to competitiveness, debt sustainability, public spending, and the labor market.
Our responsibility is to ensure that we are doing better in each of these areas by 2017, when the current electoral term expires.
To meet this challenge, we have designed an economic strategy that rests on three pillars: Europe, fiscal consolidation, and competitiveness.
Europe is our number one priority: stabilizing the eurozone and resolving its current crisis are essential to stability and economic recovery in France.
Hollande’s government insists that we will be successful only if three conditions are met.
First, Europe should adopt a balanced approach to fiscal consolidation – a necessary process, but self-defeating when carried out too quickly.
We must then break the perverse feedback loop between banking risk and sovereign risk that is at the heart of the euro crisis.
This requires implementing a fully-fledged banking union – with a pan-European supervisor and a strong regime for banking resolution and deposit insurance – as soon as possible.
Finally, in the medium to long term, we must complete the eurozone integration process and move forward on solidarity and risk-sharing – for example, by establishing a eurozone-specific budget.
In late November, the eurozone finally agreed on a partial rescheduling of Greece’s debt to alleviate the country’s financial burden.
It was a critical step toward stabilization, but more must be done.
In 2013, we will have to turn our gaze to other countries (such as Cyprus and Spain), and ensure that we maintain the momentum needed to build a banking union.
Fiscal consolidation is the second pillar of France’s economic strategy.
France has not adopted a balanced budget in the last 30 years, and its public debt reached an unsustainable €1.7 trillion ($2.2 trillion) in 2011.
Our duty is to rise to the occasion and reverse the tide.
France is fully committed to a fiscal-consolidation effort that returns it to a balanced budget by 2017.
This is not just a political commitment; we have enshrined France’s fiscal path in a law adopted in November.
The coming year will be a milestone on this path: France is targeting a 3%-of-GDP budget deficit in 2013, down from 5.2% in 2011 and 4.5% in 2012, and a lower debt/GDP ratio from 2014 onward.
This is an ambitious commitment, and one that we intend to meet without resorting to an old-fashioned “tax and spend” fiscal policy: over the next five years, spending cuts will be larger than tax increases, reaching €60 billion over five years.
Obviously we will have to modernize France’s administration to achieve this, looking to other countries for best practices.
But the challenge for the coming five years will be to adapt and upgrade our institutions without undermining the quality of public services, which is part and parcel of French competitiveness.
Finally, we have committed ourselves to measures aimed at addressing France’s weakened competitiveness, via a “National Pact for Growth, Competitiveness, and Employment,” which includes a €20 billion cut in labor costs for employers, to be phased in over three years.
A new corporate-tax credit will cut payroll taxes by 6% for all wages below 2.5 times the minimum wage – a step that will benefit more than 80% of all salaried workers.
And, because expectations for France’s competitiveness agenda are high, we will ensure swift implementation of the National Pact so that it can start producing results as soon as 2013.
We have designed the corporate-tax credit to maximize its positive impact on the economy: labor costs will fall immediately without depressing aggregate demand in 2013, because the spending cuts (€10 billion) and household tax increases that will fund the credit will begin only in 2014.
The Pact also improves the business environment and creates mechanisms, such as the extension of a research tax rebate, designed to boost innovation.
Last but not least, we have launched a major labor-market reform that will establish our own version of northern Europe’s “flexicurity” model.
Firms need more flexibility to adjust their payrolls in adverse economic conditions; and workers need more security, provided by better training and active labor-market policies.
We are committed to reforming the French economy.
But we are committed to doing so while remaining true to our political convictions, and without jeopardizing what makes France both strong and special: a highly redistributive social model.
Europe is and will be part of the solution, if we can agree that more solidarity is the next step in our shared journey.
Europe needs more solidarity not only to overcome the crisis and complete the eurozone integration process, but also to bridge the widening divide between Europe and its peoples.
I look forward to 2013 as a year of progress on our national and European agendas alike.
They are, after all, two sides of the same coin.
The Accidental Empire
NEW YORK – It is now clear that the main cause of the euro crisis is the member states’ surrender of their right to print money to the European Central Bank.
They did not understand just what that surrender entailed – and neither did the European authorities.
When the euro was introduced, regulators allowed banks to buy unlimited amounts of government bonds without setting aside any equity capital, and the ECB discounted all eurozone government bonds on equal terms.
Commercial banks found it advantageous to accumulate weaker countries’ bonds to earn a few extra basis points, which caused interest rates to converge across the eurozone.
Germany, struggling with the burdens of reunification, undertook structural reforms and became more competitive.
Other countries enjoyed housing and consumption booms on the back of cheap credit, making them less competitive.
Then came the crash of 2008.
Governments had to bail out their banks.
Some of them found themselves in the position of a developing country that had become heavily indebted in a currency that it did not control.
Reflecting the divergence in economic performance, Europe became divided into creditor and debtor countries.
When financial markets discovered that supposedly riskless government bonds might be forced into default, they raised risk premiums dramatically.
This rendered potentially insolvent commercial banks, whose balance sheets were loaded with such bonds, giving rise to Europe’s twin sovereign-debt and banking crisis.
The eurozone is now replicating how the global financial system dealt with such crises in 1982 and again in 1997.
In both cases, the international authorities inflicted hardship on the periphery in order to protect the center; now Germany is unknowingly playing the same role.
The details differ, but the idea is the same: creditors are shifting the entire burden of adjustment onto debtors, while the “center” avoids its own responsibility for the imbalances.
Interestingly, the terms “center” and “periphery” have crept into usage almost unnoticed.
Yet, in the euro crisis, the center’s responsibility is even greater than it was in 1982 or 1997: it designed a flawed currency system and failed to correct the defects.
In the 1980’s, Latin America suffered a lost decade; a similar fate now awaits Europe.
At the onset of the crisis, a breakup of the euro was inconceivable: the assets and liabilities denominated in a common currency were so intermingled that a breakup would have led to an uncontrollable meltdown.
But, as the crisis has progressed, the financial system has become increasingly reordered along national lines.
This trend has gathered momentum in recent months.
The ECB’s long-term refinancing operation enabled Spanish and Italian banks to buy their own countries’ bonds and earn a large spread.
Simultaneously, banks gave preference to shedding assets outside their national borders, and risk managers try to match assets and liabilities at home, rather than within the eurozone as a whole.
If this continued for a few years, a euro breakup would become possible without a meltdown, but it would leave the creditor countries with large claims against debtor countries, which would be difficult to collect.
In addition to intergovernmental transfers and guarantees, the Bundesbank’s claims against peripheral countries’ central banks within the Target2 clearing system totaled €644 billion ($804 billion) on April 30, and the amount is growing exponentially, owing to capital flight.
So the crisis keeps growing.
Tensions in financial markets have hit new highs.
Most telling is that Britain, which retained control of its currency, enjoys the lowest yields in its history, while the risk premium on Spanish bonds is at a new high.
The real economy of the eurozone is declining, while Germany is booming.
This means that the divergence is widening.
The political and social dynamics are also working toward disintegration.
Public opinion, as expressed in recent election results, is increasingly opposed to austerity, and this trend is likely to continue until the policy is reversed.
Something has to give.
In my judgment, the authorities have a three-month window during which they could still correct their mistakes and reverse current trends.
That would require some extraordinary policy measures to return conditions closer to normal, and they must conform to existing treaties, which could then be revised in a calmer atmosphere to prevent recurrence of imbalances.
It is difficult, but not impossible, to identify some extraordinary measures that would meet these tough requirements.
They would have to tackle the banking and the sovereign-debt problems simultaneously, without neglecting to reduce divergences in competitiveness.
The eurozone needs a banking union: a European deposit-insurance scheme in order to stem capital flight, a European source for financing bank recapitalization, and eurozone-wide supervision and regulation.
The heavily indebted countries need relief on their financing costs.
There are various ways to provide it, but they all require Germany’s active support.
That is where the blockage is.
German authorities are working feverishly to come up with a set of proposals in time for the European Union summit at the end of June, but all signs suggest that they will offer only the minimum on which the various parties can agree – implying, once again, only temporary relief.
But we are at an inflection point.
The Greek crisis is liable to come to a climax in the fall, even if the election produces a government that is willing to abide by Greece’s current agreement with its creditors.
By that time, the German economy will also be weakening, so that Chancellor Angela Merkel will find it even more difficult than today to persuade the German public to accept additional European responsibilities.
Barring an accident like the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, Germany is likely to do enough to hold the euro together, but the EU will become something very different from the open society that once fired people’s imagination.
The division between debtor and creditor countries will become permanent, with Germany dominating and the periphery becoming a depressed hinterland.
This will inevitably arouse suspicion about Germany’s role in Europe – but any comparison with Germany's past is quite inappropriate.
The current situation is due not to a deliberate plan, but to the lack of one.
It is a tragedy of policy errors.
Germany is a well-functioning democracy with an overwhelming majority for an open society.
When the German people become aware of the consequences –&nbsp;one hopes not too late – they will want to correct the defects in the euro's design.
It is clear what is needed: a European fiscal authority that is able and willing to reduce the debt burden of the periphery, as well as a banking union.
Debt relief could take various forms other than Eurobonds, and would be conditional on debtors abiding by the fiscal compact.
Withdrawing all or part of the relief in case of nonperformance would be a powerful protection against moral hazard.
It is up to Germany to live up to the leadership responsibilities thrust upon it by its own success.
The Achievement Myth
NEW YORK – In late September, the American press was filled with data on women’s happiness.
Marcus Buckingham, a business consultant, made the case that the data showed that women have become less happy over the past 40 years.
Blogs, newsmagazines, and daytime talk shows agonized over the notion that feminism – all that freedom, all those choices – was actually making women sadder.
In fact, the women had told the researchers whom Buckingham cited that they were ‘not satisfied’ with many areas of their lives.
If Western women have learned anything in the past 40 years, it is how to be unsatisfied with the status quo – an important insight for the rest of the world, as we seek to export Western-style feminism.
There is truth, for good and for ill, to the idea that Western-style “consciousness-raising” is also about teaching women how to be dissatisfied.
The contemporary Western women’s movement announced itself in 1963, with Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique and that book’s permission to complain – to identify in many ways “the problem that has no name.”
Waves of discourse followed, helping Western women see what was “not enough” in many aspects of their lives, such as the low-paying jobs in which men took credit for their work – and pinched their bottoms.
The movement also raised the bar sexually: Shere Hite let women know in 1973 that if they could not reach orgasm through intercourse alone, they weren’t aberrant – they could ask for more and subtler sexual attention.
Do you want to run your own business?
Go, girl!
Do you dream of equal parenting, or of being a Supreme Court Justice?
Right on, sister!
In every area of their lives, those who articulated Western feminism invited women to demand more.
But the downside of this aspirational language and philosophy can be a perpetual, personal restlessness.
Many men and women in the rest of the world – especially in the developing world – observe this in us and are ambivalent about it.
Indeed, the definition of Western feminism as “always more” has led to a paradox.
Our girls and young women are unable to relax.
New data in the West reveal that we have not necessarily raised a generation of daughters who are exuding self-respect and self-esteem.
We are raising a generation of girls who are extremely hard on themselves – who set their own personal standards incredibly, even punishingly high – and who don’t give themselves a chance to rest and think, “that’s enough.”
What if we in the West, by letting feminism be defined as always doing more, doing it better, and outdoing others, have failed to give our daughters a definition of success that sometimes simply lets them be?
Unfortunately for us in the West, Second Wave feminism was articulated by ambitious, highly educated women who went to elite colleges and viewed professional accomplishment as the apex of overall accomplishment.
Not much space was given to other forms of achievement, such as caring for elderly parents, being a nurturing member of the community, or – how very un-Western! – attaining a certain inner wisdom, insight, or peace.
What if we have externalized the feminist ideal primarily as a set of accomplishments and rigors, rather than embracing it as an expansion of all kinds of freedom – which can also sometimes include freedom from eternal aspiration?
The redefinition of feminism as “always seeking more” fulfills the requirements of consumer capitalism and a post-industrial work ethic.
It is not necessarily a victory for women – or men – that, 40 years on, professional women are just as exhausted as professional men traditionally have been.
When children of working mothers were asked in one recent survey what they wanted to change in their life situation, they did not say that they wanted to spend more time with their mothers. They said that they wished their mothers could be less exhausted and stressed.
My aunt Anasuya, who is one of my most important role models, delayed conventionally defined achievements in the professional world as she focused on raising a family.
Now, with her children grown, she has gone off to Tibet for months to realize her dream of becoming a practitioner of Tibetan medicine.
Feminism certainly opened the way for her to have a life of choices, and now to reach for this unusual goal.
But I don’t know that feminism made space explicitly to honor what I admire most about her: her open door.
She is continually taking in students who need a home, or refugee single mothers in economic need, or simply making one more place at the table for teenagers whose parents are struggling with issues of their own.
In terms of the way she amplifies the lives of others, hers is one of the most successful “careers” I know – and one pursued while exuding calm, serenity, and peace.
Should Western feminism deepen its definition of a successful woman’s life, so that more than credentials can demonstrate well-made choices?
I believe the time is right to do so.
As markets collapse, unemployment skyrockets, and the foundations of our institutions shift in seismic ways, this could be a moment of great opportunity for women and those for whom they care.
Perhaps seeing how futile it is to rest one’s sense of self on externalized, professionalized achievement is a wake-up call – and a first step to a deeper freedom, and an even deeper sense of feminine destiny.
The Afghan Endgame Mirage
STOCKHOLM – On a recent visit to Afghanistan and Pakistan, I could not fail to notice the increasingly frequent international calls for an “endgame” in Afghanistan.
But an endgame for that country is a dangerous illusion: the game will not end, and neither will history.
The only thing that could come to an end is the world’s attention and engagement in Afghanistan, which could well lead to catastrophic consequences.
Much international focus is now on the year 2014, the target date for completion of the gradual transfer of responsibility for security from international forces to the Afghan government.
This process is not without challenges, but there is no reason to believe that it could not be finalized more or less according to plan and the current timetable.
My belief is that there is another, far more critical challenge facing Afghanistan in 2014: the election of a new president.
In a system where so much power – open and hidden, constitutional and traditional – is centered around the president, the election could well turn into an all-out battle for the country’s future.
The presidential election of 2009 – in which Hamid Karzai gained a second term – was a highly contentious affair, and neither the Afghan political system nor the international community came through it with flying colors.
Together with the battle over the Taliban’s future role in the country, the struggle for power in 2014 could reanimate divisions that take the country back to the brink of a wider civil war, with the liberal technocrats of Kabul crushed between a resurgent Northern Alliance and a wider “Pashtun Pact.”
Such a scenario would, of course, spell disaster for Afghanistan.
But the implications would be far broader.
We must not ignore the grave dangers that it would pose for Pakistan, where a new round of jihadist rhetoric and mobilization could be fatal to hopes of building a stable and more secure country.
We should have learned the lesson of the 1980’s: ignorance is not bliss.
What, then, is the proper policy for the international community?
First, we must focus on what is most important – a transition to a post-Karzai system that is seen as reasonably legitimate by all parts of Afghanistan.
This is primarily a question of making the elections as free and as fair as possible, and here the United Nations’ role will be critical.
But it is also imperative to establish a wide national consensus on the rules of the game.
Karzai can leave no better legacy than an orderly transition, and has no interest in seeing all that he has achieved go up in flames.
Second, we must encourage a true regional dialogue that prevents Afghanistan from becoming a battleground for devastating proxy wars.
Here, the key will be to bridge the gulf between Pakistan’s government and the forces of northern Afghanistan.
Pakistan must do whatever is necessary to convince everyone that it will not play a hidden game with the Taliban – assuming, of course, that it has no such intention.
It is equally important that Pakistan and India engage in an open dialogue that can establish trust and transparency in their respective policies concerning Afghanistan.
Today, this dialogue hardly exists, and their mutual maneuvering, fueled by mistrust, could easily destabilize their weaker neighbor.
Finally, for reasons of history, geography, and culture, Iran’s role in Afghanistan cannot and should not be ignored.
There is no reason why the West’s strategic objectives concerning Afghanistan should change fundamentally in the coming years.
The key now is to get our priorities right.
Securing an orderly political transition and encouraging a deep and broad regional dialogue should now be at the top of the international agenda for Afghanistan.
Not only are these objectives important in themselves; they are also central in creating the right framework for a settlement between the various Afghan parties and the Taliban.
Some now argue that large-scale engagement in Afghanistan was a mistake.
But, in the mirror of history, we can see that the greater mistake has been to abandon the country altogether.
Afghanistan connects Central and South Asia, and a breakdown of order there would pose grave risks in both directions.
Moreover, the world – not just the West, but Russia and China as well – would risk global proliferation of drugs, weapons, and terror.
The task now is not to seek an illusory endgame.
The book is not finished; we are merely entering a new chapter.
What we must do now is create the framework for a more stable Afghanistan, and for sustained international engagement in a region that is crucial for global stability.
The Age of Authoritarian Democracy
MOSCOW – The world is currently being shaken by tectonic changes almost too numerous to count: the ongoing economic crisis is accelerating the degradation of international governance and supranational institutions, and both are occurring alongside a massive shift of economic and political power to Asia.
Less than a quarter-century after Francis Fukuyama declared “the end of history,” we seem to have arrived at the dawn of a new age of social and geopolitical upheaval.
Dramatically, the Arab world has been swept by a revolutionary spring, though one that is rapidly becoming a chilly winter.
Indeed, for the most part, the new regimes are combining the old authoritarianism with Islamism, resulting in further social stagnation, resentment, and instability.
Even more remarkable, however, are the social (and antisocial) grassroots demonstrations that are mushrooming in affluent Western societies.
These protests have two major causes.
First, social inequality has grown unabated in the West over the last quarter-century, owing in part to the disappearance of the Soviet Union and, with it, the threat of expansionist communism.
The specter of revolution had forced Western elites to use the power of the state to redistribute wealth and nurture the growth of loyal middle classes.
But, when communism collapsed in its Eurasian heartland, the West’s rich, believing that they had nothing more to fear, pressed to roll back the welfare state, causing inequality to rise rapidly.
This was tolerable as long as the overall pie was expanding, but the global financial crisis in 2008 ended that.
Second, over the past 15 years, hundreds of millions of jobs shifted to Asia, which offered inexpensive and often highly skilled labor.
The West, euphoric from its victory over communism and its seemingly unstoppable economic growth, failed to implement necessary structural reforms (Germany and Sweden were rare exceptions).
Instead, Western prosperity relied increasingly on debt.
But the economic crisis has made it impossible to maintain a good life on borrowed money.
Americans and Europeans are beginning to understand that neither they, nor their children, can assume that they will become wealthier over time.
Governments now face the difficult task of implementing reforms that will hit the majority of voters hardest.
In the meantime, the minority that has benefited financially over the past two decades is unlikely to give up its advantages without a fight.
All of this cannot fail but to weaken Western democracy’s allure in countries like Russia, where, unlike in the West or to a large extent the Arab world, those who are organizing the massive demonstrations against the government belong to the economic elite.
Theirs is a movement of political reform – demanding more freedom and government accountability – not of social protest, at least not yet.
A few years ago, it was fashionable to worry about the challenge that authoritarian-style capitalism (for example, in China, Singapore, Malaysia, or Russia) presented to Western democratic capitalism.
Today, the problem is not only economic.
Western capitalism’s model of a society based on near-universal affluence and liberal democracy looks increasingly ineffective compared to the competition.
Authoritarian countries’ middle classes may push their leaders toward greater democracy, as in Russia, but Western democracies will also likely become more authoritarian.
Indeed, measured against today’s standards, Charles de Gaulle, Winston Churchill, and Dwight Eisenhower were comparatively authoritarian leaders.
The West will have to re-adopt such an approach, or risk losing out globally as its ultra-right and ultra-left political forces consolidate their positions and its middle classes begin to dissolve.
We must find ways to prevent the political polarization that gave rise to totalitarian systems – communist and fascist – in the twentieth century.
Fortunately, this is possible.
Communism and fascism were born and took root in societies demoralized by war, which is why all steps should be taken now to prevent the outbreak of war.
This is becoming particularly relevant today, as the smell of war hangs over Iran.
Israel, which is facing a surge of hostile sentiment among its neighbors in the wake of their “democratic” upheavals, is not the only interested party.
Many people in the advanced countries, and even some in Russia, look increasingly supportive of a war with Iran, despite – or perhaps owing to – the need to address the ongoing global economic crisis and failure of international governance.
At the same time, huge opportunities beckon in times of far-reaching change.
Billions of people in Asia have extricated themselves from poverty.
New markets and spheres for applying one’s intellect, education, and talents are appearing constantly.
The world’s power centers are beginning to counterbalance each other, undermining hegemonic ambitions and heralding a creative instability based on genuine multipolarity, with people gaining greater freedom to define their fate in the global arena.
Paradoxically, today’s global changes and challenges offer the potential for both peaceful coexistence and violent conflict.
Whether fortunately or not, it is up to us – alone – to determine which future it will be.
What America Wants in Egypt
PRINCETON – Both the Muslim Brotherhood and Egypt’s liberal opposition are roundly criticizing the United States.
That is hard on Ambassador Anne Patterson, Secretary of State John Kerry, and Deputy Secretary of State William Burns, who just visited Cairo.
But it is also evidence that the US is trying to pursue the right policy.
The US is doing its best to support not a particular party, but rather a conception of liberal democracy that entails free and fair elections and a mode of governance that respects and includes minority views and upholds individual rights.
To pursue this course, however, will require standing up to Israel and Saudi Arabia.
The young people who led Egypt’s revolution two and a half years ago have been suspicious of the US for the simple reason that it supported former President Hosni Mubarak’s regime for 30 years.
From the US perspective, President Barack Obama pivoted quickly from Mubarak to the people; but it did not look that way on Cairo’s streets.
When the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi was elected President in 2012, many Egyptians assumed that America must have supported him, because they could not imagine that the US would accept a result that it did not want.
When Patterson tried to work with Morsi’s government in ways that allowed her to pursue US interests, including pushing for more inclusive and rights-respecting policies, the liberal opposition saw her as supporting the Muslim Brotherhood.
But when the US refused to call the Egyptian military’s removal of Morsi a coup (a designation that would have required it to cut off the $1.5 billion in aid provided annually to the Egyptian army), Muslim Brotherhood supporters concluded that America supported the army’s decision.
So what should the US and other governments that support liberal democracy do now?
The answer could affect Egypt’s political future and that of countries throughout the region.
As many commentators have pointed out, from the Islamists’ standpoint, Morsi’s removal looks remarkably like the Algerian military’s overthrow in 1992 (with US support) of an elected Islamist government; the Turkish military’s “soft coup” in 1997, when it forced an elected Islamist government out of power; and the US government’s reversal of its support for “Arab democracy” after Hamas won elections in Gaza in 2006.
If the choice for Islamists is still bullets or ballots, bullets may now look more promising.
More generally, military interference with civilian politics, for any reason, weakens the processes, institutions, and checks on state power that make liberal democracy work.
Yet an estimated 17 million Egyptians marched to protest Morsi’s government, the majority of them citizens who had been mobilized through a petition process to demand a government responsive to their needs.
Morsi and his Freedom and Justice Party (the Muslin Brotherhood’s political wing) gave no sign that they were prepared to accept real compromise, as opposed to tactical delays, in achieving their vision of an Islamic state.
In his final speech, Morsi rallied his troops for the barricades and bloodshed rather than for the compromise that would have kept him in office.
Genuine liberal democracy requires accepting that in a pluralist, divided country, it is possible to govern only through inclusion, not imposition.
Anything else suggests that political Islam is the Marxism of our time, preparing a long-term strategy ultimately aimed at replacing the system rather than reforming it.
The liberal-democratic alternative is to participate in the push and pull over the role of religion in public life within limits set by a super-majoritarian constitution, as more religiously oriented parties do in the US, Europe, and Israel.
Given these competing considerations, the US should start by calling the events that began on June 30 a coup, but not yet a military coup, on the grounds that a true military coup replaces the existing government with a military government.
That has not happened, and it may not happen if genuinely free and fair elections, with the participation of all parties, take place within six months.
The US should therefore declare that it will cut off its aid to Egypt’s military at a specified date unless elections take place.
But that decision involves US-Israeli relations as much as US-Egyptian relations, because US aid has been aimed at securing and preserving Egypt’s peace treaty with Israel.
In the last two weeks, Israel has increased cooperation with Egypt’s generals to pursue Islamist extremists in Sinai.
Equally important, the US and as many other countries as possible should make clear to Egypt’s military that the detention of Muslim Brotherhood leaders must stop unless the military tries them for publicly inciting violence.
While it is legitimate to demand that the Brotherhood become a regular legal organization, rather than a shadowy network fronted by the Freedom and Justice Party, criminalization of political activity has no place in a constitutional democracy.
It is the classic first step toward dictatorship, as is censorship of Muslim Brotherhood media.
Egyptian elections will not be free and fair if they follow a political purge, as in Iran or Russia.
But stopping the military’s campaign against Brotherhood leaders requires engaging Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
These two countries authorized a combined $8 billion in aid to Egypt immediately after June 30, and they make no secret of their desire to eradicate the Brotherhood.
But political stability that is bought in this way cannot last for more than a few months.
Over the longer term, an elected government will have to bring enough parts of Egyptian society together to be able to make tough choices about dismantling the military’s corrupt state within a state, cutting subsidies, and rebuilding the economy’s foundations.
Pushing the Muslim Brotherhood back underground is a recipe for further instability.
Revolutions often seesaw between extremes before the forces strong enough to overthrow governments become strong enough and legitimate enough to govern.
All friends of the Egyptian people must support the principles and processes of liberal democracy, regardless of the politicians and parties that we offend.
The Al Jazeera Revolution Turns Ten
When it first appeared, the new satellite channel broadcast from Qatar reflected its own name.
Al Jazeera – Arabic for “the island” – represented a haven of professional, independent, current affairs programming in a sea of one-sided, government-controlled Arab media.
Until Al Jazeera’s mostly BBC-trained journalists arrived on the scene, the average Arab citizen’s news television diet was nothing more than protocol news, wire service video reflecting the latest in the Palestinian conflict, and dramatic photos of earthquakes or wild fires.
Al Jazeera not only provided live interviews and broadcasts from the field; it introduced live debate to the Arab world.
Its program Al Itijah al Mu’akess (“the opposite direction”) brought the sort of verbal jousts that most of the world takes for granted but Arabs had never seen televised.
The guests that Faisal Qassem brought to the Doha studios (or via satellite) included people from the same Arab country or region but representing completely opposing points of view.
While hard-hitting professional news and programs like Al Itijah al Mu’akess provided viewers with unique television, it took major world conflicts to bring Al Jazeera acclaim.
The Palestinian intifada, the terrorist attacks against New York and Washington in September 2001, and the invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq propelled Al Jazeera to global influence.
In its first years, Al Jazeera was simultaneously hailed as a pioneering media outlet for reform in the Arab world and as an instigator of internal conflict and strife.
Almost every Arab ruler at one time or another attempted to silence the station by closing its local bureau and pressing the Qatari rulers to muzzle its freewheeling journalists. Neither worked.
In fact, the pressures only added to the station’s popularity among Arab viewers.
The United States initially seemed favorable to Al Jazeera.
The station’s encouragement of democratic reform and coverage of different points of view were compatible with the proclamations of US foreign policy.
But this changed dramatically after 9/11, when it became clear that Iraqi and Afghan civilian victims of US bombs (as well as prisoners of war) would receive more coverage than was being provided by the embedded western media machine (Al Jazeera’s one embedded journalist did not remain so very long).
When Al Jazeera reporters interviewed Osama bin Laden and the station broadcast his videos, America’s gloves came off.
Senior US officials publicly vilified the station.
But the more the US and authoritarian Arab regimes attacked the station, the more the station became a reflector of some of the radical Islamic trends.
In the Danish cartoon case and the recent controversy over the Pope’s statements, the station was clearly seen as making the news rather than just covering it.
Despite its popularity, however, Al Jazeera has not succeeded financially.
The enmity of the Saudis to the station and its Qatari owners resulted in boycotts.
Multi-national advertisers who covet the huge Saudi market were informed in no uncertain terms that they would lose hefty contracts if they advertised on Al Jazeera.
Nevertheless, the station, whose owners have deep pockets, expanded to add a direct satellite broadcast, a children’s station, two sports stations, and soon an international, English-language station.
Although no one has yet caught up to Al Jazeera’s news and current affairs popularity, the Saudi-owned Middle East Broadcasting Center has introduced a successful 24-hour station, Al Arrabiyeh, which is challenging Al Jazeera’s lead.
The Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation and Egypt’s Dream have also won large segments of the general Arab public with entertainment programs.
Al Jazeera has made Qatar famous and the Arab world better informed.
Despite its inadequacies and biases, Al Jazeera has changed the Arab world for the better.
While no state-run TV station had live current affairs programs ten years ago, now even stations from some of the most dictatorial regimes are forced to raise their level and allow live interviews.
As it celebrates its tenth anniversary, Al Jazeera is no longer new, but it remains a trendsetter.
It has broken new ground in politics and culture, but its impact on social and economic life has been minimal.
So, as Al Jazeera moves into media adolescence, it must begin to think about how it can become a social pioneer in the Arab and Islamic world.
God knows, change is still needed on that front.
The Allure of Asia
President Bush is in Asia to attend the Asian Pacific Economic Council in China, but he should pay attention to another Asian summit to which he was not invited.
In December, Malaysia will host an East Asian meeting that deliberately excludes the United States.
According to many close observers, America’s attractiveness is declining in the region where the allure, or “soft power,” of others has increased.
As John Lennon sang in 1968, “if you go carrying pictures of Chairman Mao, you ain’t gonna make it with anyone anyhow.”
Asia’s resurgence began with Japan’s economic success.
By the end of the century, Japan’s remarkable performance not only made the Japanese wealthy, but also enhanced the country’s soft power.
As the first non-Western country that drew even with the West in modernity while showing that it is possible to maintain a unique culture, Japan has more potential soft-power resources than any other Asian country.
Today Japan ranks first in the world in the number of patents, third in expenditure on research and development as a share of GDP, second in book sales and music sales, and highest for life expectancy.
It is home to three of the top twenty-five multinational brand names (Toyota, Honda, and Sony).
The decade-long economic slowdown of the 1990’s tarnished Japan’s reputation, but it did not erase Japan’s soft-power resources.
Japan’s global cultural influence grew in areas ranging from fashion, food, and pop music to consumer electronics, architecture, and art.
Japanese manufacturers rule the roost in home video games.
Pokemon cartoons are broadcast in 65 countries, and Japanese animation is a huge hit with filmmakers and teenagers everywhere.
In short, Japan’s popular culture was still producing potential soft-power resources even after its economy slowed down.
Now, with signs of a reviving economy, Japan’s soft power may increase even more.
But there are limits.
Unlike Germany, which repudiated its past aggression and reconciled with its neighbors in the framework of the European Union, Japan has never come to terms with its record in the 1930’s and 1940’s.
The residual suspicion that lingers in countries like China and Korea sets limits on Japan’s appeal that are reinforced every time the Japanese prime minister visits the Yasukuni Shrine.
Japan also faces serious demographic challenges.
By mid-century, Japan’s population could shrink by 30% unless it attracts 17 million immigrants – a hard task in a country historically resistant to immigration.
Moreover, the Japanese language is not widely spoken, and Japan’s meager English-language skills make it difficult to attract international talent to its universities.
Japan’s culture remains inward-looking.
Looking ahead, China and India are the looming giants of Asia, with their huge populations and rapid economic growth rates.
Not only are their military, or “hard power,” resources growing; there are signs that their soft-power resources are increasing, too.
In 2000, Chinese novelist Gao Xingjian won China’s first Nobel prize for literature, followed a year later by the Indian diaspora writer V.S. Naipaul.
The Chinese film “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon” became the highest grossing non-English film, and Indian movies like “Monsoon Wedding” were global box-office successes.
Indeed, “Bollywood” produces more movies every year than Hollywood.
The list goes on.
Yao Ming, the Chinese star of the National Basketball Association’s Houston Rockets, could become another Michael Jordan, and China is set to host the 2008 Summer Olympics.
Large expatriate communities in the US – 2.4 million Chinese and 1.7 million Indians – have increased interest in their home countries among other Americans.
Moreover, transnational connections in the information industry are close, as Western high-tech companies increasingly employ affiliates in Bangalore and Shanghai to provide real-time services.
But the real promise for China and India lies in the future.
A country’s soft power rests upon the attractiveness of its culture, the appeal of its domestic political and social values, and the style and substance of its foreign policies.
In recent years, both China and India have adopted foreign policies that have increased their attractiveness to others.
But neither country yet ranks high on the various indices of potential soft-power resources that are possessed by the US, Europe, and Japan.
While culture provides some soft power, domestic policies and values set limits, particularly in China, where the Communist Party fears allowing too much intellectual freedom and resists outside influences.
Both countries have a reputation for corruption in government.
India benefits from democratic politics, but suffers from overly bureaucratized government.
In foreign policy as well, both countries’ reputations are burdened with the problems of longstanding disputes over Taiwan and Kashmir.
Moreover, in the US, the attraction of an authoritarian China is limited by the concern that it could become a future threat.
The soft power of Asian countries, then, lags behind that of the US, Europe, and Japan, but it is likely to increase.
Indeed, if the US continues to pursue unattractive policies, it may find that its absence from the summit in Malaysia in December is a harbinger of things to come.
The American Anti-Intellectual Threat
NEW YORK – In recent years, the United States has been more a source of global instability than a source of global problem-solving.
Examples include the war in Iraq, launched by the US on false premises, obstructionism on efforts to curb climate change, meager development assistance, and the violation of international treaties such as the Geneva Conventions.
While many factors contributed to America’s destabilizing actions, a powerful one is anti-intellectualism, exemplified recently by Republican vice-presidential nominee Sarah Palin’s surging popularity.
By anti-intellectualism, I mean especially an aggressively anti-scientific perspective, backed by disdain for those who adhere to science and evidence.
The challenges faced by a major power like the US require rigorous analysis of information according to the best scientific principles. 
Climate change, for example, poses dire threats to the planet that must be assessed according to prevailing scientific norms and the evolving capacity of climate science.
The Nobel Prize-winning global scientific process called the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has set the gold standard for scientific rigor in analyzing the threats of human-induced climate change.
We need scientifically literate politicians adept at evidence-based critical thinking to translate these findings and recommendations into policy and international agreements.
In the US, however, the attitudes of President Bush, leading Republicans, and now Sarah Palin, have been the opposite of scientific.
The White House did all it could for eight years to hide the overwhelming scientific consensus that humans are contributing to climate change.
It tried to prevent government scientists from speaking honestly to the public. The Wall Street Journal has similarly peddled anti-science and pseudo-science to oppose policies to fight human-induced climate change.
These anti-scientific approaches affected not only climate policy, but also foreign policy.
The US went to war in Iraq on the basis of Bush’s gut instincts and religious convictions, not rigorous evidence.
Likewise, Palin has called the Iraq War “a task from God.”
These are not isolated albeit powerful individuals out of touch with reality.
They reflect the fact that a significant portion of American society, which currently votes mainly Republican, rejects or is simply unaware of basic scientific evidence regarding climate change, biological evolution, human health, and other fields.
These voters generally do not reject the benefits of technologies that result from modern science, but they do reject the evidence and advice of scientists regarding public policies.
Recent survey data by the Pew Foundation found that while 58% of Democrats believe that human beings are causing global warming, only 28% of Republicans do.
Similarly, a 2005 survey found that 59% of self-professed conservative Republicans rejected any theory of evolution, while 67% of liberal Democrats accepted some version of evolutionary theory.
To be sure, some of these deniers are simply scientifically ignorant, having been failed by the poor quality of science education in America.
But others are biblical fundamentalists, who reject modern science because they take the word of the Bible as literally true.
They reject geological evidence of climate change because they reject the science of geology itself.
The issue here is not religion versus science.
All of the great religions have traditions of fruitful interchange with – and, indeed, support for – scientific inquiry.
The problem is an aggressive fundamentalism that denies modern science, and an aggressive anti-intellectualism that views experts and scientists as the enemy.
It is those views that could end up getting us all killed.
After all, that kind of extremism can even lead to war, based on perverted views that a particular war is God’s will rather than a failure of politics and cooperation. 
In many statements, Palin seems intent on invoking God in her judgments about war, an ominous sign for the future if she is elected.
She would certainly stoke many enemies who will look to their own brands of fundamentalism to strike back at the US.
Extremists on both sides end up putting at risk the vast majority of humans who are neither extremists nor anti-science fundamentalists.
It is difficult to know for sure what is giving rise to fundamentalism in so many parts of the world.
What is happening in the US, for example, is not happening in Europe, but it is of course characteristic of some parts of the Middle East and Central Asia.
Fundamentalism seems to emerge in times of far-reaching change, when traditional social arrangements come under threat.  The surge of modern American fundamentalism in politics dates to the civil rights era of the 1960’s, and at least partly reflects a backlash among whites against the growing political and economic strength of non-white and immigrant minority groups in US society.
Humanity’s only hope is that the vicious circle of extremism can be replaced by a shared global understanding of the massive challenges of climate change, food supplies, sustainable energy, water scarcity, and poverty.
Global scientific processes like the IPCC are critical, because they offer our best hope of forging a consensus based on the scientific evidence. 
The US must return to the global consensus based on shared science rather than anti-intellectualism.
That is the urgent challenge at the heart of American society today.  
The American Recovery
NEWPORT BEACH – The United States has gone through an arduous period of intervention and rehabilitation since the global financial crisis in 2008 sent it to the economic equivalent of the emergency room.
It moved from the intensive-care unit to the recovery room and, just recently, was discharged from the hospital.
The question now is whether the US economy is ready not just to walk, but also to run and sprint.
The answer will powerfully influence global economic prospects.
It is easy to forget how critical things were back in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009.
Having suffered what economists call a “sudden stop,” many parts of the US economy were imploding or had ceased to function – to extend the medical metaphor, even the most vital organs were threatened.
Economic activity collapsed and unemployment surged.
Credit stopped flowing.
Banks were on the verge of bankruptcy and nationalization.
International trade was disrupted.
Income and wealth inequalities worsened.
And a general sense of fear and uncertainty inhibited the few healthy parts of the economy from engaging in meaningful hiring, investment, and expansion.
Parlous conditions required dramatic measures.
And that is what the economy got in the form of unprecedented fiscal stimulus and unthinkable policy activism on the part of the US Federal Reserve.
As they intervened, American policymakers consulted closely with their counterparts around the world, urging them to take supportive steps.
And they did, culminating in one of the most successful periods of global policy coordination in history, involving both advanced and emerging economies.
For many, the global economic summit held in London in April 2009 marks the point when the US economy turned the corner.
The change was so notable that many policymakers fell into the trap of projecting a quick rebound, especially given America’s prior history of economic dynamism and resilience, only to be humbled by what has proven to be a protracted and complex process of recovery.
Even today, that process highlights the scale and scope of the economy’s structural weaknesses.
Having reduced the risk of a relapse into recession, the US economy is able now to move on its own power, though gingerly.
The horrific collapse in the labor market has given way to consistent monthly employment gains, albeit less than what is needed for a full recovery.
Manufacturing activity has picked up, helped by a surge in exports.
The housing sector seems to be finding a tentative bottom (though housing finance remains incoherent).
Consumers have better access to credit.
And, sensing all of this, companies are beginning to deploy the massive precautionary cash balances that they have accumulated.
With the US still by far the largest economy in the world and the anchor of the international monetary system, its well-being has huge implications everywhere.
So, not surprisingly, the US recovery has helped to set a calming and constructive tone – and at a critical juncture, given that Europe is still struggling with a debt crisis on the eurozone periphery, and emerging economies are going through a cyclical slowdown.
Politics is also in play, and in a manner that significantly influences who will lead the world’s superpower after this November’s presidential and congressional elections.
The economic improvements already have helped President Barack Obama’s re-election prospects, as has the continuing drama of a drawn-out, divisive, and expensive Republican primary.
The problem is that the sense of relief now can – and probably will – be taken too far.
Indeed, today’s good news should not obscure some consequential structural limitations that will require prolonged therapy and caution.
After all, the US economy has yet to regain its full strength, is too structurally impaired to sustain any rapid forward movement, and has not yet started to overcome the many distortive side effects of the extreme medicine that it received.
Locking in recovery implies a multi-year program of serious and coordinated reforms that fundamentally improve the way the country educates and trains its citizens, invests in infrastructure and finances other productive outlays and housing, competes in the global economy, and formulates and adheres to a rational budgetary process.
Such a program will also require a recovering America to navigate several key challenges in the next few months.
For starters, the economy is not yet in a position to handle the 4-5%-of-GDP “fiscal cliff” that is approaching as all of the hard political decisions that were postponed come into view at the end of this year.
The prospect of a disorderly fiscal contraction needs to give way to a more rationally designed approach that avoids undermining the fragile recovery.
To accomplish that, the political class must avoid the bickering that almost sent America back into recession in 2011, and that raised major questions about the quality of the country’s economic governance.
Oil prices are not helping.
Having already surged on account of Iran-related geopolitical concerns, they are altering American consumers’ behavior, weakening their confidence, aggravating the country’s payments imbalances, and further reducing policymakers’ flexibility.
And then there is Europe, which is yet to overcome decisively its debt and growth problems.
Like other countries, the US must continue to strengthen internal firewalls to limit its vulnerability to what is still a complex crisis across the Atlantic.
America’s full recovery is not yet guaranteed.
A mix of steadfastness, caution, and good luck is needed for that to happen.
And when it does, the country will be in a better position to repay its massive hospital bill.
The American Way of Debt
After almost 15 years of unprecedented growth - interrupted only by a brief slowdown in 2000-2001 - the United States has accumulated a huge stock of foreign liabilities, equivalent to 25% of its GDP.
With the current account deficit now exceeding 5% of GDP, US foreign debt is rising fast.
But no country can accumulate debt forever - and what cannot last sooner or later must end.
In early 1985, when the US current account deficit reached $120 billion, about a third of today's level at current prices, the rest of the world stopped financing it. The outcome was a sudden fall in the value of the dollar, which depreciated by 50% against the Deutschemark.
Europe should not welcome a sequel.
Indeed, the world itself cannot afford the disappearance of the US current account deficit - at least not quickly.
Take away US imports and the timid growth Europe has seen in the past year would immediately disappear.
This may already be happening: the appreciation of the euro, from $1.20 to $1.30 in the past few months, was enough to bring European growth to a standstill during the third quarter of this year.
Before the dollar started to weaken, exports from the 25 EU member states were growing at 6.5% per year, compared with 2% for consumption and 3% for investment.
Even in Japan, the recent recovery was almost entirely led by exports.
But as the yen strengthens, Japan, too, seems to stop growing.
With central banks around the world full of dollars and trade imbalances becoming worrisome, there are three possible solutions.
One is that domestic saving in the US increases. But this is unlikely, at least in the near future, given President Bush's ambitious fiscal plans and the continuing war in Iraq.
US private savings are also slightly negative, and an increase might lead to a slowdown in the short run.
The second possibility is a more pronounced devaluation of the dollar, bringing it well beyond the current levels relative to both the euro and the yen.
Revaluation of the Chinese yuan would also help.
The third option is a pick up of growth in Europe, which would increase US exports.
This could happen only if European companies cut costs and increase productivity.
As always, a litany of plans and promises for "structural reforms" can be heard, but none of them is likely to be implemented anytime soon.
So what can be done?
One alternative is to increase working hours without increasing salary per hours proportionally.
Americans and Europeans worked the same number of hours in the early 1970's.
Today, Europeans work 50% less on average in France and Germany than in the US.
This is partly due to higher taxes in Europe, and this cannot be undone: nobody can force someone to work if they consider their take-home pay too low because of a high marginal tax rate.
But the relative decline in work hours is also due to trade unions' success in winning compulsory vacation time.
Labor reform leading to longer hours would not reduce the total income of the employed, but it would reduce production costs.