He meant that migrants are not goods that can be exported or imported, and they should not be exploited as if they were.
Migrants are human beings with rights, and they are motivated by a complex combination of personal desires, fears, and familial obligations.
Many migrants are searching for jobs because they have missed out on globalization’s unequally distributed gains, and they see no future for themselves if they remain where they are; countless others have been displaced by conflicts or natural disasters.
Today, ungoverned migration is threatening geopolitical stability, burdening border controls, and creating chaos around the world.
The current mechanisms for managing migration have clearly failed to meet existing needs.
The world needs a new, comprehensive global-governance framework to address all issues relating to human mobility.
Achieving such an outcome is Bangladesh’s primary objective as Chair of the 2016 Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD), which culminates with the Ninth Annual Forum Meeting in Dhaka on December 10-12.
In 2015, as part of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals for 2030, world leaders pledged to cooperate on migration issues and to “facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration.”
The SDGs acknowledge migrants’ positive contribution to inclusive growth and sustainable development, and it is high time that our leaders follow through on their promises.
Sadly, governments worldwide have become preoccupied with deterring migration and restricting people’s movement, rather than creating safe, dignified channels for human mobility.
Unsurprisingly, this obsession with control has had little impact on irregular migration flows, because it runs counter to the pull of market forces and the push of personal aspirations.
Populist politicians have taken advantage of the current situation by politicizing migration and scapegoating migrants for socioeconomic problems such as unemployment, welfare-system strains, and deteriorating social cohesion.
But there is still room for hope.
When world leaders gathered at the UN Summit for Refugees and Migrants on September 19, they reaffirmed migrants’ human rights and committed to strengthening global governance on this issue.
At the center of the summit’s unanimously adopted New York Declaration is a commitment to develop two global compacts: to share responsibility for taking in refugees, and to ensure orderly, safe, regular, and responsible migration.
The government of Bangladesh proposed the second compact in April 2016.
That compact, which will be adopted at an inter-governmental conference in 2018, offers an historic opportunity to improve the way governments and other stakeholders cooperate on migration.
Building walls and discriminating against migrants or refugees on the basis of ethnicity or religion is antithetical to the 2030 SDG agenda, which aims to free people from the shackles of poverty, reduce inequality, and promote shared prosperity.
The international community must now ensure that the new global compacts promote these broad ambitions.
This will require national governments and global-governance institutions to implement bold policies that make migration both easier and more orderly.
It will also require them to protect migrants and refugees’ rights, prevent ethnic or religious discrimination, and provide emergency assistance when needed.
And it will encourage them to maximize migrants’ positive economic impact on both their new countries and their countries of origin, by reducing financial and human costs and integrating newcomers into the labor market.
To achieve the best outcome, the two global compacts will need to be pursued in a coordinated fashion, and treated as two parts of a single framework for governing migration.
In 2017, governments will begin to negotiate the details of this future framework.
This may include a legally binding convention; a political declaration of principles to guide conduct; or operational commitments with goals, targets, and indicators of success, combined with a robust monitoring mechanism.
These options should not be seen as mutually exclusive.
If diplomacy prevails, and international arrangements are crafted carefully, one could imagine an outcome similar to the 2015 Paris climate agreement: binding commitments in some areas, non-binding guiding principles in others, and a shared promise by member states to take concrete action and to report their progress regularly.
Such an approach would help to guarantee effectiveness.
As the Chair of the GFMD, Bangladesh will communicate the Dhaka summit’s recommendations to countries’ negotiators.
We will push for an agreement among political leaders at the inter-governmental conference in 2018 that vastly improves how migration is managed.
With international cooperation, we can unleash the full social and economic potential of migration.
And, in doing so, we will make migrants safer, societies more harmonious, and economies more prosperous.
The Unity of Water
MOSCOW – In May, Vietnam became the 35th and decisive signatory of the 1997 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses.
As a result, 90 days later, on August 17, the convention will enter into force.
The fact that it took almost 50 years to draft and finally achieve the necessary ratification threshold demonstrates that something is very wrong with the modern system of multilateralism.
Regardless of longstanding disagreements over how cross-border freshwater resources should be allocated and managed, and understandable preferences by governments and water professionals to rely on basin agreements rather than on international legal instruments, that half-century wait can be explained only by a lack of political leadership.
So, though the world may celebrate the convention’s long-awaited adoption, we cannot rest on our laurels.
Roughly 60% of all freshwater runs within cross-border basins; only an estimated 40% of those basins, however, are governed by some sort of basin agreement.
In an increasingly water-stressed world, shared water resources are becoming an instrument of power, fostering competition within and between countries.
The struggle for water is heightening political tensions and exacerbating impacts on ecosystems.
But the really bad news is that water consumption is growing faster than population – indeed, in the twentieth century it grew at twice the rate.
As a result, several UN agencies forecast that, by 2025, 1.8 billion people will be living in regions stricken with absolute water scarcity, implying a lack of access to adequate quantities for human and environmental uses.
Moreover, two-thirds of the world’s population will face water-stress conditions, meaning a scarcity of renewable freshwater.
Without resolute counter-measures, demand for water will overstretch many societies’ adaptive capacities.
This could result in massive migration, economic stagnation, destabilization, and violence, posing a new threat to national and international security.
The UN Watercourses Convention must not become just another ignored international agreement, filed away in a drawer.
The stakes are too high.
In today’s context of climate change, rising demand, population growth, increasing pollution, and overexploited resources, everything must be done to consolidate the legal framework for managing the world’s watersheds.
Our environmental security, economic development, and political stability directly depend on it.
The convention will soon apply to all of the cross-border rivers of its signatories’ territories, not just the biggest basins.
It will complement the gaps and shortcomings of existing agreements and provide legal coverage to the numerous cross-border rivers that are under increasing pressure.
Worldwide, there are 276 cross-border freshwater basins and about as many cross-border aquifers.
Backed by adequate financing, political will, and the engagement of stakeholders, the convention can help address the water challenges that we are all facing.
But will it?
An ambitious agenda should be adopted now, at a time when the international community is negotiating the contents of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the successor to the UN Millennium Development Goals, which will expire in 2015.
We at Green Cross hope that the new goals, which are to be achieved by 2030, will include a stand-alone target that addresses water-resources management.
Moreover, the international community will soon have to agree on a climate-change framework to replace the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate change directly affects the hydrological cycle, which means that all of the efforts that are undertaken to contain greenhouse-gas emissions will help to stabilize rainfall patterns and mitigate the extreme water events that so many regions are already experiencing.
But the UN Watercourses Convention’s entry into force raises as many new questions as existed in the period before its ratification.
What will its implementation mean in practice?
How will countries apply its mandates within their borders and in relation to riparian neighbors?
How will the American and Asian countries that have largely ignored ratification respond?
Furthermore, how will the convention relate to the Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes, which is already in force in most European and Central Asian countries and, since February 2013, has aimed to open its membership to the rest of the world?
Similarly, how will the convention’s implementation affect existing regional and local cross-border freshwater agreements?
The countries that ratified the UN Watercourses Convention are expected to engage in its implementation and to go further in their efforts to protect and sustainably use their cross-border waters.
What instruments, including financial, will the convention provide to them?
Several legal instruments can be implemented jointly and synergistically: the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, the UN Convention to Combat Desertification, and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, to name just a few.
The UN Watercourses Convention’s long-delayed enactment should be viewed as an opportunity for signatory states to encourage those that are not yet party to cooperative agreements to work seriously on these issues.
Clearly, politicians and diplomats alone cannot respond effectively to the challenges that the world faces.
What the world needs is the engagement of political, business, and civil-society leaders; effective implementation of the UN Watercourses Convention is impossible without it.
This is too often overlooked, but it constitutes the key to the long-term success of cooperation that generates benefits for all.
Inclusive participation by stakeholders (including the affected communities), and the development of the capacity to identify, value, and share the benefits of cross-border water resources, should be an integral part of any strategy to achieve effective multilateral collaboration.
Milosevic’s Trial Was Not in Vain
Slobodan Milosevic cheated justice, and by doing so demonstrated the futility of attempting to deal with war crimes and crimes against humanity through international prosecutions.
That, at least, is the conclusion that some people have reached after Milosevic’s death in a Hague prison: the fact that he was able to drag out his trial for four years and still escape a verdict is considered proof that the international community is wasting its resources by putting such people on trial for their misdeeds.
Even the most dedicated partisans of international justice concede that the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has had many shortcomings.
All those associated with it were new to such proceedings, and had to learn on the job, as there had been no such bodies since the courts at Nuremberg and Tokyo after World War II.
Moreover, the post-WWII bodies were tribunals in which the war’s victors judged the losers, and those prosecuted were already in custody.
The ICTY, by contrast, has no capacity of its own to arrest defendants.
It must rely on persuasion to secure cooperation by others – cooperation that is still being withheld in the case of the two most notorious defendants from the Bosnian War, Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic..
Until Tony Blair and Robin Cook became, respectively, Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom in 1997, four years after the ICTY was established, NATO troops in Bosnia failed to arrest indicted suspects even when they ran into them.
By now, of course, 133 defendants from all parties to the wars in ex-Yugoslavia have appeared before the Tribunal, charged with war crimes, crimes against humanity, and even genocide.
These are highly complex cases, frequently involving not only novel issues under international law, but also thousands of witnesses – often traumatized by their suffering – dispersed to many lands, the constant need for high-quality simultaneous translations, and disruptive tactics by some defendants.
Yet the proceedings against 85 of them, including appeals, have been completed.
In trying them, the ICTY has been a model of fairness at all times.
The mountains of evidence in its records make the horrendous crimes committed in the wars in ex-Yugoslavia comparable in the extent of their documentation to those by the Nazis.
Inevitable efforts by demagogues to revise the history of what took place in ex-Yugoslavia in the 1990’s will be complicated by the availability of that evidence, including the facts compiled during the Milosevic trial.
Far from being a failure, the ICTY has inspired the establishment of several other such courts, including those for Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Cambodia, and the permanent International Criminal Court.
Even heads of state have not escaped these bodies.
Milosevic, the former president of Yugoslavia, and then Serbia, died in prison.
Biljana Plavsic, the President of the Bosnian Serb Republic after Karadzic, expressed remorse for her crimes, pled guilty, and is serving a prison sentence.
Jean Kambanda, former Prime Minister of Rwanda, pled guilty to crimes against humanity and genocide and is serving a life sentence in prison.
We are thus slowly reaching the point where some of those contemplating crimes such as those committed by Slobodan Milosevic must recognize that one day they could be held accountable.
Charles Taylor was President of Liberia when the Tribunal for Sierra Leone indicted him.
He had to flee his country, paving the way for the democratic transition that resulted in the recent election of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.
Taylor still faces the prospect of trial and, another former dictator, Saddam Hussein, is now on trial before a national court in Iraq.
Persisting on the path of international justice will continue to require substantial resources.
Great as they are, the costs are trivial in comparison to the expense of humanitarian aid, international military intervention, and reconstruction assistance.
Most important, of course, is the need to prevent the suffering caused by the crimes that lead to international prosecutions; and when those crimes cannot be prevented, we must provide some comfort and redress to the victims and their families by doing justice.
Of course, the slow, tortuous process of international justice is often frustrating to the victims.
But it would be worse if those responsible for great crimes got away with it, as happened all too often in the past.
In the wake of Milosevic’s death, Karadzic and Mladic should be brought before the ICTY, both to reinforce its work and to demonstrate to their victims that the international community is resolved not to allow their suffering to be forgotten.
The ICTY’s mission is as valid and as vital as ever: to show that the era of impunity for some of humanity’s worst crimes is coming to an end.
Mind the Neighbors
PRINCETON – The conventional wisdom last week on whether Syria would comply with former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s ceasefire plan was that it was up to Russia.
We were reverting to Cold War politics, in which the West was unwilling to use force and Russia was willing to keep arming and supporting its client.
Thus, Russia held the trump card: the choice of how much pressure it was willing to put on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to comply with the plan.
If this view were correct, Iran would surely be holding an equally powerful hand.
Annan, after all, traveled to Tehran as well.
Traditional balance-of-power geopolitics, it seems, is alive and well.
But this is, at best, a partial view that obscures as much as it reveals.
In particular, it misses the crucial and growing importance of regional politics and institutions.
A longer-term resolution of the Syrian crisis depends as much on Turkey and the Arab League as it does on the United States, Europe, and Russia.
Consider what else happened last week: Turkey’s government made clear that it would turn to new measures if Annan’s plan does not produce results.
Turkish officials have been issuing similar proclamations for months, but now Syrian troops have fired into Turkey, chasing Free Syrian Army rebels who fled across the border, while the number of Syrian civilian refugees has increased sharply.
Last week, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan raised the stakes dramatically with talk of having “many options,” and by adding: “Also, NATO has responsibilities to do with Turkey’s borders, according to Article 5.”
Article 5 of the NATO treaty stipulates that an attack on one NATO member is to be considered an attack on all, and that all will come to the member’s aid.
Of course, other NATO members could disagree that Syria has in fact attacked Turkey, but if Turkey were to invoke Article 5, a refusal to offer assistance could have unpleasant consequences for the alliance as a whole.
And Assad knows full well that it will be impossible to avoid further border incidents unless he is prepared to allow the Free Syrian Army to use Turkey as a safe zone.
The significance of Article 5 is that if a credible case can be made that Turkey and its allies are acting in self-defense, they do not need to seek the UN Security Council’s approval.
That makes Erdoğan’s suggestion a game-changer, forcing Assad to reckon with the prospect of a de facto militarily-enforced safe zone for the civilian opposition.
The deeper point here is that regional organizations, including NATO, provide the first level of legality and legitimacy required for a successful use of force.
The US would not have supported intervention in Libya if the Arab League had not supported a no-fly zone and been willing to go to the UN on that basis.
Indeed, assuming that Assad does not start bulldozing entire cities, I cannot imagine any circumstances under which the US would support even limited military intervention in Syria without public approval by the Arab League and Turkey.
That is why we have seen a game of “after you” with respect to Syria, with the Turks saying that they need Western support, the US saying that it needs regional support, and both saying that they need UN support.
Looking beyond the Middle East, Africa provides the best evidence for a geopolitics based as much on regional powers and institutions as on traditional great powers.
While Annan has been trying his diplomatic best to resolve Syria’s crisis, upheavals in Senegal, Mali, Malawi, and Guinea-Bissau have been swiftly addressed by other regional powers.
In particular, the African Union (AU) has acted repeatedly in the name of enforcing the African Charter on Democracy, Elections, and Governance.
In Senegal, simmering violence accompanied recent elections in which President Abdoulaye Wade was allowed to stand for an unprecedented third term.
The first round forced Wade into a run-off with Macky Sall, at which point the AU promptly sent an Elections Observer Mission, drawn from 18 African countries, to assess whether the elections were legal and the results “reflected the will of the Senegalese people.”
We cannot be sure what impact the mission had on Wade’s ultimate decision to concede defeat to Sall, but knowing that the region was watching must have focused his mind.
The situation in Mali is more complicated, for it involves an ongoing secessionist movement, as well as a coup on March 21.
But, after the coup the AU and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), backed by the UN, immediately suspended Mali’s membership in the AU, imposed economic and diplomatic sanctions on the country, and placed travel restrictions on coup leaders.
Just over two weeks later, ECOWAS announced that it had reached an agreement with the coup leaders to return the government to civilian rule in exchange for lifting the sanctions.
Likewise, AU President Jean Ping condemned a coup in Guinea-Bissau in early April immediately and in the strongest terms.
Those who interpret all moves on the international stage in terms of states’ eternal jockeying for power and prestige will never lack for evidence.
The way in which the Saudi-Iranian rivalry is playing out in Syria is a prominent example.
But countries’ desire to stop mass murder in their neighborhood, or to enforce regional norms, has its own force.
Increasingly, when a regional institution will not act, powers from outside the region find it difficult to intervene.
And, when a region does unite on a course of action, intervention by outside powers becomes either less necessary or more effective.
China’s Measured Embrace of India
BEIJING – Chinese President Xi Jinping’s three-day visit to India, the main leg of a recent tour of Central and South Asia, sheds new light on China’s emerging approach to its neighbors, particularly Asia’s other giant.
Recent subtle changes in Sino-Indian relations could prove to be enormously consequential for the world in the coming decades.
Under Xi, China is adopting a new grand strategy which can be called “dual rebalancing”: implementing bold domestic reforms to regain economic momentum while overhauling China’s global posture and diplomacy, focusing on sources of risk in its near abroad.
The Silk Road Economic Belt, which is focused on Central Asia, and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, which concentrates on the countries bordering the Indian Ocean’s shipping lanes, are leading initiatives on China’s foreign-policy agenda.
Their success will depend, in large part, on whether China gets support from other great powers, specifically Russia in Central Asia and India in South Asia.
China understands that India’s position on the world stage has been strengthening since the beginning of this century.
India’s new prime minister, Narendra Modi, an aspirational and authoritative leader from Gujarat, one of the country’s most developed states, has promised to bring India’s economy out of a half-decade funk, enhance the living standards of his country’s have-nots, and boost the country’s standing as a global power.
The trick for Chinese policy is to reconcile Modi’s ambitions with China’s strategic goals.
Since Modi came to power, India has been basking in the adulation of major powers like Japan and the United States.
Partly motivated by a desire to counterbalance China’s rising geopolitical influence, Japan and the US have sought to draw India into a multilateral alliance consisting of democratic countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
Indeed, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has vowed to forge a “democratic security diamond” with the US, Australia, and India.
During Modi’s visit to Japan in early September, Abe offered to invest $35 billion in Indian infrastructure projects over five years, accelerate negotiations on civil nuclear deals, and boost bilateral maritime security cooperation.
The two sides agreed to build up a “Special Strategic and Global Partnership,” leaving Chinese strategists to wrestle with the implications of deeper India-Japan ties.
Likewise, despite an on-again off-again relationship with India since Bill Clinton’s presidency, the US continues to view the country as a “natural ally.”
US cabinet members – Secretary of State John Kerry and Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel – both visited India in recent months to try and woo Modi by promising improved economic and strategic ties.
In the last three years, the US has surpassed Russia as India’s largest arms supplier.
Modi’s government is desperate to diversity its sources of advanced weapons and become self-reliant in defense production.
Barack Obama’s administration is now expected to do whatever it can to strengthen relations with India during Modi’s upcoming visit to Washington.
As Nicholas Burns, a former under-secretary of state, has argued, US strategic interests in the century ahead will align more closely with India’s than with those of any other continental Asian power, making India central to America’s strategic rebalancing toward Asia.
Xi is confident that China can understand and satisfy many of Modi’s needs better than regional rivals like Japan.
But China should not underestimate India’s determination to uphold its strategic autonomy in Asia’s shifting geopolitical landscape.
During Xi’s visit, the two leaders signed 15 agreements in the fields of trade, finance, and culture.
Xi committed China to invest $20 billion in India over the next five years, particularly to modernize India’s decrepit and overused railway system.
This compares with just $400 million, or 0.18% of India’s inward foreign investment, in Chinese investment from 2000 to 2014.
China also promised to establish two industrial parks, in Gujarat and Maharashtra, as well as provide greater market access to Indian products, in an effort to allay India’s worries over the widening bilateral trade deficit, which has soared from $1 billion in 2001 to more than $40 billion today.
Modi’s efforts to revive market-oriented reform and improve the country’s business environment will help to attract Chinese corporations eager to capitalize on India’s vast labor force, varied skill base, and geographical advantages.
In addition, China wants to strengthen cooperation with India in regional and global affairs.
India is likely soon to gain full membership in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the club of Central Asian and Asian states formed after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
India’s “Connect Central Asia policy,” and its efforts to build a North-South Transit Corridor, would benefit development in Central Asia, a region of major concern to China, because it abuts the restless Chinese province of Xinjiang.
As major aid providers and investors in Afghanistan, China and India also have common interests in stabilizing that country, and countering religious extremism and terrorism after NATO troops leave.
Moreover, the two countries share similar interests in reshaping global economic governance, particularly by further strengthening cooperation among the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) and ensuring that climate change is addressed in a way that does not impede growth.
But India’s lingering bitterness over the 1962 war with China remains.
On many occasions, Modi has voiced suspicions about China’s growing footprint in disputed border areas.
India’s sensitivity to potential Chinese encirclement is similar to China’s fears of encirclement by the US and its allies.
That is why China is unlikely to develop its relations with India and Pakistan (with which China still values its all-weather partnership) on separate tracks, as the US did during the Bush administration.
Xi’s visit to India strongly suggests that China is determined to engage with Modi in ways that are intended to inhibit the bilateral rivalry from intensifying.
But, despite Xi’s investment pledges, it is far from certain that Asia’s two giants, both with growing global aspirations, can bridge the differences that continue to burden their relationship.
China’s Arab March
BEIJING – The growing bloodshed in Iraq and Syria is being watched as keenly in China as anywhere else in the world.
Indeed, the greater Middle East is becoming an ever greater focus of Chinese foreign policy.
At the just-concluded sixth ministerial conference of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum, held in Beijing, Chinese President Xi Jinping called upon his Arab counterparts to upgrade their strategic relationships with China, by deepening bilateral cooperation in areas ranging from finance and energy to space technology.
This reflects China’s broader goal – established partly in response to America’s “pivot” toward Asia – of rebalancing its strategic focus westward, with an emphasis on the Arab world.
Of course, economic ties between China and Arab countries have been growing stronger for more than a decade, with the trade volume increasing from $25.5 billion in 2004 to $238.9 billion in 2013.
China is now the Arab world’s second-largest trading partner, and the largest trading partner for nine Arab countries.
Within ten years, the volume of China-Arab trade is expected to reach $600 billion.
Engineering contracts and investment have also enhanced ties.
Under Xi’s leadership, China is attempting to reshape its relationships with Arab countries according to its new “march west” strategic framework.
The most notable component of this strategy is the “Silk Road economic belt,” which is to run along the ancient Central Asian Silk Road and the modern maritime Silk Road – an initiative that Xi promoted heavily at the recent meeting in Beijing.
This effort highlights China’s goal of establishing hub-and-spoke relationships with key developing economies around it.
To this end, Prime Minister Li Keqiang has proposed an economic corridor linking China to Pakistan, and has spoken of other corridors running through Bangladesh, India, and Myanmar.
Unsurprisingly, energy has been a key factor in economic ties with the Arab world.
From 2004 to 2013, China’s crude oil imports from Arab countries grew by more than 12% annually, on average, reaching 133 million tons per year.
And China’s “march west” strategy furthers its goal of safeguarding access to these resources.
As the director of the State Council’s Development Research Center, Li Wei, pointed out in February, at the current rate, China will be consuming 800 million tons of oil annually, and importing 75% of its petroleum, by 2030.
In this sense, China’s trajectory contrasts sharply with that of the United States, where the rapid growth in output of shale oil and gas, together with energy-saving measures, has brought energy independence closer than ever – a point that President Barack Obama emphasized in his most recent State of the Union address.
In fact, according to the US Energy Information Administration, China surpassed the US as the world’s largest net oil importer earlier this year.
Moreover, the US is gradually disengaging strategically from the greater Middle East, creating a vacuum that China seeks to fill.
To succeed, China will need to become more attentive to the region’s complex dynamics; find creative ways to participate in conflict-resolution efforts; and respond enthusiastically to Middle Eastern governments’ growing desire to connect to Asia.
Doing so would enable China’s leaders to advance their goal of developing the country’s vast inland regions. Specifically, western provinces like Ningxia and Qinghai, which have substantial Muslim communities, could benefit from deeper links with Arab economies.
Enhanced influence in the Arab world would also promote the perception of China as a leader of the developing world – a position that could boost China’s strategic and economic resilience considerably.
For starters, it would enable China to capitalize on the demographic heft of the developing world, which will house more than 80% of the world’s population in 2020.
Moreover, it would allow China to maximize its gains from burgeoning trade among developing economies, which surged from 8% of global trade in 1990 to 24% in 2011.
To be sure, not all Arab governments are welcoming China with open arms.
Indeed, many of the Middle East’s most powerful actors – including Turkey and Saudi Arabia – are suspicious of China’s long-term intentions.
But China can take steps to gain these countries’ trust.
For example, China’s leaders should work to address the unrest in the Muslim-dominated province of Xinjiang more effectively.
Clearly, China’s rising clout is no longer confined to Asia.
China’s “march west” into the Arab world is a bold effort to translate its economic might into enduring regional – and, ultimately, global – influence.
This is a daunting task, but it is one that can not only help to secure China’s long-term future, but perhaps bring greater weight to bear in resolving the region’s immense challenges.
Hunting Tigers in China
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – In the boldest move yet since President Xi Jinping launched his anti-corruption campaign, China has announced the start of a formal investigation into “serious disciplinary violations” by one of the Chinese Communist Party’s most senior figures, Zhou Yongkang.
Though rumors of Zhou’s political demise had been circulating for nearly a year, anyone familiar with Chinese political intrigue knew that, until the CCP made it official, Zhou’s many powerful patrons and cronies could still save him.
Now it is official: a “mega-tiger” has been brought down.
But is that what China really needs?
Since 2012, when Xi began “hunting tigers,” as he put it, three dozen government ministers, provincial governors, and other high-level officials have fallen into his net.
But Zhou is no ordinary tiger.
A former member of the Politburo Standing Committee, the CCP’s top decision-making body, Zhou was considered untouchable.
Since the end of the Cultural Revolution, the CCP has adhered to the implicit rule that members of the Politburo Standing Committee, sitting or retired, enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution.
Some have, of course, been purged in power struggles, such as the one that led to the fall of Hua Guofeng, Mao’s immediate successor, in the early 1980s.
But the defeated have typically retired quietly, and never faced formal corruption charges.
Given this history, the prosecution of Zhou is a watershed event – far more significant than the riveting trial of the disgraced former Chongqing Communist Party Secretary Bo Xilai a year ago.
It unambiguously demonstrates Xi’s personal authority and political resolve.
But the question remains: What exactly does Xi hope to achieve with China’s most fearsome anti-corruption campaign in more than three decades?
The conventional wisdom is that the threat of prosecution serves Xi’s goals of consolidating power and compelling the bureaucracy to implement economic reforms that run counter to its interests.
The two prongs of Xi’s political strategy – cleansing the Party and reinvigorating China’s economy – are thus complementary and interdependent.
This strategy has considerable merit.
But even the Machiavellian dictum that a ruler should encourage his citizens’ fear rather than their love can go only so far.
The most successful political leaders are skilled coalition-builders.
Consider Deng Xiaoping, China’s most successful reformer (the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989 notwithstanding).
The grand coalition that he forged, against all odds, upon his return to power in 1979 was essential to bringing about the economic transformation that followed.
The question today is thus not whether Xi has amassed enough authority to effect change in China (he has), but whether he has built a coalition capable of advancing his declared goal of reviving pro-market reforms.
And, so far, the answer seems to be no.
Since taking over the presidency, Xi’s actions have been both resolute and contradictory.
On one hand, he has been aggressively pursuing “tigers” and “flies” (lower-level officials), while curbing, at least temporarily, the privileges enjoyed by Chinese officials.
On the other hand, he has launched an equally ferocious campaign against political liberalization, arresting and jailing leading human-rights activists and cracking down on China’s once-vibrant social media.
The risks of waging a two-front war are obvious.
If Xi’s fight against corruption is genuine, it will engender fear and resentment among the Chinese bureaucracy.
While officials feign compliance with Xi’s economic-reform agenda, they will seek any opportunity to stymie it.
The absence of significant real progress since Xi unveiled his economic blueprint last November suggests that this is already happening.
At the same time, Xi’s tough stance against political reform is diminishing hope among liberals.
Of course, this group – including intellectuals, social activists, journalists, and progressive private entrepreneurs – has little institutional power.
What it does have is the capacity to influence ordinary Chinese – making them a valuable addition to a pro-reform coalition.
Deng recognized this potential in the 1980s; unless Xi follows suit, he will find it increasingly difficult to rally the public behind his vision for China’s future.
This is not to say that caging Zhou was not a good move.
But Xi must now shift his focus from bagging another quarry to winning over new and perhaps unexpected allies.
His long-term success – and that of China – depends on it.
Wooing China’s Princelings
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – China’s “princelings” – the offspring of senior Chinese officials who benefit from lavish privileges in education, employment, and business – are coming under scrutiny as never before.
Bo Xilai, the son of one of Mao’s comrades and a supposed “immortal” of the revolution, was recently sentenced to life in prison after his conviction on charges of corruption and abuse of power.
Outside China, princelings are feeling the heat as well.
Not long ago, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission announced that it was investigating JPMorgan Chase’s hiring of princelings in Hong Kong, who apparently delivered lucrative underwriting deals for the bank.
While recent scandals have put China’s princelings under a harsh media spotlight, they have been hot commodities for Western companies seeking to capitalize on their guanxi (connections) in order to secure multi-billion dollar transactions.
The list of financial institutions that have engaged in such hiring practices reads like a who’s who of investment banking.
Of course, it is premature to conclude that JPMorgan violated the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act by employing children of Chinese officials who oversaw companies that retained the bank to underwrite their stock offerings.
Nonetheless, the case highlights a broader trend: the wooing of China’s princelings by prestigious Western educational institutions and businesses for the purpose of advancing their parochial interests in the burgeoning Chinese market.
The unseemly race to recruit princelings starts at the world’s leading colleges and universities.
Because China has no universities that rival the Ivy League or Oxford and Cambridge, senior Chinese officials prefer to send their children to these schools.
Given the opacity surrounding admission to these highly selective institutions (where the acceptance rate typically is as low as around 8%), it is impossible to tell whether princelings get in on the basis of merit or family background.
But it is notable that princelings are not found in the most prestigious doctoral programs, where professors, not administrators, make admissions decisions.
Likewise, MIT and Caltech, where only the truly gifted survive, have a dearth of princelings.
Indeed, the sheer number of princelings, including children of incumbent Chinese leaders, now attending Ivy League universities clearly points to the importance of family ties.
President Xi Jinping’s daughter, for example, studies at Harvard under an assumed name, and Bo Xilai’s son has been a student at Oxford and Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government; he is now studying at Columbia Law School.
Simply put, elite Western colleges and universities, having identified China as a top market for fund-raising and high-end network-building, regard the princelings as a valuable investment.
Nurturing ties with China’s political elite is good business, and the princelings can help open doors.
But preferential treatment for princelings at elite universities (and business schools) has real social costs, because admission to these institutions is zero-sum.
A place awarded to a less-qualified princeling is a place denied to a more qualified applicant.
Worse still, this injustice is self-perpetuating.
Western investment banks and multinationals can use princelings’ elite academic credentials to justify hiring them, even if the real reason is the hope that putting a princeling on the payroll will give the company a rainmaker in China.
Defenders of this practice insist that princelings are well educated and highly qualified.
Undoubtedly, some of them are; but many are not.
Apologists also claim that nepotism is universal, citing examples of children of American politicians and business leaders who have graduated from Ivy League universities and secured coveted private-sector jobs.
But hiring Chinese princelings is not the moral equivalent of American-style nepotism.
The political and social environments in which the two practices occur are completely different.
In the US, nepotism is difficult to hide, and public scrutiny helps to check its most blatant manifestations.
The democratic process, particularly the role played by a free press, constrains rent-seeking by children of government officials.
In China, by contrast, pervasive corruption, the absence of a free press, and state capitalism mean that princelings’ conduct is unconstrained – and typically shrouded in secrecy.
Chinese censors methodically suppress news coverage of princelings’ business dealings.
Most important, as part of its strategy for regime survival, the Chinese Communist Party favors princelings for appointments in government and state-owned enterprises.
Now, in the wake of Bo’s fall from grace, and in light of the controversy over JPMorgan’s hiring of Chinese princelings, Western academic and business leaders must ask themselves a tough question: Do they want to be complicit in helping the Party perpetuate its hereditary rule?
China’s Plenum Test
TOKYO – There is something odd and disturbing about the conventional wisdom surrounding the upcoming Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
As the November 9-12 conclave draws near, the international community’s attention seems to be focused mainly on technocratic policy changes deemed essential to restructuring China’s state-dominated economy and reenergizing growth.
Will the government liberalize interest rates or loosen capital controls?
How will the fiscal system be revamped?
Will land reform be part of the package?
The list of such questions goes on.
Outside China, the prevalent view among business leaders is that President Xi Jinping’s new administration has consolidated its power and acquired enough authority to push through far-reaching economic reforms.
He and his colleagues need only to get the specific policies right.
On the surface, such thinking may seem reasonable.
In China’s top-down political system, a unified leadership is seen as fully capable of forcing the bureaucracy to comply with its wishes.
With Xi’s anti-corruption campaign in full swing, and the example of Bo Xilai’s imprisonment serving as a warning to the new president’s adversaries (no matter how senior they are), Chinese officials at all levels, it is widely believed, are likely to toe the line.
Unfortunately, this view is both too sanguine and naïve.
It overestimates the effectiveness of anti-corruption campaigns in contemporary China (there have been many in the last three decades), and it overlooks the political sources of the country’s economic slowdown.
While Xi’s efforts to cleanse the rot inside the Chinese party-state should be applauded, it is no less important to recognize their limits.
So far, Xi’s campaign has remained a conventional affair involving selective prosecution.
Given the central government’s well-known inability to enforce its policies at the local level and the prevalence of tight-knit patronage networks in Chinese provinces and cities, it is unrealistic to expect that the current anti-corruption drive will produce significantly better results than in the past.
Indeed, the fight against corruption is at war with itself, because Xi is simultaneously seeking to buttress one-party rule.
But it is precisely the absence of effective checks on the exercise of power that encourages and sustains rampant corruption in the first place.
Optimism about the CCP’s ability to push through market-oriented reforms also ignores the real obstacles to future growth and prosperity, which do not include a lack of economic ideas or policy expertise; on the contrary, it is well known – even obvious – what kind of economic reforms are needed.
What prevents China from pursuing these reforms is a combination of opposition from powerful entrenched interest groups – state-owned enterprises, local governments, the economic-policy bureaucracy, and family members of political elites and well-connected businessmen – and flawed political institutions.
Unless Xi and his colleagues demonstrate their resolve to overcome such opposition and launch comprehensive reforms, their chances of success are not high.
Compared with the two previous breakthroughs in reforming China’s economy, in 1978 and 1992, Xi faces a different environment and a much tougher challenge.
Opponents of Deng Xiaoping’s reforms were ideologically driven; they had no personal stake in the Maoist political economy.
Defeating them required building a winning coalition within the party, discrediting the communist ideology, and rallying public support, all of which Deng did.
Today, by contrast, members of the ruling elite benefit directly and immensely from the state-dominated economy.
Market-oriented reform, by leveling the competitive playing field, would hurt their interests and reduce their privileges, making fierce opposition likely.
Only by mobilizing pressure outside the party-state can these insiders be forced to accept some of the decentralizing and liberalizing reforms that China’s economy needs.
At that point, China will have a better chance of improving its legal institutions, increasing political accountability, strengthening protection of private property rights, and making the government genuinely – in Mao’s words – “serve the people.”
Without real and significant political change, technocratic reform proposals will treat only the symptoms of China’s economic malaise, without addressing its underlying institutional causes.
In assessing the outcome of the Third Plenum, what observers should really be looking for is evidence of a bold strategy for political reform.
If Xi and his colleagues produce no credible sign of such a commitment, everything else will be eyewash – and skepticism about China’s fate under their leadership eventually will be vindicated.
Fallen Tiger, Shaken Dragon
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – Less than 18 months after becoming General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Xi Jinping is poised to cage the biggest political “tiger” – a corrupt top official – in the history of the People’s Republic.
Although rumors of the imminent fall of former internal security chief Zhou Yongkang have been swirling for months, many observers remained unsure whether Xi would prosecute Zhou and thus break the party’s long-established unwritten rule of immunity for sitting or retired members of the Politburo Standing Committee.
But doubts about Zhou’s fate have now been dispelled by a recent flurry of uncensored news stories in the Chinese media that revealed shocking details of corruption involving Zhou’s family and former subordinates.
One newspaper reported that the authorities recently searched the homes of Zhou’s two brothers.
Though these stories have yet to implicate Zhou directly, it will be only a matter of time before the Chinese government officially charges him with corruption.
Whispered reports are even more lurid.
Zhou is said to have plotted to murder his first wife, and there are rumors that at the height of last year’s scandal involving disgraced former Chongqing party boss Bo Xilai, he attempted to assassinate Xi in the leadership compound at Zhongnanhai.
Based on what the Chinese press has disclosed thus far, it is clear that the Zhou case will be the ugliest and most sensational scandal involving a senior party leader that the country has ever seen.
It will make Bo, an ally of Zhou and a former Politburo member who was sentenced to life imprisonment for corruption, look like a petty thief.
Apparently, the Chinese government is meticulously building a case against Zhou by pursuing two critical leads.
The first one targets his son, Zhou Bin, a businessman who has amassed a huge fortune through shady deals and possibly criminal activities.
With so many officials and private businessmen eager to curry favor with his father, Zhou Bin had no difficulty cashing in.
His business activities include brokering sales of oil-field equipment to Iraq (causing huge losses for Chinese state-owned oil companies); construction of hydroelectric power stations in Sichuan (where his father was the provincial party boss from 1997 to 2002); providing information technology for 8,000 state-owned gas stations; and investments in real estate, oil exploration, and toll roads.
The most damaging revelation so far concerns Zhou Bin’s friendship with a billionaire mafia boss, Liu Han, who is now standing trial for organized crime and murder.
Liu made his fortune with Zhou Bin’s help. In one case, the younger Zhou allegedly used his political connections to help Liu sell two hydroelectric power stations to a state-owned power company for a profit of ¥2.2 billion ($330 million).
The second lead centers on Zhou Yongkang’s former lieutenants.
A tactic favored by Chinese anti-corruption investigators is to detain junior officials who have worked closely with their primary target.
Typically, these minions are threatened with long prison sentences, or even the death penalty, unless they cooperate.
In this case, a dozen officials who worked for Zhou in the energy sector in Sichuan and in the Ministry of Public Security (where Zhou was Minister from 2003 to 2008) have been arrested.
Most ominously for Zhou, the officials include two of his former executive assistants, who presumably have intimate knowledge of Zhou’s activities.
When the Chinese government formally announces Zhou’s arrest – probably after the conclusion of the annual session of the National People’s Congress in mid-March – the revelations of the rot within the Chinese party-state will stun even the most jaded observers.
What Zhou, his family, and their cronies have done can be described only as insatiable looting and blatant gangsterism.
More important, the Zhou scandal will almost certainly implicate a record number of senior officials.
As of now, one minister, two provincial vice governors, one vice minister, and several senior executives in state-owned oil companies have been detained.
More officials are expected to fall in the coming year.
For Xi, ensnaring Zhou in his anti-corruption net will likely provide a boost in his popular standing.
He can show a skeptical Chinese public that he has the political will to take down one of the country’s most powerful politicians.
Moreover, vanquishing a once-untouchable politician will leave no doubt about Xi’s personal authority.
For the rest of the world, the unfolding Zhou scandal reconfirms a profoundly worrisome fact: the Middle Kingdom remains deeply corrupt.
Caging a tiger will not destroy a vampire.
Down with Dengism
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – China has recently held a series of solemn, high-profile ceremonies, barely noticed by the outside world, in honor of the 110th anniversary of former leader Deng Xiaoping’s birth.
But, as with most political festivities in China these days, few have bothered to reflect on what is being celebrated – and what Deng’s leadership actually meant.
The truth is that, while Deng deserves appreciation for having brought China back from the abyss of Maoism, his approach – “Dengism,” or authoritarian developmentalism – is now impeding China’s prospects.
Distinguishing Deng the reformer from Dengism the governing philosophy is no idle academic exercise.
Deng, who risked his authority and that of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to break with Maoist convention and launch China’s economic revolution, died in 1997.
Dengism, which emphasizes the goal of modernization under a powerful one-party state, continues to shape China’s governance system.
Deng, who famously declared, “A cat’s color does not matter as long as it catches mice,” is generally remembered as an unabashed pragmatist.
But even pragmatists have core principles that limit their actions, and Deng was no exception.
Two ideas were incontrovertible: the CCP could retain its grip on power only by delivering economic development, and China could modernize only under a strong one-party system.
Thus, rejection of democracy in any form was fundamental to Deng’s viewpoint.
Though he advocated legal reform as a tool of modernization, Deng was adamant that the rule of law not be allowed to limit the CCP’s power.
To be sure, Deng recognized some of the pathologies of the party-state.
With leadership positions allocated – often for life – on the basis of personal connections, rather than merit, he understood that the system suffered from gross inefficiency, risk aversion, and a lack of technical expertise.
But Deng was convinced that administrative reforms could resolve these issues.
What he did not anticipate was how difficult it would be to overcome resistance from within the CCP to any diminution of its powers.
The slow pace of reform frustrated Deng so much that, in the late 1980s, he asked the reformist premier Zhao Ziyang to lead a secret high-level task force to examine options for more radical changes – this time, directly targeting the political system.
But when the group asserted that progress toward modernization would require the incorporation of some democratic principles and the rule of law, Deng immediately quashed the initiative.
His view that modernization required keeping power concentrated in the hands of a single party failed to anticipate the threat that a predatory state would pose to sustained development.
Herein lies the tragedy of Dengism.
It gained credibility from the fact that its creator dismantled a cruel and destructive system, and left behind a more prosperous and humane China.
But that credibility has been used to justify the maintenance of a system that is now hampering China’s continued progress.
Dengism’s greatest intellectual failure is its inability to account for the potential of unchecked power to nurture greed and corruption among ruling elites.
Its greatest political failure is its resistance to the democratic reforms needed to constrain that power.
During Deng’s rule, Dengism’s inherent contradictions and limitations were less apparent.
After all, the Chinese people had been repressed for so long that economic reforms alone represented a huge step forward.
Indeed, by creating space for individual creativity and entrepreneurship, they unleashed a historically unprecedented period of rapid growth that lifted millions of Chinese out of poverty.
But the lack of political reform meant that there was nothing to stop the ruling elites from appropriating a disproportionate share of the new wealth.
Recent revelations of systemic corruption at all levels of government demonstrate that the gravest threat to China’s long-term economic success is the unchallenged, unruly party-state.
The good news is that President Xi Jinping seems to recognize this problem.
Beyond taking up Deng’s mantle in pursuing market-oriented economic reforms, he has been directing a bold anti-corruption campaign since coming to power.
In July, he launched a formal investigation into one of the Chinese Communist Party’s most senior figures, Zhou Yongkang – a testament to his commitment to rooting out abuse of power.
Xi’s desire to become China’s next great reformer may well be why his government has been investing so much energy in lauding Deng’s achievements.
One hopes that he continues to emulate Deng, without allowing his approach to become distorted by Dengism.
Mirror, Mirror, on the Screen
NEW YORK – Suppose a group of workers frequently communicate among themselves, and then suddenly one of them gets left off all the “copy-tos.”  “It could be that they’re planning a surprise birthday party,” says Elizabeth Charnock, whose company, Cataphora, analyzes e-mail traffic and content as well as other documents, primarily for clients involved in litigation and crime detection.
With Cataphora’s new software tool called Digital Mirror, you can see the top asymmetries in your own relationships: whom you respond to before others versus whom you postpone, reschedule, or otherwise delay – and who does the same to you.
To the extent that you are cc’ed, you can also see patterns among your friends or colleagues: Which topics provoke huge amounts of stress or argument?
Which are dismissed with little comment?
The software works by analyzing not just the “shape” of a conversation – who writes to whom, who answers, and when – but also the content.
What are the key words?
And what – judging by everything from words such as “must” or “immediately” to slang or profanity, to “softeners” such as “if you don't mind” and “please,” and text written in ALL CAPS – is the tone?
Obviously, some cultures have their own jargon and tone, so Digital Mirror looks at the relative as well as absolute frequency of the values that it measures.
Is Juan obsequiously polite to Alice, but abrupt to Marvin?
Does he respond promptly to Teresa, but ignore Anatoly?
The sofware offers nine visualizations that reflect behavior and trends over time, including quality time (a pie chart of whom you spend time with online and offline), pecking order (illustrated with chickens!), blow-off scorecard (relationship asymmetry), and temperature gauge.
The result is a startlingly clear look at what is going on in a circle of people: who defers to whom, who takes charge, who passes the buck.
Digital Mirror – along with a book written by Charnock called E-Habits, which serves as a kind of extended documentation – can be used for self-analysis or analysis of the local ecosystem.
The program is targeted at individuals, but a company systems administrator or human-resources manager could use it to identify company- or group-wide patterns – though to do so without informing employees that their mail is being monitored would be illegal in Europe and bad practice at best in the United States. 
Of course, transparency is unsettling – whether it’s seeing your own wrinkles in the mirror, or confirming unpleasant aspects of how others treat you.
Transparency is unambiguously good for companies and for governments; by and large they don’t welcome it, but it makes them more accountable to their constituents and to society.
Personal transparency and accountability, on the other hand, are harder, owing both to a lack of visibility and to people’s reluctance to confront one another – or themselves.
Once you see your own digital reflection, will you improve your behavior? (Surely you are not already perfect?)
Though personal transparency is uncomfortable, wouldn’t you rather answer to a piece of software than confront your friends’ candor face-to-face?
Conversely, if someone at work is bothering you, you don’t need to tell them directly; you can just e-mail them a link to Digital Mirror (just like the old trick of dropping a can of deodorant on a co-worker’s desk – difficult but sometimes necessary).
Indeed, I suspect that the people who need Digital Mirror the most are the ones who will recognize that need the least.
Still, it may help the semi-self-aware to improve their personal relations – or at least to be more aware of the trade-offs they make when they favor one friend or colleague over another.
According to Charnock, “People believe that the digital world largely masks their preferences for different individuals. For example, in a real-world office, you can see who goes out to lunch together or gossips at the water cooler, who has a line in front of their door, and so on.
Not only are many of the equivalent online activities harder to see or quantify, but things like Facebook encourage you to ‘friend’ everyone….Everyone is more popular, more intelligent, and better looking than average.
Digital Mirror does the reverse.
It is like the difference between a bar or club where the lights are low, and a good make-up mirror.”
This all reflects a trend toward greater clarity in our relations.
Facebook and other social tools operate under the covers: Facebook notices which friends you interact with and whose photos you comment on in order to select the items in your NewsFeed or the ads you see.
But Facebook does not show that information to you. Digital Mirror does.
Within a few years, this kind of transparency will probably be commonplace, both from Facebook and from ad networks and behavioral targeters trying to derive information about your likely purchases.
But right now, only Digital Mirror is one of the few to give you the ability to do the same for yourself.
Mismanaging Missile Defense
Missile defense has suddenly emerged as a divisive issue in Europe.
Rather than enhancing European security, the Bush administration’s plan to deploy elements of a missile defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic threatens to increase strains with Russia and deepen divisions with America’s European allies, particularly those in Eastern Europe, where support for US polices has been strongest.
The growing opposition to the US missile defense deployment is rooted in the way in which America has managed – or rather mismanaged – the presentation of its deployment plans.
First, US officials did not lay the political and psychological groundwork for deployment.
They assumed that Czech and Polish leaders – who were strongly pro-American – would willingly agree to deployment, and that public opinion in both countries would go along with whatever the governments decided.
But America failed to develop a coherent public rationale for its planned deployment of a system designed to destroy a missile fired by a rogue regime.
As a result, the Czech and Polish governments were unable to answer fundamental questions about the costs and benefits of the deployment for Polish and Czech national security.
This allowed skeptics and opponents of missile defense to gain the upper hand in the internal debates in both countries.
Second, US officials initially tended to view missile defense largely as a technological issue divorced from its political context.
For most Europeans, however, the military-technical issues are less important than the broader political implications of deployment for European stability and security.
The initial American briefings to European allies ignored this fact.
Third, America underestimated the role of public opinion in Poland and the Czech Republic.
US officials assumed that it was sufficient to have the consent of the governments and failed to recognize the degree to which these countries have become increasingly “Europeanized” in the last decade.
Membership in the European Union has resulted in the proliferation of ties to Europe at many levels, as well as a major influx of EU money.
This has had an enormous impact on public attitudes in Eastern Europe.
In Poland, a big gap exists between the government’s attitude and that of the population regarding the EU.
The Polish government is dominated by Euro-skeptics and has pursued a highly nationalistic policy that has often antagonized EU officials.
Ordinary Poles, by contrast, are strongly pro-European.
According to recent polls, 80% of the population supports Poland’s membership in the EU – the highest in Europe.
Fourth, American officials have tended to assume that the countries of Eastern Europe will remain staunchly pro-American and automatically support US policy.
That was true five years ago, but it is much less true today.
As Eastern European countries become more closely integrated into the EU, they increasingly have to calculate the impact of their policies on relations with Europe.
At the same time, the war in Iraq and abuses associated with it have tarnished America’s image in Eastern Europe.
This is true even in Poland, which is the most pro-American country in the region.
The Polish government strongly supported the US in Iraq, sending the third largest contingent of forces, after the US and Great Britain.
However, Polish public opinion, like public opinion in Western Europe, was overwhelmingly opposed to the Iraq invasion.
Moreover, many Poles feel they have little to show for the government’s support.
As former Polish Defense Minister Radek Sikorski noted recently, there is a sense among many Poles that the US takes Poland for granted.
Sikorski’s argument shocked many US officials, because he is considered one of the most pro-American politicians in Poland.
But it reflects a widespread sentiment among many Poles, including those who are staunch supporters of close ties to the US.
Unlike the Iraq operation, the planned missile defense deployment will almost certainly require approval by the Polish parliament.
This approval cannot be taken for granted.
The government will need to explain to a skeptical Polish population and parliament why the deployment is in Poland’s national interest – not just America’s interest – and how it enhances Polish security.
Simply saying, “because the Americans want it” will not be enough.
The US can still win the missile debate in Europe, but only if it stops treating missile defense primarily as a technological issue and addresses the broader political concerns that are driving the debate among European publics, including those in Eastern Europe.
Misusing the Inaction Argument
SAN JOSÉ, COSTA RICA – One commonly repeated argument for doing something about climate change sounds compelling, but turns out to be almost fraudulent.
It is based on comparing the cost of action with the cost of inaction, and almost every major politician in the world uses it.
The president of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, for example, used this argument when he presented the European Union’s proposal to tackle climate change earlier this year.
The EU promised to cut its CO2 emissions by 20% by 2020, at a cost that the Commission’s own estimates put at about 0.5% of GDP, or roughly €60 billion per year.
This is obviously a hefty price tag – at least a 50% increase in the total cost of the EU – and it will likely be much higher (the Commission has previously estimated the cost to be double its current estimate).
But Barroso’s punchline was that “the cost is low compared to the high price of inaction.”
In fact, he forecasted that the price of doing nothing “could even approach 20% of GDP.”
(Never mind that this cost estimate is probably wildly overestimated – most models show about 3% damages.)
So there you have it.
Of course, politicians should be willing to spend 0.5% of GDP to avoid a 20% cost of GDP.
This sounds eminently sensible – until you realize that Barroso is comparing two entirely different issues.
The 0.5%-of-GDP expense will reduce emissions ever so slightly (if everyone in the EU actually fulfills their requirements for the rest of the century, global emissions will fall by about 4%).
This would reduce the temperature increase expected by the end of the century by just five-hundredths of a degree Celsius (nine-hundredths Fahrenheit).
Thus, the EU’s immensely ambitious program will not stop or even significantly impact global warming.
In other words, if Barroso fears costs of 20% of GDP in the year 2100, the 0.5% payment every year of this century will do virtually nothing to change that cost.
We would still have to pay by the end of the century, only now we would also have made ourselves poorer in the 90 years preceding it.
The sleight of hand works because we assume that the action will cancel all the effects of inaction, whereas of course, nothing like that is true.
This becomes much clearer if we substitute much smaller action than Barroso envisions. 
For example, say that the EU decides to put up a diamond-studded wind turbine at the Berlaymont headquarters, which will save one ton of CO2 each year.
The cost will be $1 billion, but the EU says that this is incredibly cheap when compared to the cost of inaction on climate change, which will run into the trillions.
It should be obvious that the $1 billion windmill doesn’t negate the trillions of dollars of damage from climate change that we still have to pay by the end of the century.
The EU’s argument is similar to advising a man with a gangrenous leg that paying $50,000 for an aspirin is a good deal because the cost compares favorably to the cost of inaction, which is losing the leg.
Of course, the aspirin doesn’t prevent that outcome.
The inaction argument is really terribly negligent, because it causes us to recommend aspirin and lose sight of smarter actions that might actually save the leg.
Likewise, it is negligent to focus on inefficiently cutting CO2 now because of costs in the distant future that in reality will not be avoided.
It stops us from focusing on long-term strategies like investment in energy R&amp;D that would actually solve climate change and at a much lower cost.
If Barroso were alone, perhaps we could let his statement go, but the same argument is used again and again by influential politicians.
Germany’s Angela Merkel says it “makes economic sense” to cut CO2, because the “the economic consequences of inaction will be dramatic for us all.”
Australia’s Kevin Rudd agrees that “the cost of inaction will be far greater than the cost of action.”
United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon has gone on record with the exact same words.
In the United States, both John McCain and Barack Obama use the cost of inaction as a pivotal reason to support carbon cuts.
California senator Diane Feinstein argues that we should curb carbon emissions because the Sierra snowpack, which accounts for much of California’s drinking water, will be reduced by 40% by 2050 due to global warming.
What she fails to tell us is that even a substantial reduction in emissions – at a high cost – will have an immeasurable effect on snowmelt by 2050.
Instead, we should perhaps invest in water storage facilities.
Likewise, when politicians fret that we will lose a significant proportion of polar bears by 2050, they use it as an argument for cutting carbon, but forget to tell us that doing so will have no measurable effect on polar bear populations.
Instead, we should perhaps stop shooting the 300 polar bears we hunt each year.
The inaction argument makes us spend vast resources on policies that will do virtually nothing to deal with climate change, thereby diverting those resources from policies that could actually make an impact.
We would never accept medical practitioners advising ultra-expensive and ineffective aspirins for gangrene because the cost of aspirin outweighs the cost of losing the leg.
Why, then, should we tolerate such fallacious arguments when debating the costliest public policy decision in the history of mankind?
Managing Europe’s Perfect Storm
NEW YORK – The Chinese often point out that in their language the character for crisis and opportunity are one and the same.
But, while it is indeed true that crisis and opportunity often go hand in hand, it is difficult to see much opportunity in Europe’s current circumstances.
One reason the current situation facing Europe is so difficult is that it was so unexpected.
Here we are, 70 years after the end of World War II, a quarter-century after the end of the Cold War, and some two decades after the Balkan wars, and suddenly Europe’s political, economic, and strategic future seems much more uncertain than anyone predicted as recently as a year ago.
Another reason to be worried is that Europe faces not one crisis, but several.
The first is economic: not just the current reality of slow growth, but the prospect that slow growth will continue without respite, owing above all to policies that often discourage businesses from investing and hiring.
The rise of populist political parties of both the left and the right across the continent attests to popular frustrations and fears.
Making matters worse for Europe’s economy was the decision taken decades back to introduce a common currency without a common fiscal policy.
Discipline disappeared at the national level in many countries; Greece was the most recent casualty, but it is unlikely to be the last.
The second crisis results from Russian actions in Ukraine.
There is no prospect of Russia giving up Crimea, and questions about its intentions in eastern Ukraine and the Baltics are mounting.
The result is the return of geopolitics to Europe at a time when defense spending is modest and public support for armed intervention is largely absent.
The third, and most pressing, crisis is the result of massive flows of migrants from the Middle East and elsewhere into Europe.