Some analysts predict that only half of Britain’s MPs will be returned in next year’s election.
But, whatever the failures of particular British legislators, the issues go further than merely allowing voters to “throw the rascals out.”
There is also a question of how successful leadership is taught and learned in a democracy.
A successful democracy requires leadership to be widespread throughout government and civil society.
Citizens who express concern about leadership need to learn not only how to judge it, but how to practice it themselves.
Many observers say that leadership is an art rather than a science.
Good leadership is situational. In my book The Powers to Lead , I call this skill “contextual intelligence.”
The ability to mobilize a group effectively is certainly an art rather than a predictive science, and varies with situations, but that does not mean that it cannot be profitably studied and learned.
Music and painting are based in part on innate skills, but also on training and practice.
And artists can benefit not merely from studio courses, but also from art appreciation lessons that introduce them to the full repertoires and pallets of past masters.
Learning leadership occurs in a variety of ways. Learning from experience is the most common and most powerful.
It produces the tacit knowledge that is crucial in a crisis. But experience and intuition can be supplemented by analytics, which is the purpose of my book.
As Mark Twain once observed, a cat that sits on a hot stove will not sit on a hot stove again, but it won’t sit on a cold one, either.
Consequently, learning to analyze situations and contexts is an important leadership skill.
The United States Army categorizes leadership learning under three words: “be, know, do.”
“Be” refers to the shaping of character and values, and it comes partly from training and partly from experience.
“Know” refers to analysis and skills, which can be trained.
“Do” refers to action and requires both training and fieldwork.
Most important, however, is experience and the emphasis on learning from mistakes and a continuous process that results from what the military calls “after-action reviews.”
Learning can also occur in the classroom, whether through case studies, historical and analytic approaches, or experiential teaching that simulates situations that train students to increase self-awareness, distinguish their roles from their selves, and use their selves as a barometer for understanding a larger group.
Similarly, students can learn from the results of scientific studies, limited though they may be, and by studying the range of behaviors and contexts that historical episodes can illuminate.
In practice, of course, few people occupy top positions in groups or organizations.
Most people “lead from the middle.”
Effective leadership from the middle often requires attracting and persuading those above, below, and beside you.
Indeed, leaders in the middle frequently find themselves in a policy vacuum, with few clear directives from the top.
A passive follower keeps his head down, shuns risk, and avoids criticism.
An opportunist uses the slack to feather his own nest rather than help the leader or the public.
Bureaucratic entrepreneurs, on the other hand, take advantage of such opportunities to adjust and promote policies.
The key moral question is whether, and at what point, their entrepreneurial activity exceed the bounds of policies set from the top.
Since they lack the legitimate authority of elected or high-level appointed officials, bureaucratic entrepreneurs must remain cognizant of the need to balance initiative with loyalty.
Leaders should encourage such entrepreneurship among their followers as a means of increasing their effectiveness.
After all, the key to successful leadership is to surround oneself with good people, empower them by delegating authority, and then claim credit for their accomplishments.
To make this formula work, however, requires a good deal of soft power.
Without the soft power that produces attraction and loyalty to the leader’s goals, entrepreneurs run off in all directions and dissipate a group’s energies.
With soft power, however, the energy of empowered followers strengthens leaders.
Leadership is broadly distributed throughout healthy democracies, and all citizens need to learn more about what makes good and bad leaders.
Potential leaders, in turn, can learn more about the sources and limits of the soft-power skills of emotional IQ, vision, and communication, as well as hard-power political and organizational skills.
They must also better understand the nature of the contextual intelligence they will need to educate their hunches and sustain strategies of smart power.
Most important, in today’s age of globalization, revolutionary information technology, and broadened participation, citizens in democracies must learn more about the nature and limits of the new demands on leadership.
Learning to Leave Extremism
BEIRUT – Report after report from the World Bank, United Nations Development Program, and the Arab League emphasize that the education deficit in the Arab world is among the main causes of its underdevelopment.
With 5% of the world’s population and the bulk of the world’s oil and gas, the Arab world nonetheless lags behind most of the rest of the world, and suffers from what can best be termed “educational poverty.”
Without dramatic improvement at all educational levels, unemployment, illiteracy, and income inequality will continue to worsen, and the region will remain a danger to itself and its neighbors.
Even before the current economic recession, unemployment in the Arab world was estimated at 14% – the world’s highest average outside sub-Saharan Africa.
Among young people and recent graduates, the figure is more than double.
The Arab world also has the highest population growth rate in the world, with almost 40% of its population now below the age of 15.
According to some estimates, the Arab world accounts for one-quarter of the world’s unemployment among the 15-24 age group.
Just to keep up with the inflow of young people into the labor market, Arab economies will have to generate 100 million new jobs over the next 10 years, which will be impossible if education remains impoverished.
Enrollment ratios in the Arab world have improved over the past decade, but Arab countries still have one of the lowest average net enrollment ratios in the developing world.
About one-fifth of eligible children, more than seven million, are not in school, and 60% of these are girls.
The average years of schooling for Arabs is less than half that for the East Asian countries.
Not surprisingly, despite progress in recent decades, illiteracy remains at around 30% on average, and in some Arab countries reaches 50% and 60%.
The quality of Arab education is also an obstacle.
Today’s job market demands skills based on problem-solving, critical thinking, modern languages, and technology, but Arab educational systems generally remain traditional, rote-based, and authoritarian.
Research throughout the world shows that education is a key prerequisite for sustainable growth.
The East Asian tigers invested heavily in education, and it paid off in terms of a capable and modern workforce.
By contrast, development in the Arab world, driven largely by oil revenues, has left the population under-educated and economically marginalized.
Schools and universities received large-scale support, and students and scholars traveled from city to city in pursuit of knowledge.
After these golden ages, education fell into decline.
By the 1970’s and 1980’s, the Arab world’s post-independence states had made great improvements in their education sector.
But they did not have the resources to keep up with their own growing populations.
The dramatic levels of investment of the 1950’s and 1960’s tapered off, with the result that too many children are now either outside the school system or are receiving a low-quality education that leaves them without basic literacy and numeracy skills.
And there are still too many disparities based on gender, location, wealth, disability, and other markers of marginalization.
What the West has most, and what the Arab world most needs, is education.
It requires more schools and fewer guns; more universities and fewer aircraft carriers.
The American University of Beirut, founded in 1866, has arguably done more to transform the Middle East in positive ways than any other comparable institution, yet it receives only $3 million in annual aid from the United States, which spends billions on armies and weaponry in the region.
Indeed, the cost of a single month of western military spending in Iraq or Afghanistan would be enough to triple total aid for education in the Middle East.
The cost of two cruise missiles would build a school, the cost of a Eurofighter a small university.
Education can also have a fundamental effect on forming values.
Radical Islamists recognized this long ago and plowed their resources into schools.
Saudi Arabia recognized it in the 1970’s as it sought to expand its influence, and over the years the Kingdom has funded thousands of schools and colleges that teach its stringent brand of Wahhabi Islam.
In Afghanistan and Pakistan, the radical vision is conveyed to the young in religious schools known as madrasas.
Indeed, “Taliban” means “students.”
The struggle for the future of the Arab and Muslim worlds that is being fought now will be won or lost not on the battlefield, but in the classroom.
Learning Without Theory
CAMBRIDGE – How can we improve the state of the world?
How can we make countries more competitive, growth more sustainable and inclusive, and genders more equal?
One way is to have a correct theory of the relationship between actions and outcomes and then to implement actions that achieve our goals.
But, in most of the situations we face, we lack such a theory, or if we have one, we are not sure that it is correct.
So what can we do?
Should we postpone action until we learn about what works?
But how will we learn if we do not act?
And if we act, how can we learn whether we did the right thing?
New advances in machine learning and biological anthropology are shedding light on how learning happens and what makes a learning process successful.
But, while theories are important, most of what we learn does not depend on them.
For example, there may be a theory of what makes a cat a cat, but that is not how toddlers learn to recognize them.
As Harvard’s Leslie Valiant argues in his 2013 book, we learn the concept of “catness” in a theory-less way by inferring it from a set of pictures of animals that are appropriately labeled as either cats or non-cats.
And the more examples we see, the more we become “probably, approximately correct.”
We learn to recognize the spoken language without knowledge of linguistics, and voice-recognition software uses a theory-less learning algorithm called a “hidden Markov chain” on a set of audios and their texts, rather than by using linguistics, as Ray Kurzweil tells us in his book How to Create a Mind.
To the chagrin of many of us academics, theory is often dispensable.
Biological evolution is also based on a theory-less algorithm, one that learns which genotypes generate better-adapted individuals without having a theory of which changes in the genome will improve performance.
It just uses random variation and selection of the fittest, over and over again.
While biological evolution through sexual reproduction requires generations, we can learn from each other much more quickly through cultural evolution, explaining why humans have made so much progress.
According to Robert Boyd, Peter Richerson, and Joseph Henrich, our ability to imitate is at the core of our success as a species.
It is what makes cultural evolution possible, cumulative, and powerful.
It is what allows us to learn from others and hence to make progress much faster than if we were to learn by ourselves.
In addition, because imitation, like genetic replication, is not perfect, we accidentally discover other ways of doing the same thing (or even new and better things).
We humans are wired to imitate others, and we especially prefer to imitate the most successful among us.
This makes evolutionary sense, as the features of the successful are more likely to be related to their success than those of others.
But this may lead to errors when what we imitate is unrelated to success.
Advertising has exploited this weakness in our wiring, making us think that if George Clooney is cool and wears something, maybe we can be cool by wearing it, too.
More constructively, the business world uses imitation through the practice of benchmarking, whereby companies share performance information so that they can all learn what is achievable and whom to try to imitate, thus facilitating the identification of “best practices.”
To improve, you can start by imitating what successful companies do, without a good theory of why.
Benchmarking has been moving to the policy arena, including issues such as sustainable development, the business environment, competitiveness, gender parity, and, more recently, inclusive growth.
Some of these applications create good measures of performance, allowing users to assess outcomes and track progress.
Good examples of these benchmarking exercises are the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index or the United Nations’ Human Development Index.
They are theory-less in the sense that they do not tell you how to improve performance; but they do tell you if you did improve – that is, they inform about changes in “fitness.”
Other indicators, in my view, confuse measures of performance with measures of hypothetical causes of performance.
They confuse the “what” and the “how,” and they inappropriately put both in the index.
They attempt to be more theory-driven than our knowledge allows.
Two examples of this are the WEF’s Global Competitiveness Index and its new Inclusive Growth and Development Index.
For example, competitiveness has to do with the ability to increase market share without sacrificing margins or lowering wages, something that reflects superior productivity.
The inclusiveness of growth has to do with the disparities of income and growth across different regions and social groups.
But this is not what these indexes really measure.
Instead, the indexes include variables – what they refer to as the “policy space” – that are supposed to cause either competitiveness or inclusive growth.
And the authors do not even check whether they do.
(In the case of competitiveness, my co-authors and I have found that they don’t.)
Confusing “what” and “how” is counterproductive.
It has led country after country, including Colombia, Mexico, Morocco, and Saudi Arabia, to try to improve their competitiveness ranking by working on things that are in the index but that do not really improve their performance.
And they are late in finding out, because they do improve their ranking in the index.
We do not really know what could make growth more inclusive, countries more competitive, and development more sustainable in each country and region; and we should not pretend that we do.
We can help the world make progress by measuring the outcomes we care about, facilitating imitation and tracking performance.
But confusing means and ends will have us all dressing like George Clooney and wondering why we do not really feel all that cool.
Can Lebanon Escape the Resource Curse?
BEIRUT – After two and a half years without a president, Lebanon’s Parliament has elected Michel Aoun to the post.
Now, Lebanon can turn its attention to oil and gas production, with policymakers’ expectations running high – verging on irrational exuberance – that an energy windfall will jumpstart the country’s economy, which has suffered from poor political and economic governance and the spillover effects from Syria’s civil war.
Lebanon’s potential hydrocarbon wealth could indeed transform the country, as well as providing a model for other Middle Eastern energy producers to follow.
But policymakers must be mindful of four major risks.
For starters, oil and gas prices are volatile, and fossil fuels in general have an uncertain future.
Oil and gas prices have declined by some 60% since June 2014, and it is unlikely that they will recover over the medium term.
We are in the age of oil’s “new normal,” defined by plentiful alternative energy sources.
Second, the size of Lebanon’s recoverable energy reserves is uncertain.
Equally important, even under the most optimistic scenarios, the country’s capacity to manage oil and gas extraction, production, and distribution is uncertain as well.
Third, ongoing territorial disputes in the region – and the absence of agreed maritime borders with Cyprus, Israel, and Syria – creates legal uncertainty about who owns and may exploit certain oil and gas blocks.
Fourth, Lebanon’s leaders must deal with its dysfunctional politics and dismal governance, which are likely to frustrate any attempt to manage its natural resources transparently and sustainably.
So, can Lebanon escape the curse of the “devil’s excrement” that has afflicted many of its Middle Eastern neighbors?
The International Monetary Fund’s estimate of Lebanon’s potential oil and gas revenues optimistically assumes that production will start in 2021, reach full capacity by 2036, and continue until 2056.
In this scenario, once production starts, resource revenues would constitute about 2.8% of Lebanon’s non-oil GDP, and would account for about 9% of government revenues at peak production, before gradually declining.
But even if oil and gas blocks are auctioned off almost immediately, in 2017, and then successfully explored, the resulting revenues would not arrive until 2022 at the earliest.
Manna from heaven is not about to fall on Lebanon.
Meanwhile, Lebanon’s new leadership must address the government’s dismal fiscal predicament, including a 2016 budget deficit amounting to 8.1% of GDP and government debt totaling 144% of GDP – one of the highest public-debt ratios in the world.
This means that Lebanon must undergo strong fiscal adjustments sooner, rather than later, and that any future oil and gas revenues will have to be heavily discounted.
But Lebanon’s governance is the more critical issue, because the country must now build a foundation to manage its fossil-fuel wealth properly.
The main lesson from other resource-rich countries is that, in the absence of good governance – strong institutions, the rule of law, effective regulations – Lebanon’s energy windfall will likely lead to more corruption, as special interests and politicians try to capture the rents for themselves.
With Lebanese politics persistently in a quagmire, the new leadership must establish a sound fiscal regime and a robust governance framework to ensure transparency in energy exploitation and production, fiscal sustainability, and intergenerational equity.
It can do so if it follows the right roadmap.
First, to guarantee that Lebanon’s natural resources are prudently managed, the government should formally join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
Third, Lebanon should establish an independent energy regulator, by making the Lebanese Petroleum Administration independent from the Ministry of Energy and Water and widen its mandate to manage Lebanon’s natural resources.
Separation and independence from the ministry is needed to protect natural-resource management and decision-making from political interference.
Finally, Lebanon should adopt a legal framework for setting long-term constraints on fiscal policy.
In particular, government expenditure should be determined by an estimate of permanent income (including the sustainable contribution from resource revenues), while cyclical revenue would be saved in a sovereign-wealth fund. Similar to Chile and Norway’s well-known precedents, such a rule would stipulate that all energy-price windfalls automatically be saved, and that government spending be determined by cyclically adjusted tax revenues and a share of energy revenues.
The stakes for Lebanon are high.
A troubled country in a tumultuous region, it could transform itself if it soundly and efficiently manages its prospective oil and gas wealth.
Or it could succumb to the curse, which would entrench the country’s waste, nepotism, corruption, and inequality.
Lebanon’s oil and gas wealth belongs to all of its citizens, current and future.
If the new leadership bases its decision-making on a national consensus – and under a governance framework that ensures transparency, disclosure, and accountability – the curse will be cast off.
And others in the region might see such success as worthy of emulation.
Educating Syria’s Refugee Children
BEIRUT – When I took charge of Lebanon’s Ministry of Education and Higher Education in February 2014, I was presented with two huge challenges.
In addition to improving the management and quality of Lebanon’s public education system, I had to determine how to handle the unprecedented influx of refugees from Syria – around half a million of them children.
One possibility would have been to focus solely on providing education to Lebanese children – thereby upholding our country’s long-held status as an important intellectual center in the Middle East – and to outsource the refugee problem to the international community.
After all, Lebanon has already done far more than many other countries, accepting well over a million Syrian refugees despite the intense pressure on the local population and economy.
Instead, I took the view that, as long as these children were on Lebanese soil, we have a responsibility to provide them with a quality education in a structured environment, so that when they can finally return to Syria, they will have the skills and knowledge with which to rebuild their country.
The greater risk, I felt, would have been to leave these children sitting idle, losing their hopes and aspirations, or, worse, being forced into child labor or drawn in by radical ideologies.
My ministry has worked with the international community, especially UNICEF and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, as well as international donors like the European Union, the United Kingdom, and the World Bank, to develop the strategy we call Reaching All Children with Education (RACE).
Through this initiative, we have committed to support all the children and youth displaced from Syria, a country that before the war had achieved near universal enrollment.
Despite various setbacks, during the last academic year we opened 1,000 public schools to non-Lebanese students.
By using many of the buildings in double shifts, we were able to provide 106,795 Syrian refugee children with schooling.
Next year, I want to go much further.
I am aiming to double the number of Syrian children in our public schools to 200,000 students.
This is a huge endeavor, considering that only 238,000 Lebanese students are attending public school.
So I have commissioned a number of studies to help us craft a scaled-up enrollment strategy for September, and installed a project-management team in the ministry whose sole task is to make sure that we can reach this goal.
The biggest challenge, however, will be to secure the necessary financing.
The biggest constraint we had in providing education to Syrian children last year was the lack of resources.
Indeed, despite strong demand, lack of financing hampered our ability to increase enrollment considerably.
My plan this year is to show the world that the planning, policies, and systems are in place months before the start of the school year – ready to be scaled up if the financing can be provided.
It is important to note that the Lebanese government plans to cover a large share of the cost of the program.
We estimate that providing a refugee child with a place in our public schools will cost roughly $1,800 per year; donors are being asked to contribute $363 per student in the first shift and $600 per student in the second.
Unfortunately, however, the price tag for providing children with an education is just one part of the total cost of this effort.
Some Syrian children will need psycho-social and health support to cope with the unimaginable trauma suffered because of the war.
Language difficulties mean that some will struggle to bond with their Lebanese counterparts or learn at the same rate.
New schools may need to be constructed.
Transportation will need to be found and funded.
And finally – and importantly for me – the program will have to be designed in a way that ensures that Lebanese parents don’t feel compelled to pull their children out of public school and incur debts by educating them privately.
Each of these challenges will cost money, which is why we hope that, as we approach the beginning of the school year in September, the international community will urgently increase its financial support to Lebanon.
With no end in sight to the crisis in Syria, it is likely that we will need to provide these children with education for years to come.
So I call on donors to make multi-year commitments that enable us to ensure the students are able to complete their schooling.
Lebanon is not able to bear this burden alone.
We are facing a shortfall of $100 million for the new school year.
Without additional support from the international community, our vision will not be realized – despite strong political will and rigorous planning.
Lebanon often struggles to attract funding because of its status as a middle-income country, but this label is misleading, as it does not take into account serious structural weaknesses that pre-date the Syrian crisis or the huge proportion of the resident population composed of refugees from Syria, Palestine, and Iraq living in abject poverty.
One thing I hope will become clear at the Oslo education summit is the need to help middle-income countries affected by fragility and conflict.
I am thankful to the donors who have been with us from the beginning, but we now need additional international support.
This September, we have the potential to enroll nearly half the refugee children in our country in the public-school system.
The alternative is leaving hundreds of thousands of children on the streets, languishing in informal settlements with an uncertain future.
Lebanon’s Example to Iraq
Iraq’s voters have spoken.
Now a new government must be formed and a new constitution written.
Lebanon, argues Paul Salem, may provide a guide for those Iraqis who seek a constitution that can reconcile the country’s Shi-ite, Sunni, Kurdish and Turkmen communities.
Rebuilding a country devastated by war, riven by internal divisions, and plagued by foreign intervention in a part of the world as volatile as the Middle East is one of the most daunting tasks imaginable.
Add to it a desire to create a democracy from scratch in a region characterized by authoritarian government and that task becomes almost impossible.
But the challenge has been met before, in Lebanon after its nightmarishly long civil war (1975-1990).
So perhaps there are lessons from that experience that can be applied in Iraq.
Both Lebanon and Iraq comprise ancient communities living within the borders of states outlined in the 20th century.
Although a strong sense of modern nationalism exists in both, ancient ethnic and religious communities play a critical role in shaping political identities and public life.
Both countries also possess a fairly educated middle class and intelligentsia alongside more traditional elites.
Both societies have a mixed history that included periods of peaceful, cooperative politics and periods of violence and bloodletting.
One lesson from Lebanon’s recent history stands out above all others: in divided political societies such as Lebanon and Iraq, coalition democracy is preferable to majoritarian winner-takes-all democracy.
In Lebanon, the danger of one community monopolizing power over others is avoided because the Lebanese constitution imposes permanent power-sharing arrangements on all major communities.
These arrangements apply both to parliament and the executive branch.
In Lebanon’s post-war parliament, seats are widely distributed among the various confessional communities, so that none feels excluded or fears losing political representation if it loses numerical superiority.
In the executive branch, the council of ministers is balanced among Christians and Muslims in order to encourage, indeed force, cooperation and to avoid the risk of domination the fear of oppression by one group.
In addition, the three major posts in government—the president of the republic, the prime minister, and the speaker of parliament—are counterbalanced in power and are also divided among the three largest communities.
Moreover, coexistence and cooperation among the various communities is enshrined as a basic principle in Lebanon’s constitution.
Promoting any policy or law that increases communal tension is unconstitutional.
In Iraq, some of these steps have already been taken.
The Governing Council and the interim Government are both coalition bodies of the Lebanese type, comprising studied proportions from the three main communities in Iraq—the Shia, the Sunni, and the Kurds. Iraq, however, still has neither a parliament nor a constitution.
With regard to parliament, there is no need to follow Lebanon’s rigid apportionment of seats according to confessional identity.
All the same, Iraq’s parliamentary electoral law should be drawn up to take two important factors into account:
· First, districts should be drawn to ensure that all major communities in the country are amply represented in parliament and none feels left out;
· Second, electoral districts should be multi-member districts and should, as far as is possible, include populations of more than one community in order to encourage cross-communal politics and the election of moderate politicians that can speak to all communities and that know how to resolve tensions among them.
Until elections can be organized, it may be necessary to do what was done in Lebanon just after the war: appoint members to an interim Iraqi parliament.
This could be described as a temporary advisory parliament, or ‘Shura Council,’ but it should include hundreds of figures from throughout the country and they should be selected through the Governing Council and interim Government after nationwide consultations.
Such a large Shura Council would provide a broad Iraqi face and body to the interim administration. It would also serve to create the beginnings of Iraqi parliamentary and local politics in advance of the elections, which should be held as soon as possible.
In terms of drawing up a new constitution, the Lebanese principle of government by power sharing must be a central pillar.
Beyond the balance of representation in parliament and government, a balance might need to be struck between the highest offices of state.
As in Lebanon, Iraqis might need to create a balance between the offices of president, prime minister, and speaker of parliament, and to agree that a leader of a different major community will occupy each.
This would reinforce the need for inter-communal cooperation and minimize the risk of a return to any form of communal domination or dictatorship.
As someone who knew Lebanon in its darkest hours—when Lebanon was a by-word for chaos, violence, and political hopelessness—and who saw its rapid reconstitution as a functioning participatory political system and its astonishing return to normalcy, I know that Iraq can be politically rebuilt.
Like the Lebanese, Iraqis have suffered enough.
By recognizing a permanent say in politics for all of the country’s mutually suspicious communities, Iraqis can pull back from the brink and build for themselves an Iraq worthy of their talents and their history.
Lebanon’s Moment of Decision
Lebanon is at a historic crossroad.
It can choose to lead the Middle East into vibrant multi-sectarian democracy or slump back into corrupt local politics under foreign tutelage.
The latter path could easily lead to civil strife and, perhaps, another civil war.
At this very moment, Lebanon’s political leaders are meeting jointly for the first time in the country’s modern history without the interference of Syria, France, or the United States.
Everyone from Saad Hariri, the son of our murdered Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, to Hizbullah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, is present to discuss openly the issues that divide the country, as are the leaders of Lebanon’s Shiia, Sunni, Greek Orthodox, Maronite Christian, and Druze communities.
This national dialogue, held under security measures that have basically shut down central Beirut, began March 2 and is expected to last up to ten days.
But one player is missing: Emile Lahoud, who claims Lebanon’s presidency as his by right of Syrian power.
Lahoud’s absence is not surprising, as the discussions deal with the fate of his illegal presidency and how to break the deadlock that his continuance in office has imposed on the country.
Indeed, just as Lahoud’s chair at the talks is vacant, so – in the eyes of the world and under the country’s 150-year old constitution – is Lebanon’s presidency.
It has been vacant since September 2004 when Lahoud, backed by Syria, forced an extension of his six-year term on the Lebanese parliament, which elects the president.
We Lebanese can already claim victory in our year-long non-violent fight for independence and democracy.
We have succeeded in placing the issue of the presidency at center stage in Lebanese politics.
Parliament Speaker Nabih Birri, Hizbullah Secretary General Hassan Nasrallah, and Michel Aoun, leader of the Free Patriotic Movement, remain reluctant participants in the search for a new head of state.
Nevertheless, the election of a new, democratic, and lawful president has become accepted nationally as a necessary point of departure from the murderous path taken by the country with the extension of Lahoud’s mandate.
This was clearly demonstrated on February 14, when roughly a million people assembled to commemorate the first anniversary of Rafik Hariri’s assassination.
The crowd’s sole demand was that Lahoud step down.
On that day, I urged Druze leader Walid Jumblatt and Future Movement leader Saad Hariri, a Sunni and the political heir of his slain father, to make this their paramount slogan.
The democratic movement’s main objective is to bring about a non-violent, constitutional process to replace Lahoud with a new president in free and open elections.
In this we have the clear support of the international community, with the United Nations Security Council giving its unanimous support to my demand for presidential elections.
On January 23, the Security Council issued a statement expressing regret that the conduct of “free and fair presidential elections” had not yet been carried out in accordance with Security Council Resolution 1559, which was passed on the eve of Lahoud’s extension.
At a historic gathering of the parliamentary majority on February 16, I presented a four-step process to complete, in a constitutional manner, our non-violent revolt against foreign power.
First, the popular and parliamentary majority in Lebanon must declare that no solution is possible without the election of a new president.
Second, a majority of parliamentarians must sign a petition declaring null and void the extension of Lahoud’s term.
Third, the parliamentary majority must formally acknowledge Lahoud’s illegitimacy.
Finally, Lebanon must elect a new president.
With the national dialogue now underway, we are in the midst of phase three.
If, during this dialogue, a consensus is reached on the need to elect a new president, so much the better.
If not, phases three and four will be completed by other means.
Lahoud has become irrelevant.
Once the president’s illegitimacy is formally acknowledged by a majority of parliamentarians, all his acts will be considered beyond his constitutional powers, and the process of electing a new president will be firmly on track.
This can only be reversed by violence, which is unlikely, so strong is the consensus that Lebanon needs a new president, and so ingrained is the rejection of force by all Lebanese.
While we must be vigilant in preventing extremist groups from derailing the process, the best way to do so is to accelerate transformation at the top.
As for me, I realize that in seeking Lebanon’s presidency, we must look to the future.
That is why I offer a program that addresses such key issues as the effective representation of women in government, the need to urgently address environmental problems, to strengthen rule of law, transparency, and accountability, and to move toward universal suffrage in the election of top executive positions.
I have also emphasized that Lebanon must develop its comparative advantages, particularly in education, banking, and services.
All these issues have now become part of the national debate.
Lebanon’s traditional political class may not like it, but, as more of its members are now recognizing, the momentum for a new kind of presidency will not be stopped.
Le Défi Chinois
NEW YORK – So far, discussions about whether or not China should revalue its currency, the renminbi, have focused almost exclusively on the impact of the currency’s exchange rate on China’s trade balance.
But what would an appreciation of the renminbi do to China’s inward and outward foreign direct investment (FDI)?
In evaluating China’s currency policy, the effects of any change on the trade balance are no more important than the potential consequences for inward FDI, which plays such a crucial role in China’s economic development, and China’s outward FDI, which is receiving increased attention worldwide.
China has been the developing world’s largest recipient of FDI since the mid-1990s.
Revaluation of the renminbi would make it more expensive for foreign firms to establish themselves (or expand) in China – the world’s most dynamic market – and would render exports of foreign affiliates, which account for 54% of total exports, less competitive internationally.
On the other hand, the increased cost would be offset to some extent by lower-cost imported inputs, and foreign affiliates could expect to repatriate higher profits from sales in China in terms of their own currencies.
But the most notable development of recent years has been the surge in China’s outward FDI since the government adopted its “go global” policy in 2000, encouraging Chinese firms to invest overseas.
China’s outward FDI more than doubled in 2005-2007, from $12 billion to $27 billion, and then more than doubled again in 2008, to $56 billion.
Outflows continued to rise to $57 billion in 2009, a time when global FDI flows had collapsed by 50%, making China the world’s fifth largest outward investor.
The increasing international competitiveness of Chinese firms, together with government policy, has been the main driver of China’s skyrocketing outward FDI.
The 20% revaluation of the renminbi against the US dollar in 2005-2008 undoubtedly facilitated this in the case of recipient countries whose currencies did not also appreciate against the dollar.
China’s outward FDI is poised to increase sharply again in 2010, judging by the first half of the year, when it was rising at an annual rate of 44%.
Revaluation would accelerate this trend.
This is precisely what happened in Japan after the yen was revalued by over 50% against the dollar between 1985 and 1987, following the Plaza Accord.
Japan’s outward FDI rocketed from $7 billion in 1984 to $20 billion in 1986, peaking at $48 billion in 1990.
A renewed renminbi appreciation would boost China’s outward FDI growth even further by lowering the cost of overseas assets for Chinese firms, which operate in a fairly competitive market and have strong cash reserves from both retained earnings and large-scale state credit allocations.
Like competitors elsewhere, they need to invest abroad to acquire a portfolio of local assets that give then better access to the markets, skills, technology, and natural resources that they need to protect and strengthen their international competitiveness.
The revaluation effect would be reinforced by rising wage pressures inside China, which are already leading some labor-intensive Chinese firms to invest abroad (there are more than 700 Chinese affiliates in Vietnam alone). Some of these firms have been weighing whether to move production abroad or to inland provinces of China; revaluation could push them in the former direction.
Because most of China’s outward FDI is from state-owned enterprises (SOEs), suspicions of non-commercial motivations are widespread.
But there is no systematic evidence that China’s SOEs are driven by more than normal commercial considerations.
At the same time, various private or semi-private entities have been investing abroad.
As their operations are less visible, it is likely that their outward FDI, and therefore China’s total, is understated.
Fears of Chinese overseas investment, as of Japanese and South Korean investment in the 1980s and 1990s – and, before that, of the great post-war U.S. multinationals, which the French writer Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber dubbed “le défi américain” in the 1960s – are misplaced.
These investments were eventually accepted as making a contribution to their host countries.
Similarly, the surge in China’s outward FDI is good for China and for host countries.
Chinese FDI, like all FDI, can provide host countries with a bundle of tangible and intangible assets needed for economic growth and development.
While a significant part of China’s outward FDI initially takes the form of trade-supporting FDI, it can be expected to lead relatively quickly to some production being shifted out of China, including to the US and Europe, thereby possibly reducing exports from China.
Moreover, FDI, like trade, is a key means to integrate China into the world economy and make it a responsible stakeholder.
Like their Japanese and South Korean counterparts, however, Chinese firms will have to learn how to operate in highly sophisticated developed-country markets, as well as in developing countries, where their investments in natural resources are expanding rapidly.
They will also have to learn from the past mistakes of other multinationals.
In particular, they need to establish a strong reputation as good corporate citizens, in addition to making a positive economic contribution to their host countries.
The Chinese government can play a crucial role by adopting a code of conduct for all Chinese enterprises investing abroad, in line with internationally accepted norms and taking into account the increasing importance of sustainable FDI.
For their part, recipient countries should accept, rather than shun or discriminate against, China’s “new kids on the block.”
South Korea’s Feminine Future
SEOUL – Over the last half-century, South Korea has made considerable economic progress, with per capita income increasing from a mere $80 dollars in 1960 to more than $22,000 last year.
But its potential for sustained growth is faltering, owing to the imminent decline of its working-age population – projected to fall by 25% by 2050 – and rising competition from China and other emerging economies.
In order to improve its prospects, South Korea must pursue economic reform and restructuring, with an emphasis on maximizing its human-capital resources – especially women.
South Korea’s success over the last five decades owes much to the rapid growth of its well-educated labor force.
From 1960 to 2010, the share of adults with a secondary education soared from 20% to an impressive 87%.
By boosting productivity, increasing returns on investment, and facilitating technological adaption and innovation, South Korea’s abundance of well-educated workers has served as the foundation for its export-oriented development strategy.
But women remain underutilized, to the detriment of the entire economy.
Indeed, any effective South Korean growth strategy must create more and better economic opportunities for women, in part by establishing more accommodating working environments and instituting a more diverse and flexible education system.
To its credit, South Korea has built a relatively gender-equal society.
The gender gap in enrollment in both secondary and higher education is very small; and women’s access to elite positions in law, medicine, and the civil service has increased considerably in recent years.
The country elected its first female president, Park Geun-hye, in 2012.
But a significant gender gap remains in terms of the return on human capital.
According to OECD data, only 55% of South Korean women aged 15-64 are in the labor force, compared to an average of 65% in the advanced economies.
South Korea’s male labor-force participation rate, by contrast, stands at about 77% – close to the OECD average of 79%.
Women who have completed secondary or tertiary education are more likely to enter and remain in the labor market than their less educated counterparts.
The labor-participation rate for women with post-secondary education is 64%, far exceeding the 35% rate for those with only a primary or middle-school education.
But, even for South Korea’s most highly educated and capable female workers, child rearing is a major career obstacle.
In fact, South Korean women participate in the labor force at roughly the average rate for the OECD while they are in their late twenties.
The problem is that the rate drops sharply from 71% to 57% among women in their 30’s, as inflexible working environments and a lack of affordable childcare undermine their ability to continue investing in their careers.
The good news is that Park’s government is working to change this.
Indeed, its three-year plan for economic innovation, announced in February, aims to raise the female employment rate to 62% by 2017, through the provision of affordable, high-quality childcare facilities and expanded paid parental leave, among other measures.
But it is less clear how the government will create additional jobs for women.
It could, for example, split full-time jobs into multiple part-time positions, and offer incentives for workers to reduce their hours.
But, given that South Korea’s workforce already includes a substantial share of non-regular workers, increasing temporary employment may not contribute to economic growth.
A better approach would entail creating high-quality jobs in modern service industries.
As it stands, while the services sector accounts for more than 70% of employment in South Korea, its productivity-growth rate remains much lower than that of the manufacturing sector.
Too many people are working in traditional, low-productivity service industries, such as wholesale, retail trade, and restaurants, leaving modern, high-productivity services like communications, health, financial intermediation, and business services underdeveloped.
It is also important to narrow the mismatch between women’s abilities and their career paths.
The current system tends to reinforce gender roles, encouraging children to follow culturally framed paths, instead of nurturing their individual interests and potential.
For example, female university students are much more likely to study humanities than the so-called “STEM” subjects (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) – key drivers of productivity gains, innovation, and economic growth.
Efforts by primary and secondary schools could help to foster more diverse interests among female students, giving talented young women the tools they need to make important contributions to key economic sectors.
Of course, the potential of educated, empowered women to drive sustained economic growth is not limited to South Korea.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, too, has identified increased female labor-force participation as critical to efforts to revive his country’s long-dormant economy.
In South Korea, Japan, and elsewhere, developing and maximizing women’s potential will require comprehensive education and labor-market reforms, as well as structural change, particularly on the services side of the economy.
The question is whether political leaders are ready to back their lofty pronouncements with decisive action.
China’s Education Revolution
BEIJING – Over the last 35 years, China’s strong and sustained output growth – averaging more than 9.5% annually – has driven the miraculous transformation of a rural, command economy into a global economic superpower.
In fact, according to the World Bank’s most recent calculation of the purchasing power of aggregate income, China is about to overtake the United States as the world’s largest economy.
But, in terms of the quality and sustainability of its growth model, China still has a long way to go.
Despite its remarkable rise, China’s per capita income, at $10,057 (adjusted for purchasing power) in 2011, ranks 99th in the world – roughly one-fifth of US per capita income of $49,782.
And reaching high-income status is no easy feat.
Indeed, many countries have tried and failed, leaving them in a so-called middle-income trap, in which per capita income levels stagnate before crossing the high-income threshold.
Strong human capital is critical to enable China to escape this fate.
But China’s labor force currently lacks the skills needed to support high-tech, high-value industries.
Changing this will require comprehensive education reform that expands and improves opportunities for children, while strengthening skills training for adults.
To be sure, over the last four decades, the quality of China’s labor force has improved substantially, which is reflected in impressive gains in educational attainment.
Gross enrollment rates at the primary level have surpassed 100% since the 1990’s, while secondary and tertiary enrollment rates reached 87% and 24%, respectively, in 2012.
In 2010, more than 70% of Chinese citizens aged 15-64 had received secondary education, compared to about 20% in 1970.
Furthermore, Chinese students perform well in internationally comparable tests.
Fifteen-year-olds in Shanghai outperformed students from 65 countries, including 34 OECD countries, in mathematics, science, and reading, according to the Program for International Student Assessment in 2009 and 2012.
China has also benefited from rapid employment growth, with more than seven million workers having entered the workforce each year since 1990.
This, together with the massive reallocation of workers from rural to urban areas, has supported the labor-intensive manufacturing industries that have fueled China’s economic rise.
But China’s demographic advantage is diminishing quickly, owing to low fertility rates and population aging.
According to the United Nations, by 2030, China’s working-age population (15–59 years old) will have decreased by 67 million from its 2010 level.
Moreover, higher education in China leaves much to be desired, with employer surveys revealing that graduates of upper secondary schools and universities usually lack the required technical knowledge and soft skills.
For example, in 2013, more than one-third of the Chinese firms surveyed said that they struggled to recruit skilled workers, with 61% attributing this to a shortage of general employable skills.
How, then, can China expect to achieve the export diversification and technological upgrading that it needs to move up the global value chain?
Clearly, China needs to reform its higher-education institutions, including technical and vocational training programs.
At the same time, it must expand opportunities for anyone with talent to acquire high-quality secondary and tertiary education, thereby reducing substantial disparities in the accessibility and quality of higher education across regions and social groups.
And the children of migrant workers in urban areas must be granted full access to the education system.
Such efforts to reduce educational disparities would help to address income inequality – a significant threat to China’s future economic growth.
All of this will require increased public investment in education.
As it stands, China’s public investment in education, as a share of GDP, is below international standards across all levels, but especially in senior secondary and tertiary education.
China’s education challenge also extends to quality.
Inadequate education is a major driver of rising unemployment among China’s senior secondary and tertiary graduates, not to mention their declining wage premium.
This can be remedied through better financing, more effective recruitment and compensation policies, and more decentralized decision-making in school administrations.
Finally, though some evidence suggests that there is an over-supply of university graduates in China, ongoing demographic and sectoral shifts mean that China will encounter a supply deficit of 24 million highly skilled graduates of universities or higher-level vocational schools by 2020.
To fill this gap, China must upgrade its fragmented and ineffective technical- and vocational-training programs.
To ensure that its labor force can meet the demands of a rapidly changing economic and technological environment, China must build a more inclusive, higher quality education system.
Without it, China may not be the world’s number one economy for long.
Financial Safety Nets for Asia
SEOUL – Emerging economies are facing significant uncertainty and serious downside risks.
One major source of instability is the looming reversal of the US Federal Reserve’s expansionary monetary policy – the prospect of which is generating volatility in global financial markets and threatening to disrupt emerging-economy growth.
The Fed has signaled that its federal funds rate will remain near 0%, at least as long as unemployment exceeds 6.5% and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
But when and how the Fed will begin tightening monetary policy remains unclear.
What is certain is that, in making its decision, the Fed will not consider its policy’s spillover effects on the rest of the world, leaving affected countries’ policymakers and central bankers to deal with the fallout.
Tighter US monetary policy could intensify the global credit shortage, thereby increasing pressure on Asia’s economic and financial systems.
Overreaction and herding behavior by market participants could trigger a sudden reversal of capital inflows, with a severe dollar shortage – as occurred in 1997 and 2008 – straining Asian banks and corporations.
These risks explain why the Fed’s mere suggestion of a potential move toward reducing its purchases of long-term asset (so-called quantitative easing) caused emerging-market currencies and asset prices to plummet this summer.
They also underscore Asian economies’ need for stronger financial safety nets.
The 2008 global financial crisis revealed fundamental flaws in the international monetary system, as the failure to ensure sufficient liquidity weighed heavily on emerging Asian economies.
Since then, these countries have taken measures to safeguard the stability of their financial systems against volatile external shocks, strengthen financial supervision and regulation, and develop more effective macroeconomic frameworks, including better macro-prudential regulation and capital-control measures.
But their heavy reliance on international trade and capital flows means that they remain vulnerable to severe financial spillovers from the United States.
Moreover, since the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the region’s emerging economies have increased their holdings of foreign-exchange reserves, and now possess more than half of the world’s total.
Seven of the world’s top ten reserve-holding economies are in Asia.
But hoarding international reserves, mostly in the form of low-yielding short-term US Treasury securities, is expensive and inefficient.
Some Asian economies, especially China, are also attempting to internationalize their currencies.
Given China’s expanding global influence, the renminbi’s emergence as a new international currency is inevitable.
For smaller economies, however, internationalization will be far more difficult.
In their quest to ensure sufficient liquidity, Asian economies have also actively pursued currency-swap arrangements.
Since 2008, China has signed 23 bilateral swap agreements, including one with South Korea.
Japan expanded bilateral swap facilities with its Asian neighbors during the global financial crisis.
And the ten ASEAN countries, together with China, Japan, and South Korea, have constructed a $240 billion regional reserve pool to provide short-term liquidity to members in an emergency.
Such swaps should help Asian countries to cope with currency turmoil in the wake of a Fed policy reversal.
But they remain untested and, given their relatively small volumes, cannot reassure markets or provide adequate emergency support to crisis countries, especially in the event of large-scale systemic shocks.
The Fed, as the de facto global lender of last resort, can improve significantly the effectiveness of Asia’s financial safety nets by establishing currency-swap arrangements with emerging economies’ central banks during the policy-reversal process.
In 2008, the Fed established currency-swap lines with the central banks of ten developed economies, including the eurozone, the United Kingdom, Japan, and Switzerland, and four emerging economies (Brazil, South Korea, Mexico, and Singapore).
These arrangements, most of which ended in 2010, responded to strains in short-term credit markets and improved liquidity conditions during the crisis.
The South Korean central bank’s $30 billion swap, though limited, averted a run on the won.
Reestablishing the Fed’s swap arrangements with emerging economies would minimize negative spillovers during the coming monetary-policy reversal.
Even an announcement by the Fed stating its willingness to do so would go a long way toward reassuring markets that emerging economies can avert a liquidity crisis.
The swap lines would also serve American interests.
After all, trouble in emerging economies would destabilize the entire global economy, threatening the fragile recoveries of advanced economies, including the US.
And, given China’s rise, it is clearly in America’s interest to maintain a balance of economic power in Asia.
Critics might cite the moral-hazard risk generated by liquidity support.
But a well-designed framework that offers swap lines only to well-qualified emerging economies – and only temporarily – would diminish this risk substantially.
In fact, some experts, such as the economist Edwin Truman, have proposed establishing an institutionalized global swap arrangement as a more effective and robust crisis-prevention mechanism – an idea that G-20 countries should consider.
But creating such a system would take time.
In the meantime, the Fed should take the initiative by re-establishing swap lines with advanced and emerging economies alike.
India’s Chinese Dream
SEOUL – In recent years, China and India have both emerged as global economic superpowers, with China leading the way.
But, with Chinese growth slowing and the need for structural change becoming increasingly acute, will the economic-reform efforts of India’s new prime minister, Narendra Modi, enable the country to catch up?
Since the 1980s, China has experienced unprecedented economic growth, fueled by abundant low-cost labor, high saving and investment rates, substantial market reforms, outward-oriented policies, and prudent macroeconomic management.
Its leaders now hope to achieve high-income status by developing more technologically sophisticated industries.
India’s economic performance has been less remarkable.
Economic growth began to accelerate dramatically in the early 1990s, owing to trade liberalization and other economic reforms.
Then reforms stalled, the fiscal and current-account deficits soared, and annual GDP growth fell to 4-5%.
As a result, China has pulled ahead, with per capita income last year standing at $11,850 – more than double India’s $5,350.
The question now is whether Modi’s push for faster growth can narrow the income gap in the coming decades.
The most important factor working in India’s favor is its “demographic dividend.”
In China, population aging and low fertility rates are already causing the prime working-age population, people aged 15-59, to decline.
From 2015-2040, this group is expected to shrink by more than 115 million.
Meanwhile, India’s prime working-age population will increase by 190 million.
But favorable demographics alone will not bring about the kind of growth that has made China the world’s second-largest economy.
India’s leaders must develop a comprehensive plan to eliminate barriers to economic competitiveness, expand employment opportunities in manufacturing, and improve workers’ education and skills.
As it stands, India ranks 60th in the world for economic competitiveness – much lower than China, which, at 29th, is closing in on high-income countries like South Korea (25th) and France (23rd).
The reasons for this are not difficult to discern: India performs poorly on the fundamental drivers of long-term economic prosperity.
Indeed, despite steady improvements, public health and education levels remain low (102nd worldwide).
Moreover, the lack of adequate transport, communication, and energy infrastructure (85th) is undermining India’s productivity growth.
And India lags behind China in the efficiency of its product and labor markets (ranking 85th and 99th, respectively).
Only by addressing these shortcomings can India attract sufficient investment and boost economic growth.
At the same time, India should expand labor-intensive manufacturing, thereby creating employment opportunities for its growing pool of workers.
Given that manufacturing contributes only 15% of India’s total output, compared to 31% in China, there is considerable room for growth.
In a sense, India has the advantage of being able to learn from China.
China transformed its agrarian economy by building a strong, labor-intensive industrial base, shifting workers from agriculture to manufacturing and construction, and improving productivity across all sectors.
Today, the agricultural sector accounts for only one-third of total employment in China, compared to one-half in India.
India’s structural transformation and sustainable growth will hinge on its efforts to build a flexible labor market, centered on the easing of outdated and complicated employment laws.
The legal protections of workers in India’s formal sector exceed those of most developed countries, as well as China, with mandated requirements rising as the number of employees increases.
As Jagdish Bhagwati and Arvind Panagariya have pointed out,excessive labor-market regulations deter Indian entrepreneurs from employing unskilled workers and developing labor-intensive manufacturing, implying that the Indian government should redouble its reform efforts in this area.
Equally important, Indian workers – especially young people – need opportunities to upgrade their skills continuously.
The McKinsey Global Institute estimates that, of the potential global oversupply of 90 million low-skilled workers in 2020, 27 million will be in India.
Meanwhile, the country will face a shortage of 13 million medium-skilled workers.
Despite India’s educational expansion, especially at the secondary and tertiary levels, its system of higher education, including technical and vocational education and training, remains inadequate.
Though India’s public vocational education and training systems are well institutionalized, they lack the scale, curriculum, financing, and incentives needed to prepare young workers to meet the demands of rapid globalization and technological advancement.
The good news is that Modi seems committed to boosting India’s competitiveness by improving its business climate.
For example, he has already announced measures to promote foreign direct investment in insurance, defense, and telecommunications, including higher infrastructure spending and new tax incentives for savings and investment.
India’s government will also sustain its predecessors’ efforts to strengthen vocational education and skills training.
What Modi’s plan lacks is a strong focus on expanding India’s labor-intensive industries.
That, together with the planned reforms, would enable India to seize the opportunities that arise with favorable demographics and achieve Chinese-style growth.
Education and Opportunity
SEOUL – Education is a fundamental driver of personal, national, and global development.
Since the beginning of the century, recognition of this has driven many countries to pursue the Millennium Development Goal of achieving universal primary education and eradicating gender disparities at all levels of education by 2015.
This has contributed to considerable progress in expanding educational opportunities and attainment worldwide.
But there is much more to be done.
To be sure, universal primary education has nearly been achieved.
Moreover, considerable progress has been made toward gender equality in educational opportunities and attainment.
Indeed, enrollment rates for school-age females have increased steadily at all levels, reaching near parity with male enrollment globally.
As a result, the gender gap in average years of schooling for the adult population – a widely used measure of educational attainment – has narrowed.
Moreover, in 2010, for people aged 25 and above, the female-to-male ratio in average years of schooling was almost 100% in advanced countries and about 85% in developing regions.
But, in many low-income countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia, girls still have far less access to education, especially at the secondary and tertiary levels, than boys do.
Significant global disparities also remain in post-primary education and the quality of schooling.
In advanced countries, almost 90% of the population aged 15-64 has attained at least some secondary education, compared to only 63% in developing countries.
Likewise, though more than 33% of the working-age population in advanced countries has achieved some level of tertiary education, the proportion is just 12% in the developing world.
Academic research suggests that countries with higher per capita income, lower income inequality, and lower fertility rates tend to invest more in children’s education, with public expenditure leading to higher enrollment rates.
The logical conclusion is that efforts to promote more inclusive economic growth and improve education systems can raise enrollment among young people in developing countries and reduce disparities between genders and among social groups.
But simply narrowing the gaps in school-enrollment rates and total years of schooling is not enough.
Countries must also ensure the quality of their education systems – a key challenge for the coming decades.
As it stands, poor educational outcomes and inefficient education systems are eliciting deep concern worldwide.
In many countries, primary schools fail to provide students with appropriate cognitive skills like numeracy, literacy, problem-solving ability, and general scientific knowledge.
Furthermore, inadequate education at the secondary and tertiary levels, including technical and vocational education and training, is leaving students unequipped to meet the job market’s changing demands.
As a result, many countries are struggling with a mismatch between the skills that employers seek and those that workers have.
Wide disparities in educational quality, often measured by student achievement on international examinations, are evident within and across countries.
The results of most internationally comparable mathematics, reading, and science exams for primary and secondary students reveal a considerable gap not only between advanced and developing countries, but also across the developing world.
According to the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, South Korea had the highest average score (590) in 2011 on the science test for secondary students, while Ghana scored the lowest (306).
Though academic performance is determined largely by family inputs and students’ individual talents, other factors, such as the amount of school resources available to students, also play an important role, as do various other school inputs, such as teacher quality, class size, expenditure per pupil, and instruction time.
The institutional features of education systems are another important determinant of student achievement.
Private financing and provision, school autonomy, and external monitoring and assessment mechanisms tend to influence the quality of education by changing the incentives for students and teachers.
In the future, new information and communication technologies are expected to stimulate the expansion of educational opportunities and to improve educational quality at the national and global level, by offering a variety of innovative learning channels.
For example, the ability to use new technologies to build borderless networks among schools can offer opportunities for students in low-income countries to learn from teachers in advanced countries – and vice versa.
The imperative is clear.
Global leaders must commit to enhancing the quality of education and reduce the education gap by increasing school resources, improving the efficiency of educational institutions, and seizing the opportunities afforded by technological innovation.
All of this will serve to enrich human capital, which is essential to boosting productivity and incomes.
Indeed, if such efforts are designed specifically to ensure equal opportunities for all, regardless of gender or wealth, they will be a boon to the global economy, while promoting social cohesion at the national level.
When it comes to improving education, there really is no downside.
What Comes After Lee Kuan Yew?
LONDON – All political leaders worry about their legacies.
Lee Kuan Yew, who presided over Singapore either directly or indirectly for more than a half-century – remaining influential right up to his death at 91 – had more time in power than most to do so.
Several volumes of memoirs attest to Lee’s concern about his legacy, although Singapore’s extraordinary success under his leadership speaks for itself.
Like him or not – and many did not – there is no denying the city-state’s remarkable and enduring prosperity and stability.
Yet the effort put into those memoirs by the man who called himself “Minister Mentor” during his later years offers a clue about Lee’s ultimate concern.
His legacy in terms of Singapore’s past success may be clear, but what about the future?
That, of course, is one of the few things he could not control, beyond offering his teachings to future generations.
Yet in one crucial respect – determining who Singapore’s new generation of leaders will be – the tight control that Lee exercised in the past may now make that future more difficult.
The issue is certainly solvable, especially given an excellent education system and high-quality institutions of all kinds.
But Lee’s own actions suggest that he harbored doubts.
The succession to Lee was clear: after handing over the premiership in 1990 (at the surprisingly young age of 66) to a trusted associate, Goh Chok Tong, he groomed his eldest son, Brigadier-General Lee Hsien Loong, for the job.