But there are now signs that this aggrandizement may be having ambiguous consequences.
Indeed, some central bankers are beginning to worry that their role has expanded too far, putting them at risk of a backlash.
There are two related dangers.
The first is encapsulated in the title of Mohamed El-Erian’s latest book: The Only Game in Town.
Central banks have been expected to shoulder the greater part of the burden of post-crisis adjustment.
Their massive asset purchases are a life-support system for the financial economy.
Yet they cannot, by themselves, resolve the underlying problems of global imbalances and the huge debt overhang.
Indeed, they may be preventing the other adjustments, whether fiscal or structural, that are needed to resolve those impediments to economic recovery.
This is particularly true in Europe.
While the ECB keeps the euro afloat by doing “whatever it takes” in ECB President Mario Draghi’s phrase, governments are doing little.
Why take tough decisions if the ECB continues to administer heavier and heavier doses from its monetary drug cabinet?
The second danger is a version of what is sometimes called the “over-mighty citizen” problem.
Have central banks been given too many powers for their own good?
Quantitative easing is a case in point.
Because it blurs the line between monetary and fiscal policy – which must surely be the province of elected governments – unease has grown.
We can see signs of this in Germany, where many now question whether the ECB is too powerful, independent, and unaccountable.
Similar criticism motivates those in the US who want to “audit the Fed” – often code for subjecting monetary policy to Congressional oversight.
There are worries, too, about financial regulation, and especially central banks’ shiny new macroprudential instruments.
In his new book The End of Alchemy, former BoE Governor Mervyn King argues that direct intervention in the mortgage market by restraining credit should be subject to political decision.
Others, notably Axel Weber, a former head of the Bundesbank, think it is dangerous for the central bank to supervise banks directly.
Things go wrong in financial markets, and the supervisors are blamed.
There is a risk of contagion, and a loss of confidence in monetary policy, if the central bank is in the front line.
That points to the biggest concern of all.
Central banks’ monetary-policy independence was a hard-won prize.
It has brought great benefits to our economies.
But an institution buying bonds with public money, deciding on the availability of mortgage finance, and winding down banks at great cost to their shareholders demands a different form of political accountability.
The danger is that hasty post-crisis decisions to load additional functions onto central banks may have unforeseen and unwelcome consequences.
In particular, greater political oversight of these functions could affect monetary policy as well.
For this reason, whatever new mechanisms of accountability are put in place will have to be designed with extraordinary care.
Immunization on the Front Line
MAPUTO – Most of the news one hears coming out of Mozambique is bad – poverty, disease, conflict, and floods.
But there are a lot of good things happening in my country, too.
In the past two decades, Mozambique has become a functioning democracy; grown its agriculture sector; raised literacy rates; increased water supply and electricity in rural areas; and reduced child mortality dramatically, from 219 per 1,000 live births in 1990, two years before the civil war ended, to 135 per 1,000 in 2010.
I am particularly proud of the last achievement, because, by working in partnership with my fellow Mozambicans to expand immunization coverage, I believe that I have played a part in bringing it about.
I grew up in Mozambique when the country was still under Portuguese rule, and the inequality in our colonial society shaped my view that all people have a right to health care.
I remember working at a pediatric ward as a teenager and watching children die from diseases like polio, measles, and tetanus – all easily prevented by vaccines.
The impact of that experience led me to spend the next 40 years working to ensure that every child in Mozambique, regardless of her ethnicity or where she lives, gets the vaccines that she needs to help her lead a long and healthy life.
In a few days, I will join 300 global leaders in Abu Dhabi for the world’s first vaccine summit – a gathering dedicated to ensuring that all children everywhere have access to vaccines.
People like Bill Gates and Kofi Annan will make the case that immunization programs deserve adequate funding and political support.
I don’t have an audience like Gates or Annan, but I would like to add my voice to theirs.
Millions of health workers like my colleagues and I make immunization their daily work.
We have made tremendous strides in reaching more children with more vaccines, which is why more children are surviving than ever before.
But there are still even more children to save, and we need help to do our work on the ground.
Because vaccines are useless if parents refuse to give them to their children, a big part of my job is to collaborate with health workers, community leaders, school teachers, and local political figures to educate parents about vaccines.
But having the community’s support is not enough.
It is also vital to ensure that vaccines get to the right place, at the right time, and in the right condition.
For example, in order to prevent shortages, VillageReach, the organization for which I work, helped to correct the population figures used to forecast the number of vaccines needed in each health center.
VillageReach also started a company that delivers propane gas to health centers in northern Mozambique, where, like in many of the country’s rural areas, electricity is unreliable or completely unavailable to power the refrigerators that keep vaccines cool.
Through the use of propane, we can ensure that the vaccines do not spoil during the journey from manufacturer to mother and child.
And once a month, we make sure that health workers deliver vaccines and other health services “the last mile” to mothers and children in remote rural areas.
Finally, I have learned that meticulous record-keeping and measuring results is critical to reaching more children.
That is why we are assessing different methods for gathering data from the field, including the use of mobile applications to digitize paper records.
Building these routine immunization systems has already helped us to eradicate diseases like polio and all but one type of measles.
Earlier this month, we used them to vaccinate children against pneumonia for the first time in Mozambique’s history, and we hope that next year we will begin to address rotavirus, which causes diarrhea and is the number one killer for children under five years old.
Our longer-term goal is to strengthen these systems enough to reach all children in Mozambique with basic vaccines and other forms of health care.
I believe that we can achieve this goal, because I have witnessed how far we have come already, despite our struggles.
Big challenges lie ahead, but I am confident that with the support of the global community, I can leave to my own children and community a thriving country where every person has the opportunity to prosper.
A Recovery for All
NEW YORK – Over the last two years, the majority of countries in the world chose to expand public spending in order to buffer the impact of the global financial crisis on their economies and populations.
But, this year, with signs of economic recovery emerging, advanced countries have quickly shifted from fiscal stimulus to fiscal consolidation.
Now developing countries are also following the trend to consolidate.
A recent UNICEF survey of 126 countries shows that a significant number of low- and middle-income countries are expected to reduce public expenditures in 2010-2011.
This comes at a bad time, just after world governments committed themselves to achieving the development goals, such as reducing poverty and infant mortality, agreed last September at the United Nations’ Millennium Summit.
For most low- and middle-income countries, the incipient economic recovery appears to be fragile and uneven.
Indeed, many of these countries remain vulnerable to volatile commodity prices, financial-system weaknesses, depressed demand from world markets, and shortfalls in external finance, overseas development assistance, and investment.
More importantly, according to the UN and the World Bank, the social impact of the global economic crisis continues to be felt in terms of rising hunger, unemployment, and social unrest.
The combination of rising food and fuel prices and the financial and economic crisis has reduced poor families’ purchasing power, access to social services, and employment opportunities.
Moreover, poor households have reduced food consumption, with the UN Food and Agricultural Organization estimating that nearly one billion people are hungry and malnourished.
In addition to the millions already pushed into poverty in 2008-09, another 64 million could fall into extreme poverty during 2010 as a result of the combined, lingering effects of the crisis.
In the 1980’s, adjustment programs required countries to cut back on their expenditures, including outlays on education, health, water, agriculture, and other sectors that make a difference to poor households.
As the late Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere demanded publicly: “Must we starve our children to pay our debts?”
Infant mortality rates rose among low-income groups in many developing countries, and inequality increased.
This period came to be known as the “lost decade.”
UNICEF responded with Adjustment with a Human Face, which argued that children must be protected during economic crises.
It argued for more expansionary macroeconomic policies to generate employment, public-sector investments to serve the poor, and the establishment of social-protection systems.
Thirty years later, déjà vu, the same message applies.
The poor in developing countries are again being made to endure the worst consequences of a crisis that they played no part in creating.
It is critically important that this does not lead to a new lost decade of development, and that poor households – especially children – do not suffer as they did in the 1980‘s.
And yet that could very well happen.
Our UNICEF survey of 126 developing countries found that among the nearly one-half that are reducing public expenditures, common adjustment measures include public-sector wage cuts or caps, withdrawal of food subsidies, and the targeting and rationalization of already meager social-protection systems.
These adjustment measures are often adopted without carefully examining their social impact.
How many poor children will suffer – or die – from lack of food and health care?
How many children will miss out on education because teachers are absent due to low wages, or simply because poor children must work to supplement their family income?
Adjustment of public expenditures raises the risk of a recovery that discriminates against the poor, and thus fuels greater inequities in developing countries.
Springtime for Fascism?
NEW YORK – Are we seeing a new dawn of fascism?
Many people are beginning to think so.
Donald Trump has been compared to a fascist, as has Vladimir Putin and a variety of demagogues and right-wing loudmouths in Europe.
The recent tide of authoritarian bluster has reached as far as the Philippines, whose president-elect, Rodrigo (“The Punisher”) Duterte, has vowed to toss suspected criminals into Manila Bay.
The problem with terms like “fascism” or “Nazi” is that so many ignorant people have used them so often, in so many situations, that they have long ago lost any real significance.
Few still know firsthand what fascism actually meant.
It has become a catch-all phrase for people or ideas we don't like.
Loose rhetoric has coarsened not only political debate, but historical memory, too.
When a Republican politician compares US property taxes with the Holocaust, as one Senate candidate did in 2014, the mass murder of Jews is trivialized to the extent of becoming meaningless.
The same is roughly true when Trump is compared to Hitler or Mussolini.
As a result, we are too easily distracted from the real dangers of modern demagoguery.
After all, it is not hard for Trump – or the Netherlands’ Geert Wilders, or Putin, or Duterte – to refute accusations of being fascists or Nazis.
They may be repulsive, but they are not organizing uniformed storm troopers, building concentration camps, or calling for the corporate state.
Putin comes closest, but even he is not Hitler.
Of course, forgetfulness or ignorance about the past goes both ways.
When a young Dutch writer, sympathetic to the new populist wave, expressed antipathy to his country’s “cultural elite,” for promoting “atonal music” and other arrogant forms of ugliness, instead of the wholesome beauty embraced by the common man, I wondered whether he knew about the Nazis’ attack on “degenerate art”?
Atonal music, hardly the cutting edge today, was precisely the kind of thing that Hitler’s minions loathed – and ultimately banned.
There are other echoes of our darkest history in contemporary political bombast, which a few decades ago would still have cast any politician who used it to the margins.
Stoking hatred of minorities, fulminating against the press, stirring up the mob against intellectuals, financiers, or anyone who speaks more than one language, were not part of mainstream politics, because enough people still understood the dangers of such talk.
It is clear that today's demagogues don’t much care about what they derisively call “political correctness.”
It is less clear whether they have enough historical sense to know that they are poking a monster that post-World War II generations hoped was dead but that we now know only lay dormant, until obliviousness to the past could enable it to be reawakened.
This is not to say that everything the populists say is untrue.
Hitler, too, was right to grasp that mass unemployment was a problem in Germany.
Many of the agitators’ bugbears are indeed worthy of criticism: the European Union’s opacity, the duplicitousness and greed of Wall Street bankers, the reluctance to tackle problems caused by mass immigration, the lack of concern for those hurt by economic globalization.
These are all problems that mainstream political parties have been unwilling or unable to solve.
The fascists and Nazis of the 1930s did not come from nowhere.
Their ideas were hardly original.
For many years, intellectuals, activists, journalists, and clerics had articulated hateful ideas that laid the groundwork for Mussolini, Hitler, and their imitators in other countries.
Some were Catholic reactionaries who detested secularism and individual rights.
Some were obsessed with the supposed global domination of Jews.
Some were romantics in search of an essential racial or national spirit.
Most modern demagogues may be only vaguely aware of these precedents, if they know of them at all.
In Central European countries like Hungary, or indeed in France, they may actually understand the links quite well, and some of today’s far-right politicians are not shy about being openly anti-Semitic.
In most West European countries, however, such agitators use their professed admiration for Israel as a kind of alibi, and direct their racism at Muslims.
Words and ideas have consequences.
Today’s populist leaders should not yet be compared to murderous dictators of the fairly recent past.
But, by exploiting the same popular sentiments, they are contributing to a poisonous climate, which could bring political violence into the mainstream once again.
Are Democrats Really Better for America’s Economy?
CAMBRIDGE – Hillary Clinton has repeatedly claimed in recent months that the US economy does much better when a Democrat is in the White House.
Coming from the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, that probably sounds like political spin.
But the truth is that she is absolutely right.
The president, no doubt, is but one of many factors shaping the economy, and some presidents have certainly been luckier than others.
But that doesn’t mean that Clinton’s claim is only “half true,” as asserted by some media fact-checkers (including the Pulitzer Prize-winning PolitiFact).
The difference in economic performance under Democratic and Republican presidents is consistent and substantial, with the disparities clearly above the threshold for statistical significance.
Princeton University economists Alan Blinder and Mark Watson confirm this Democratic dividend in a recent study.
Their starting point is the observation that in the post-World War II period (from Harry Truman to Barack Obama), annual GDP growth has averaged 4.3% during Democratic administrations, compared to 2.5% under Republicans.
If one goes back further, to include Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt, the disparity is even larger.
The results are similar even if one assigns responsibility for the first three months – or the first few quarters – of a president’s term to his predecessor.
But there is more.
Over the 256 quarters in the 16 post-war presidential terms, the US economy was in recession for an average of 1.1 quarters during Democratic presidencies and 4.6 quarters during the Republican terms.
The odds that such a large difference is the result of mere chance are no more than one in 100.
(This differential is not as significant statistically, however, because equity prices are so volatile.)
The likelihood that luck alone could have produced such large and consistent differences in economic performance is extremely low – a point that can be illustrated even without fancy econometrics.
Take the recession record.
If the chances of a recession starting during a Democratic or a Republican president’s term were equal, the odds of four successive recessions beginning under Republicans would be 16 to one – the same as getting “heads” on four out of four coin-flips.
That is not particularly likely, yet it is exactly what happened in the last 35 years.
If one were to go back ten business cycles assuming an equal chance of a recession starting under a Democratic or a Republican president, the odds become even longer.
There is only a 100-to-one chance that nine out of the last ten recessions would have begun under Republican presidents.
Yet they did, as confirmed by the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee.
An even more startling fact emerges from a review of the last eight times an incumbent from one party was succeeded by a president from the other party.
In the four transitions when a Republican took office, GDP growth slowed; in the other four transitions, when a Democrat moved in, the growth rate went up.
That is as unlikely as getting heads on eight coin tosses in a row – a one-in-256 shot.
Democrats thus have not succeeded by luck alone.
(In fact, Blinder and Watson also observe that the US economy performs better when Democrats control Congress or have appointed the Federal Reserve chair, though the main determinant remains the party of the president.)
So what accounts for the partisan performance gap?
Blinder and Watson suggest that five factors – oil shocks, productivity growth, defense spending, foreign economic growth, and consumer confidence – may together explain 56% of the growth gap.
But it is impossible to know the extent to which these factors were influenced by the US president’s policies.
We know even less about the factors responsible for the other 44% of the performance gap.
In assessing Clinton’s statements on this topic, the fact-checkers make much of the finding by Blinder and Watson that, contrary to widespread assumptions, fiscal and monetary policies are not more “pro-growth” or expansionary under Democrats than under Republican presidents, and therefore cannot explain the performance differential.
But presidents make many policy decisions – concerning energy, anti-trust, regulation, trade, labor, and foreign policy, to name a few – beyond how much fiscal and monetary stimulus to pursue.
There is no way to test econometrically this myriad of policies.
It is this uncertainty that has driven the fact-checkers to rate Clinton’s statements as half-true.
But she never attempted to pinpoint particular policies to explain the performance gap.
All she said was that the US economy does better under Democratic presidents.
That is 100% true.
What Good Are Economists?
NEW HAVEN – Since the global financial crisis and recession of 2007-2009, criticism of the economics profession has intensified.
The failure of all but a few professional economists to forecast the episode – the aftereffects of which still linger – has led many to question whether the economics profession contributes anything significant to society.
If they were unable to foresee something so important to people’s wellbeing, what good are they?
Indeed, economists failed to forecast most of the major crises in the last century, including the severe 1920-21 slump, the 1980-82 back-to-back recessions, and the worst of them all, the Great Depression after the 1929 stock-market crash.
In searching news archives for the year before the start of these recessions, I found virtually no warning from economists of a severe crisis ahead.
Instead, newspapers emphasized the views of business executives or politicians, who tended to be very optimistic.
The closest thing to a real warning came before the 1980-82 downturn.
In 1979, Federal Reserve Chair Paul A. Volcker told the Joint Economic Committee of the US Congress that the United States faced “unpleasant economic circumstances,” and had a “need for hard decisions, for restraint, and even for sacrifice.”
The likelihood that the Fed would have to take drastic steps to curb galloping inflation, together with the effects of the 1979 oil crisis, made a serious recession quite likely.
Nonetheless, whenever a crisis loomed in the last century, the broad consensus among economists was that it did not.
As far as I can find, almost no one in the profession – not even luminaries like John Maynard Keynes, Friedrich Hayek, or Irving Fisher – made public statements anticipating the Great Depression.
As the historian Douglas Irwin has documented, a major exception was the Swedish economist Gustav Cassel. In a series of lectures at Columbia University in 1928, Cassel warned of “a prolonged and worldwide depression.”
But his rather technical discussion (which focused on monetary economics and the gold standard) forged no new consensus among economists, and the news media reported no clear sense of alarm.
Interestingly, contemporary news accounts reveal little evidence of public anger at economists after disaster struck in 1929.
So why has the failure to foresee the latest crisis turned out so differently for the profession?
Why has it – unlike previous forecasting failures – stoked so much mistrust of economists?
One reason may be the perception that many economists were smugly promoting the “efficient markets hypothesis” – a view that seemed to rule out a collapse in asset prices.
Believing that markets always know best, they dismissed warnings by a few mere mortals (including me) about overpricing of equities and housing.
After both markets crashed spectacularly, the profession’s credibility took a direct hit.
But this criticism is unfair.
We do not blame physicians for failing to predict all of our illnesses.
Our maladies are largely random, and even if our doctors cannot tell us which ones we will have in the next year, or eliminate all of our suffering when we have them, we are happy for the help that they can provide.
Likewise, most economists devote their efforts to issues far removed from establishing a consensus outlook for the stock market or the unemployment rate.
And we should be grateful that they do.
In his new book Trillion Dollar Economists, Robert Litan of the Brookings Institution argues that the economics profession has “created trillions of dollars of income and wealth for the United States and the rest of the world.”
That sounds like a nice contribution for a relatively small profession, especially if we do some simple arithmetic.
There are, for example, only 20,000 members of the American Economic Association (of which I am President-Elect); if they have created, say, $2 trillion of income and wealth, that is about $100 million per economist.
A cynic might ask, “If economists are so smart, why aren’t they the richest people around?”
The answer is simple: Most economic ideas are public goods that cannot be patented or otherwise owned by their inventors.
Just because most economists are not rich does not mean that they have not made many people richer.
The fun thing about Litan’s book is that he details many clever little ideas about how to run businesses or to manage the economy better.
They lie in the realm of optimal pricing and marketing mechanisms, regulation of monopolies, natural-resource management, public-goods provision, and finance.
None of them is worth even a trillion dollars, but, taken together, Litan’s conclusion is plausible indeed.
The 2010 book Better Living through Economics, edited by John Siegfried, emphasizes the real-world impact of such innovations: emissions trading, the earned-income tax credit, low trade tariffs, welfare-to-work programs, more effective monetary policy, auctions of spectrum licenses, transport-sector deregulation, deferred-acceptance algorithms, enlightened antitrust policy, an all-volunteer military, and clever use of default options to promote saving for retirement.
The innovations described in Litan’s and Siegfried’s books show that the economics profession has produced an enormous amount of extremely valuable work, characterized by a serious effort to provide genuine evidence.
Yes, most economists fail to predict financial crises – just as doctors fail to predict disease.
But, like doctors, they have made life manifestly better for everyone.
A Referendum For Kurdistan?
The assassination of the President of Iraq's Governing Council makes it crystal clear that the US is failing to create the minimal law-and-order needed for any sort of orderly transfer of power to take place by June 30th.
Barely two months ago, the signing of a constitutional document by a US-appointed group of un-elected Iraqi officials was heralded as if it were the re-enactment of America's constitutional convention in Philadelphia in 1787.
But by now it is clear that this is a worthless piece of paper.
No imposed constitution, however elegant it may be, will be very helpful to Coalition forces when confronted with the type of mayhem seen in towns like Fallujah or Najjaf.
In the Kurdish region of northern Iraq, however, the situation is completely different: in the last ten years, under the protection of the Allies' no-fly zone, and even more so since the toppling of Saddam, the Kurdish regional government has been able to establish and sustain a relatively orderly administration.
It has overcome tribal and party differences and created a de facto functioning government, with an impressive record on development issues such as education, irrigation, and construction - and, above all, with no violence.
Confronted with the debacle in the rest of (Arab) Iraq, the question has to be asked why the US-led coalition should not hold a referendum in the Kurdish region, asking the population how they would like to be ruled.
After all, the Kurds have, by any internationally accepted standards, a right to self-determination.
Historically, the Kurds - who are distinct in language, culture, and historical consciousness from Arabs - never had their day in court.
After World War I and the fall of the Ottoman Empire, the victorious Allies promised them a state of their own - a promise that was cynically betrayed when British and French imperial interests took precedence.
Since then, the Kurds have suffered under the despotic rule of rival ethnic groups.
There are obvious obstacles to holding such a referendum, primarily because the US does not have a mandate to dispose of Iraq as it pleases.
But the same goes for the rest of Iraq: the US is now lamely asking for a UN resolution mandating a transfer of power to a legitimate Iraqi government - but such an authorization is highly unlikely, nor is there anyone in Iraq to whom authority can conceivably be transferred.
Why should the one region - and people - who run an orderly government, are not involved in murder, attacks on mosques, and suicide bombing of schoolchildren, be penalized?
Another objection is the opposition of Turkey - and, to a lesser degree, Iran and Syria - to granting the Iraqi Kurds self-determination.
But if one thinks in terms of universal norms of human rights, what right has Turkey to dictate internal development in another country?
After all, nobody accepts Israel's claim to oppose as a matter of principle the establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza.
The same should apply to Turkey.
If Turkey grants its own Kurdish minority more cultural and language rights and allows legitimate Kurdish political representation in the Turkish parliament, the willingness of Turkish Kurds to oppose Ankara will be diminished.
In the nineteenth century, the joint interests of the authoritarian Russian, German, and Austrian Empires prevented the establishment of a free Poland: such unholy alliances have no place in the twenty-first century.
Recently, under the aegis of the UN, a referendum on the future of Cyprus was held within the island's Greek and Turkish communities.
The outcome was paradoxical, and not to the liking of those who initiated it: but the right of the communities to determine their future was accepted.
Why not in Iraqi Kurdistan?
Perhaps to assuage political fears - and considerations of international law - any plebiscite in the Kurdish region should, initially, have only a consultative status.
But it will give legitimate expression to the will of a people long oppressed and entitled to their place in the sun.
Such a referendum may also concentrate minds among the Arab Sunnis and Shia in Iraq, when they come to realize that it is their violence that is dismantling Iraq.
Perhaps they may decide that violence is counter-productive and carries its own penalties, and may then follow the Kurdish example of curbing violence, which would help put Iraq together again without recourse to permanent repression.
If not, at the very least, the injustice suffered by the Kurdish people for generations would, at long last, be rectified.
A Referendum on Obama
STANFORD – Successful political candidates try to implement the proposals on which they ran.
The last election that was followed by such a sweeping change in policy direction occurred in 1980, when President Ronald Reagan overhauled taxes, spending, and regulation, and supported the Federal Reserve’s course of disinflation.
While the 1988, 1992, and 2000 elections were also quite consequential, the policy shifts were not nearly as large as in 1980 and 2008.
The country rebelled against Obama and the Democrats’ lurch to the left with historic Congressional election victories for Republicans in 2010.
Since then, many Republicans have been deeply disappointed that the House of Representatives has been unable to roll back much of Obama’s agenda.
But the US political system is set up to make it much harder to accomplish something than to block it.
It is not easy to do a lot while controlling only one-half of one-third of the federal government.
The 2012 election is shaping up as a referendum on Obama’s policies and performance.
The economy is improving slowly, but it remains in bad shape, with high unemployment and millions having left the labor force.
Republicans are expected to retain control of the House and regain a majority in the Senate.
Former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, the Republican frontrunner to challenge Obama in November, and the party’s other leading candidates, including former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, want less spending, major reforms of government programs, lower taxes, trade expansion, and less and more-targeted regulation than does Obama.
Romney, for example, has a detailed 59-point economic program, including a cap on federal spending at 20% of GDP, which would require reductions similar to those in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
Gingrich and the other Republicans have an even more aggressive agenda of cutting taxes and reducing the size and scope of government.
The eventual nominee would be wise to incorporate his opponents’ best ideas and top people into his campaign.
A Republican presidential victory, together with Republican control of the House and Senate, would likely lead to substantial reduction, repeal, and replacement of many Obama initiatives, attempts to reform taxes and entitlements, and measures to impose greater fiscal discipline.
High on Romney’s agenda is a reduction of the corporate-tax rate, from 35% to 25%, the OECD average level (the other Republican candidates would lower it still more), which would redress a major competitive disadvantage for American multinational companies’ global business.
A Republican victory would also most likely lead to a major push to open up many more energy-exploration opportunities within America, which Obama has stymied.
Romney has promised tougher negotiations on trade and currency with China, but is generally far more likely to push new trade agreements than the labor-supported Obama administration.
If, however, Democrats retain control of the Senate, this will be far more difficult to accomplish.
A Republican president also would make appointments to many key policymaking positions, from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to regulatory agencies.
If Obama is re-elected, and Republicans control the House and Senate, his legislative agenda will essentially be a dead letter, and he will spend the next two years, at least, negotiating its reform and rollback.
In this scenario, the policy center of gravity in the Republican party would shift to House Speaker John Boehner, the chairman of the House Budget Committee, Paul Ryan, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, and other key Representatives, including David Camp, Kevin Brady, and Kevin McCarthy, along with several Senators.
In that case, Obama would be wise to move to the center (as Bill Clinton did after the Democrats lost control of Congress in 1994) and work with congressional Republicans to shape sensible tax and entitlement reforms.
But that seems unlikely: since the Democrats’ massive defeat in 2010, Obama has moved even further to the left, embracing a more populist agenda.
Regardless of the outcome of this year’s presidential and congressional elections, various Republican state governors are likely to gain a higher national profile.
All of them –&nbsp;including Mitch Daniels of Indiana, Chris Christie of New Jersey, Bob McDonnell of Virginia, and former Governor Jeb Bush of Florida – declined to seek the Republican presidential nomination, but will be on the short list for 2016 should Obama win in November.
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis famously described the states as “laboratories”: they should be allowed to experiment and learn from each other which policies work.
For example, Clinton and the Republican Congress based landmark 1996 welfare reform on policies originated by Wisconsin Governor Tommy Thompson and successfully emulated by New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, both reformist Republicans.
The current cohort of Republican governors offers similarly innovative state-level solutions – for example, on spending, debt, and unfunded pension and health liabilities – as models for the country.
Until November, divided government and contentious campaigning will most likely prevent significant policy moves.
But, following the election, taxes and spending, trade policy, federalism, regulation, and defense will take a different course – how different depends on who wins – with important implications for America’s fiscal position, external balance, and much else, including its relations with the rest of the world.
Are Foreign Investors Still Welcome?
World flows of foreign direct investment (FDI) have soared over the past two decades, from $40 billion in the early 1980’s to $900 billion last year.
The cumulative stock of FDI has reached close to $10 trillion, making it the most important mechanism for delivery of goods and services to foreign markets: sales by foreign affiliates total roughly $19 trillion, compared to world exports of $11 trillion.
At the same time, the liberalization of FDI regimes by virtually all countries has been a driving force of intra-firm trade – the lifeblood of the emerging system of integrated international production and already around one-third of world trade.
But are the good times coming to an end?
FDI can bring a range of benefits, but it also can have costs.
During the 1970’s, when the transnational corporations (TNC’s) undertaking such investment caught the public eye, many governments believed that the costs of FDI outweighed its benefits, so they controlled it.
Led by the developed countries, the pendulum began to swing in the 1980’s.
Once viewed as part of the problem, FDI became part of the solution to economic growth and development.
Nothing exemplifies this more than changes in national FDI regimes.
As the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development reports, of the 2,156 changes that took place between 1991 and 2004, 93% were in the direction of creating a more hospitable environment for TNC’s.
But there is a real danger that the pendulum is beginning to swing back, leading to a reversal of that liberalization process.
FDI in developed countries (and increasingly in emerging markets) often takes the form of cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A’s).
Resistance to such M&amp;A’s is becoming more frequent when they involve domestic firms that are regarded by politicians as “national champions” or important for national security, economic development, or cultural identity.
The growing involvement of private equity groups in M&amp;A activity implies additional controversy, as such transactions are typically regarded as being purely speculative.
In the name of “economic patriotism,” security, and other considerations, resistance to M&amp;A’s is being codified in an increasing number of countries.
For example, a United States Senate committee recently sought to block the planned liberalization of foreign takeover rules for airlines, while Europe has enacted more restrictive takeover laws.
Moreover, governments are applying more strictly existing regulatory provisions concerning the vetting of takeovers by foreign firms.
This response is intertwined with a defensive reaction to the growing role of TNC’s from emerging markets, the “new kids on the block.”
Established TNC’s, and their home countries, will need to adjust to this new constellation of forces and its implications for the world market.
As we know from other contexts, adjustment to newcomers is not easy: compare, say, the reaction to the tie-up between France’s Alcatel and America’s Lucent to the bids by the China National Offshore Oil Corporation for Chevron or Mittal for Acelor.
Another type of defensive reaction – this time to outward FDI – may well arise once the offshoring of services gathers more speed.
All indications are that offshoring has reached the tipping point, and more of it will take place through FDI.
If home countries do not put in place the adjustment mechanisms to deal with the rapidly unfolding revolution in making service industry jobs tradable, a backlash against such outward FDI will become inevitable.
The growing unease with FDI is so far largely confined to developed countries.
But there are signs that it is spreading to emerging markets.
In the case of large-scale projects, some host countries are raising questions about the contracts that define their relationship with TNC’s, and governments are reviewing such contracts because they believe (rightly or wrongly) that they did not get a fair deal.
Of the 219 known international arbitration cases concerning investment projects, some two-thirds were initiated during the past three years.
Approaches to FDI have changed in the past, and they can change again in the future, depending on how governments view the balance of costs and benefits.
This balance involves not only economic factors, but also such considerations as security and the desire to control one’s own economic development.
The concept of “twenty-first-century nationalization,” introduced by Peruvian presidential candidate Ollanta Humala, mirrors in this respect the “economic patriotism” of French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin.
Reservations against FDI (as against anything foreign) can be found in all groups of countries, and politicians can bring them to the surface, resulting in protectionism.
It would be ironic, though, if developed countries – which led the FDI liberalization wave of the past two decades – now led a backlash against FDI.
Let us hope that the de-liberalization seen in developed countries can be checked before it spreads to other parts of the world and ultimately brings undesirable consequences for all.
America’s Hope Against Hope
NEW YORK – After a hard-fought election campaign, costing well in excess of $2 billion, it seems to many observers that not much has changed in American politics: Barack Obama is still President, the Republicans still control the House of Representatives, and the Democrats still have a majority in the Senate.
With America facing a “fiscal cliff” – automatic tax increases and spending cuts at the start of 2013 that will most likely drive the economy into recession unless bipartisan agreement on an alternative fiscal path is reached – could there be anything worse than continued political gridlock?
In fact, the election had several salutary effects – beyond showing that unbridled corporate spending could not buy an election, and that demographic changes in the United States may doom Republican extremism.
The Republicans’ explicit campaign of disenfranchisement in some states – like Pennsylvania, where they tried to make it more difficult for African-Americans and Latinos to register to vote – backfired: those whose rights were threatened were motivated to turn out and exercise them.
In Massachusetts, Elizabeth Warren, a Harvard law professor and tireless warrior for reforms to protect ordinary citizens from banks’ abusive practices, won a seat in the Senate.
Some of Mitt Romney’s advisers seemed taken aback by Obama’s victory: Wasn’t the election supposed to be about economics?
They were confident that Americans would forget how the Republicans’ deregulatory zeal had brought the economy to the brink of ruin, and that voters had not noticed how their intransigence in Congress had prevented more effective policies from being pursued in the wake of the 2008 crisis.
Voters, they assumed, would focus only on the current economic malaise.
The Republicans should not have been caught off-guard by Americans’ interest in issues like disenfranchisement and gender equality.
While these issues strike at the core of a country’s values – of what we mean by democracy and limits on government intrusion into individuals’ lives – they are also economic issues.
As I explain in my book The Price of Inequality, much of the rise in US economic inequality is attributable to a government in which the rich have disproportionate influence –&amp; and use that influence to entrench themselves.
Obviously, issues like reproductive rights and gay marriage have large economic consequences as well.
In terms of economic policy for the next four years, the main cause for post-election celebration is that the US has avoided measures that would have pushed it closer to recession, increased inequality, imposed further hardship on the elderly, and impeded access to health care for millions of Americans.
Beyond that, here is what Americans should hope for: a strong “jobs” bill – based on investments in education, health care, technology, and infrastructure – that would stimulate the economy, restore growth, reduce unemployment, and generate tax revenues far in excess of its costs, thus improving the country’s fiscal position.
They might also hope for a housing program that finally addresses America’s foreclosure crisis.
A comprehensive program to increase economic opportunity and reduce inequality is also needed – its goal being to remove, within the next decade, America’s distinction as the advanced country with the highest inequality and the least social mobility.
This implies, among other things, a fair tax system that is more progressive and eliminates the distortions and loopholes that allow speculators to pay taxes at a lower effective rate than those who work for a living, and that enable the rich to use the Cayman Islands to avoid paying their fair share.
America – and the world – would also benefit from a US energy policy that reduces reliance on imports not just by increasing domestic production, but also by cutting consumption, and that recognizes the risks posed by global warming.
Moreover, America’s science and technology policy must reflect an understanding that long-term increases in living standards depend upon productivity growth, which reflects technological progress that assumes a solid foundation of basic research.
Finally, the US needs a financial system that serves all of society, rather than operating as if it were an end in itself.
That means that the system’s focus must shift from speculative and proprietary trading to lending and job creation, which implies reforms of financial-sector regulation, and of anti-trust and corporate-governance laws, together with adequate enforcement to ensure that markets do not become rigged casinos.
Globalization has made all countries more interdependent, in turn requiring greater global cooperation.
We might hopethat America will show more leadership in reforming the global financial system by advocating for stronger international regulation, a global reserve system, and better ways to restructure sovereign debt; in addressing global warming; in democratizing the international economic institutions; and in providing assistance to poorer countries.
Americans should hope for all of this, though I am not sanguine that they will get much of it.&amp; More likely, America will muddle through – here another little program for struggling students and homeowners, there the end of the Bush tax cuts for millionaires, but no wholesale tax reform, serious cutbacks in defense spending, or significant progress on global warming.
With the euro crisis likely to continue unabated, America’s continuing malaise does not bode well for global growth.
Even worse, in the absence of strong American leadership, longstanding global problems – from climate change to urgently needed reforms of the international monetary system – will continue to fester.
Nonetheless, we should be grateful: it is better to be standing still than it is to be heading in the wrong direction.
Are Housing Prices a House of Cards?
The first big city to boom was London, starting around 1996. Boom mentality spread to Los Angeles, New York, and Sydney around 1997, to Paris in 1998, to Miami, Moscow, and Shanghai in 2001, and Vancouver around 2002.
These and other cities have been booming pretty much ever since; prices in most are up at least 50% in real terms since 2000.
This has been a big windfall to homeowners, but has hurt anyone planning to buy.
Now growth in home prices is weakening in some of these cities. The rate of price growth in London and New York slowed sharply over the past year, to only about a 1% real increase in the second quarter of 2004.
In Sydney, home prices actually fell in the second quarter.
Has the boom ended? Will no other cities benefit?
Worse still, could the mood in housing markets soon lead prices in downward?
No one predicted this boom, so predicting its end is risky.
Housing prices have shown tremendous upward momentum in the face of previous warnings that the party is over.
Any prediction concerning the boom's end requires understanding why it occurred in so many places.
Surprisingly, there is no well-received explanation, because this boom's ultimate causes are mostly psychological.
Economists would rather talk about interest rates or unemployment statistics - factors that are concrete and knowable.
Of course, these indicators do have a legitimate role to play in explaining housing markets, but they are simply not adequate to account for the recent booms.
Three psychological causes stand out: first, a change in people's perceptions about the source of value in a changing world economy; second, increasing public faith in "glamour" cities with international name recognition; and third, the plain giddy dynamics of speculative bubbles.
Each factor deserves greater attention if we are to understand current housing market conditions and discern future price trends.
First, the world economy does look more chaotic than it did a decade ago.
The crash in equity prices since 2000 in most countries has made financial assets look less secure, spurring a "flight to quality" - in this case, housing.
Moreover, terrorism is now viewed as a problem for everyone, with major tragedies in Indonesia, Spain, and Russia.
People feel safest investing in their homes, and there is little reason to expect imminent change.
Fear and upward momentum in home prices go together.
Second, the public's faith in glamorous international cities has increased with the explosive growth in global communications due to the Internet and the cell phone.
Just as people increasingly admire international celebrities, so they believe that world famous centers of business, technology, and culture - whose names are household words to people everywhere - are uniquely valuable.
As with fear of terrorism and suspicion of equities, geographical celebrity appears resilient, if not self-reinforcing: the more famous New York, Paris, and London get, the more glamorous they become.
Third, and no less important, is the speculative contagion that underlies any bubble.
The current boom has seen contagion
In contrast to the other two psychological causes, speculative contagion has a natural end.
A speculative bubble, sustaining itself solely by reaction to price increases, cannot go on forever.
So, where does this leave us?
Two of the three psychological causes suggest continued upward momentum in housing prices, while the third suggests that the momentum will come to an end some day, but does not pinpoint when.
I am betting that some high-flying glamour cities will continue to see decelerating growth in home prices - and eventually decreases.
Historically, housing prices have shown a lot of momentum, and prices in all these cities are still going up at a brisk rate, though usually somewhat slower than a year or more ago.
Based on extrapolation of growth trends, it looks safe to predict that prices will go up substantially in most of these places for another year or more, even as the rate of increase continues to decline.
The psychological factors are more important for longer-term forecasts, beyond a year, where momentum no longer plays an important role.
At this point, there is likely to be some downward instability in prices, because enthusiasm for investing in houses is likely to wane in line with declining price growth.
Prices in glamour cities are likely to drop sharply the next time there is a serious recession, or if the local economy suffers a severe shock, or if interest rates rise too fast.
Then, contagion within and across markets can work in a downward direction, propelling prices lower for years.
Are Humans Getting Better?
MELBOURNE – With daily headlines focusing on war, terrorism, and the abuses of repressive governments, and religious leaders frequently bemoaning declining standards of public and private behavior, it is easy to get the impression that we are witnessing a moral collapse.
But I think that we have grounds to be optimistic about the future.
Thirty years ago, I wrote a book called The Expanding Circle, in which I asserted that, historically, the circle of beings to whom we extend moral consideration has widened, first from the tribe to the nation, then to the race or ethnic group, then to all human beings, and, finally, to non-human animals.
That, surely, is moral progress.
We might think that evolution leads to the selection of individuals who think only of their own interests, and those of their kin, because genes for such traits would be more likely to spread.
But, as I argued then, the development of reason could take us in a different direction.
On the one hand, having a capacity to reason confers an obvious evolutionary advantage, because it makes it possible to solve problems and to plan to avoid dangers, thereby increasing the prospects of survival.
Yet, on the other hand, reason is more than a neutral problem-solving tool. It is more like an escalator: once we get on it, we are liable to be taken to places that we never expected to reach.
In particular, reason enables us to see that others, previously outside the bounds of our moral view, are like us in relevant respects.
Excluding them from the sphere of beings to whom we owe moral consideration can then seem arbitrary, or just plain wrong.
Steven Pinker’s recent book The Better Angels of Our Nature lends weighty support to this view.&nbsp; Pinker, a professor of psychology at Harvard University, draws on recent research in history, psychology, cognitive science, economics, and sociology to argue that our era is less violent, less cruel, and more peaceful than any previous period of human existence.
The decline in violence holds for families, neighborhoods, tribes, and states.
In essence, humans living today are less likely to meet a violent death, or to suffer from violence or cruelty at the hands of others, than their predecessors in any previous century.
Many people will doubt this claim.
In support of this claim, he refers to the “Flynn Effect” – the remarkable finding by the philosopher James Flynn that since IQ tests were first administered, scores have risen considerably.
The average IQ is, by definition, 100; but, to achieve that result, raw test results have to be standardized.
If the average teenager today took an IQ test in 1910, he or she would score 130, which would be better than 98% of those taking the test then.
It is not easy to attribute this rise to improved education, because the aspects of the tests on which scores have risen the most do not require a good vocabulary, or even mathematical ability, but instead assess powers of abstract reasoning.
One theory is that we have gotten better at IQ tests because we live in a more symbol-rich environment.
Flynn himself thinks that the spread of the scientific mode of reasoning has played a role.
Pinker argues that enhanced powers of reasoning give us the ability to detach ourselves from our immediate experience and from our personal or parochial perspective, and frame our ideas in more abstract, universal terms.
This, in turn, leads to better moral commitments, including avoidance of violence.
It is just this kind of reasoning ability that improved during the twentieth century.
So there are grounds to believe that our improved reasoning abilities have enabled us to reduce the influence of those more impulsive elements of our nature that lead to violence.
Perhaps this underlies the significant drop in deaths inflicted by war since 1945 – a decline that has become even steeper over the past 20 years.
If so, there would be no denying that we continue to face grave problems, including of course the threat of catastrophic climate change.
But there would nonetheless be some reason to hope for moral progress.
Are Humans Worse than Chernobyl?
PORTSMOUTH – Nearly 30 years have passed since the nuclear accident at Chernobyl, and the scientific community is still arguing about the impact radiation is having on the ecosystem surrounding the reactor.
Recently, together with other scientists, I studied the animals in the human exclusion zone around the plant.
The results were shocking: whatever the impact of radiation on animals may be, the effects of human habitation seem to have been a lot worse.
The site offers a stark reminder that humans’ simple, physical presence in a habitat is more damaging than one of the twentieth century’s worst environmental catastrophes.
We studied animals in the nearly 2,200-square-kilometer (850 square miles) sector of the exclusion zone in Belarus called the “Polessye State Radioecological Reserve.”
Before the disaster, this area was home to 22,000 people in 92 villages, and the land was farmed and exploited for its forest resources.
In the days after the accident, the area’s human residents were evacuated with their farm animals to protect them from high levels of radiation.
Even though radiation levels dropped by a factor of nearly 100 in the months after the accident, the area is still judged unfit for human habitation.
There are few reports on the effects of the accident on wild animals, but we know that in some radiation hot spots trees and wildlife died.
Some might expect that, nearly 30 years later, the area around the reactor remains a wasteland, sparsely populated by genetically damaged animals exposed to chronic radiation across multiple generations.
The reality is very different.
Indeed, as early as a few years after the accident, data collected by Belarusan scientists flying helicopter surveys over the abandoned area showed rising numbers of wild boar, elk, and roe deer.
And, with the passage of time, the region’s wildlife population continued to grow, as animals made use of what people had left behind.
Crops, gardens, and orchards provided abundant food supplies.
Abandoned houses and farm buildings offered ready-made nests and dens.
By 1993, the number of wild boar had increased sixfold, before halving due to a disease outbreak and predation from the rapidly growing wolf population.
Our research shows that the number of large mammals at Chernobyl is similar to that in uncontaminated nature reserves in Belarus – except for wolves, which are far more numerous in the area around the reactor.
The area is also home to lynx and even a few brown bears.
Nor do the population data show any link between radiation levels and mammal densities; the number of mammals in the most contaminated parts of the zone is similar to that in the least contaminated parts.
To be sure, the fact that animals are thriving at Chernobyl does not mean that radiation is good for wildlife.
Radiation does cause DNA damage, and at current levels we cannot rule out some effects on the reproduction of individual animals.
But a comparison with what happened outside the affected area is instructive.
Whatever damage radiation has wrought, human habitation has caused far greater destruction.
Indeed, in areas outside the zone or nature reserves, populations of elk and wild boar underwent steep declines, as major socioeconomic changes after the fall of the Soviet Union worsened rural poverty and crippled wildlife management.
The lesson from Chernobyl is that if nature is to thrive, it must be given space – from us.
The primary causes behind declining global biodiversity include habitat loss and fragmentation as a result of human activity.
Even some of our most well-meaning environmental efforts, such as the fight against climate change, have led to the expansion of the human presence into previously untouched wilderness.
Demand for biofuels, for example, has been linked to deforestation.
It may also be time we consider embracing high-tech – even genetically modified – agriculture to provide the food we need on smaller areas of land, leaving more space for wildlife.
There are no easy solutions, of course, and all efforts to address the problem will be complicated by continuing rapid growth of the world’s human population.
But one thing is clear: we, as a species, need to think more carefully about our impact on the nonhuman animal population and begin to take better account of these effects in our economic and environmental policies.
Violence and Innovation
ABU DHABI – In the 1949 British film The Third Man, the character Harry Lime observes that, during the Borgia family’s rule in Renaissance Italy, the country “had warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed.
But [it] produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance.”
By contrast, he contends, Switzerland’s 500 years of democracy and peace produced little more than the cuckoo clock.
While the implication that innovation and creativity are born only of conflict is extreme – in fact, Switzerland is a world leader in innovation – Lime makes a crucial point.
Although peace, order, and political stability are widely perceived as essential prerequisites for invention, entrepreneurship, and economic development, there have been many exceptions to this rule – especially when it comes to creativity and innovation.
The United States is consistently ranked among the world’s top ten countries for innovation, including by INSEAD’s Global Innovation Index.
But, on the Global Peace Index, it is ranked 88th of 153 countries.
Likewise, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands rank, respectively, fifth and sixth on the Innovation Index, but only 28th and 29th on the Peace Index.
Conversely, Bhutan is among the top 20 most peaceful nations, but does not even make it onto innovation indices.
Of course, crime, terrorism, conflict, and political instability severe enough to cause a total breakdown of law and order significantly impede creativity and innovation.
But some countries show strong resilience in the face of pervasive violence and volatility.
For example, despite widespread violent crime, Mexico and South Africa have high levels of innovation (measured by patent filing and trademark registration).
When terrorism indicators are taken into account, Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, and Israel emerge as resilient innovators.
Just as peace and stability do not always lead to creativity and innovation, fighting and uncertainty do not necessarily deter it.
Although peace, political stability, and civil order are important factors to consider when selecting a location for a large-scale foreign production or service operation, they are far less important when it comes to sourcing creativity and making the related investments.
In particular, creative industries, such as animation, arts, design, and software – which are mostly based on individual skills and talent – tend to be more resilient to conflict than others.
Given this, officials, investors, and business leaders in search of revolutionary ideas, cutting-edge solutions, and untapped talent should not allow turbulence in some societies, or tranquility in others, to influence their decisions excessively.
In fact, stepping out of one’s comfort zone may offer significant benefits.
Some evidence suggests that the prevalence of uncertainty may boost competition, thereby sparking innovation.
Furthermore, social environments that are characterized by lower levels of consensus and higher levels of violence may be more likely than their more harmonious counterparts to catalyze radical innovation.
Lebanon’s experience supports this assessment.
Despite its long history of political violence, its creative industries are expanding.
According to a 2007 study of Lebanon’s copyright-based industries, conducted by the World Intellectual Property Organization, the main challenges facing the country’s software sector – an important part of its economy – include restricted markets, intense competition, a brain drain (loss of human capital), inadequate technology policy, a lack of government incentives, and rampant piracy.
Violence is conspicuously absent from the list.
To be sure, violence is always a problem.
But countries like Lebanon have become resistant to its effects – for example, by developing creative industries – diminishing its negative impact on economic, social, and intellectual development.
In 2005, 10% of all new businesses in Lebanon were in the creative sector, and the copyright-based industries contributed 4.75% of GDP.
Similarly, despite high levels of political violence, Nigeria produces more than 1,000 films annually.
Indeed, Nigeria’s film industry is the world’s third largest, after the US and India, and is second only to oil production in terms of its economic significance to the country.
According to a 2010 United Nations report on the creative economy, global trade in creative goods grew at an annual rate of 14% from 2002 to 2008.
Meanwhile, exports of such goods from developing countries, which tend to experience more violence, grew at a rate of 13.5%, reaching $176 billion (43% of total world trade in creative industries) in 2008.
Although overall global trade declined by 12% that year, trade in creative goods and services continued to expand.
This has significant implications for political and business leaders – especially in turbulent regions like the Middle East.
In order to bolster economic growth and innovation amid conflict and volatility, policymakers and investors should focus on building the creative industries.
The resilience and adaptability that they provide are crucial to supporting long-term economic growth and job creation – no matter what the future brings.
Are Services the New Manufactures?
PRINCETON – The global discussion about growth in the developing world has taken a sharp turn recently.
The hype and excitement of recent years over the prospect of rapid catch-up with the advanced economies have evaporated.
Few serious analysts still believe that the spectacular economic convergence experienced by Asian countries, and less spectacularly by most Latin American and African countries, will be sustained in the decades ahead.
The low interest rates, high commodity prices, rapid globalization, and post-Cold War stability that underpinned this extraordinary period are unlikely to persist.
A second realization has sunk in: Developing countries need a new growth model.
The problem is not just that they need to wean themselves from their reliance on fickle capital inflows and commodity booms, which have often left them vulnerable to shocks and prone to crises.
More important, export-oriented industrialization, history’s most certain path to riches, may have run its course.
Ever since the Industrial Revolution, manufacturing has been the key to rapid economic growth.
The countries that caught up with and eventually surpassed Britain, such as Germany, the United States, and Japan, all did so by building up their manufacturing industries.
Following the Second World War, there were two waves of rapid economic convergence: one in the European periphery during the 1950s and 1960s, and another in East Asia since the 1960s.
Both were based on industrial manufacturing.
China, which has emerged as the archetype of this growth strategy since the 1970s, traveled a well-worn path.
But manufacturing today is not what it used to be.
It has become much more capital- and skill-intensive, with greatly diminished potential to absorb large amounts of labor from the countryside.
While global supply chains have facilitated entry into manufacturing, they have also reduced the gains in terms of value added that accrue at home.
Many traditional industries, such as textiles and steel, are likely to face shrinking global markets and over-capacity, driven by demand shifts and environmental concerns.
And one downside of China’s success is that many other countries are finding it much harder to establish more than a niche in manufacturing.
As a consequence, developing countries are starting to de-industrialize and become more dependent on services at much lower levels of income than has been the pattern for developed countries – a phenomenon that I have called premature de-industrialization.
Can service industries play the role that manufacturing did in the past?
Already, services contribute the bulk of GDP in developing countries, even in low-income countries where agriculture has traditionally played a big part.
Young workers who leave the farm for the cities are increasingly absorbed into urban services jobs instead of manufacturing.
And international trade in services has tended to expand more rapidly than trade in goods.
Among the optimists are Ejaz Ghani and Stephen D. O’Connell of the World Bank.
In a recent paper, they argue that service industries could serve as a growth escalator, the role traditionally assumed by manufacturing.
In particular, they show that services have exhibited “unconditional convergence” in productivity recently.
That is, countries furthest away from the global frontier of labor productivity have seen the fastest productivity growth in services.
This would be very good news, but there are reasons to be wary.
The Ghani-O’Connell evidence includes data starting in the early 1990s, during which developing countries were experiencing economy-wide convergence, boosted by capital inflows and commodity windfalls.
It is unclear whether their conclusions extend to other periods.
Two things make services different from manufacturing.
First, while some segments of services are tradable and are becoming more important in global commerce, these typically are highly skill-intensive sectors that employ comparatively few ordinary workers.
Banking, finance, insurance, and other business services, along with information and communications technology (ICT), are all high-productivity activities that pay high wages.
They could act as growth escalators in economies where the work force is adequately trained.
But developing economies typically have predominantly low-skilled labor forces.
In such economies, tradable services cannot absorb more than a fraction of the labor supply.
That is why, for all of its success, the ICT sector in India has not been a primary driver of economic growth.
By contrast, traditional manufacturing could offer a large number of jobs to workers straight off the farm, at productivity levels three to four times that in agriculture.
In today’s developing countries, the bulk of excess labor is absorbed in non-tradable services operating at very low levels of productivity, in activities such as retail trade and housework.
In principle, many of these activities could benefit from better technologies, improved organization, and greater formalization.
But here the second difference between services and manufacturing comes into play.
Partial productivity gains in non-tradable activities are ultimately self-limiting, because individual service activities cannot expand without turning their terms of trade against themselves – pushing down their own prices (and profitability).
In manufacturing, small developing countries could thrive on the basis of a few export successes and diversify sequentially through time – t-shirts now, followed by the assembly of televisions and microwave ovens, and on up the chain of skill and value.
By contrast, in services, where market size is limited by domestic demand, continued success requires complementary and simultaneous gains in productivity in the rest of the economy.
Focusing on a few sectors yields no quick winning opportunities.
Growth therefore must rely on the much slower accumulation of economy-wide capabilities in the form of human capital and institutions.