An excellent example is corn that is crafted by splicing into commercial varieties a gene (or genes) from a harmless bacterium.
The bacterial genes express proteins that are toxic to corn-boring insects, but that are harmless to birds, fish, and mammals, including humans. As the modified corn fends off insect pests, it also reduces the levels of the mold Fusarium, thereby reducing the levels of fumonisin.
Indeed, researchers at Iowa State University and the US Department of Agriculture have found that the level of fumonisin in the modified corn is reduced by as much as 80% compared to conventional corn.
Similarly, an Italian study of weaned piglets that were fed either conventional corn or the same variety modified to synthesize a bacterial protein that confers resistance to insect predation found that the modified variety contained lower levels of fumonisin.
More importantly, the piglets that consumed the modified corn achieved a greater final weight, a measure of overall health, despite no difference in feed intake between the two groups.
Given the health benefits – to say nothing of the often higher and more reliable yields – governments should introduce incentives aimed at increasing use of such genetically engineered grains and other crops.
In addition, one would expect public-health advocates to demand that such improved varieties be cultivated and used for food, not unlike requirements that drinking water be chlorinated and fluoridated.
And food producers that are committed to offering the safest and best products to their customers should be competing to get genetically engineered products into the marketplace.
Alas, none of this has come to pass.
Activists continue to mount vocal and tenacious opposition to genetically engineered foods, despite almost 20 years of demonstrated, significant benefits, including reduced use of chemical pesticides (and thus less chemical runoff into waterways), greater use of farming practices that prevent soil erosion, higher profits for farmers, and less fungal contamination.
Responding to the bleating of activists, policymakers have subjected the testing and commercialization of genetically engineered crops to unscientific and draconian regulations, with dire consequences.
A groundbreaking study of the political economy of agricultural biotechnology concluded that over-regulation causes “delays in the global diffusion of proven technologies, resulting in a lower rate of growth in the global food supply and higher food prices.”
Current policies also create “disincentives for investing in further research and development, resulting in a slowdown in innovation of second-generation technologies anticipated to introduce broad consumer and environmental benefits.”
Everyone involved in food production and consumption has suffered: consumers (especially in developing countries) have been subjected to avoidable health risks, and food producers have placed themselves in legal jeopardy for selling products known to have “design defects.”
Public policy that discriminates against and discourages vital innovations in food production is not policy that has the public’s interest at heart.
The World When the Fed Raises Rates
VIENNA – The United States Federal Reserve is the world’s most powerful bank, and its most powerful component is the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the twelve men and women who meet eight times a year to determine – essentially by setting interest rates – the monetary policy of the world’s largest economy.
The last time the Fed raised interest rates was in 2006, before the growth-sapping impact of the global financial crisis persuaded it and other central banks to lower rates effectively to zero and to employ so-called quantitative easing (QE) to pump money into advanced economies.
But this year, for the first time since 2007, every advanced economy in the world is growing – including America’s.
And that means that the FOMC, fearful of asset bubbles, will at some point decide that America’s interest rates must rise.
That may (or may not, depending on the timing) be good for the US economy, but what will it mean for the rest of the world?
Our research shows why the world, especially emerging countries, will be paying nervous attention.
In mid-2013, when the Fed announced that it would gradually reduce its unconventional monetary-policy measures (for example, large-scale purchases of mortgage-backed securities), emerging markets suffered large capital outflows.
In other words, when the Fed even hints at tightening monetary policy, other countries suffer. Depending on just how much the FOMC decides to tighten at a future meeting, we foresee negative effects on world GDP in the medium term, not only for emerging markets but also for industrialized economies.
Since the Fed started to curb its QE program, there has been constant speculation over just when its current accommodative monetary policy will end.
Market participants, be they lenders or borrowers, know that “easy money” has an expiry date.
They can see that after three large asset-purchase programs, the Fed’s balance sheet has more than quadrupled since 2007, totaling about $4.5 trillion in February 2015.
However, when assessing what the FOMC intends to do, it is important to bear in mind that the Fed’s mandate is to advance America’s national economic goals.
This means that it has to consider not just the desirable rate of inflation (the target is a 2% annual rate), but also the state of the labor market – and its judgment has global implications.
That is why the Fed’s talk in mid-2013 about a gradual exit from unconventional monetary policy led to a so-called “taper tantrum” among investors, triggering a surge in global volatility and a shift in market sentiment against emerging markets.
The question now is whether future changes by the FOMC in the federal funds rate (the interest rate at which banks lend each other their overnight money deposited at the Fed) will have similar, or indeed worse, effects.
To narrow any gap between its expectations for the economy and those of the public, the Fed publishes each FOMC member’s view of the range of interest rates that should be expected over the next few years.
A member with a positive assessment of the US economy’s growth prospects will expect a rise in the federal funds rate; a pessimist will expect the rate to stay close to zero for a longer period.
Using information released by the Fed in March, we have constructed two scenarios: “lift-off” is based on the maximum projected interest rates, while “delayed lift-off” is based on the minimum.
To see the impact beyond America on GDP, consumer prices, exchange rates, and interest rates, we then apply the scenarios to a total of 36 emerging and advanced economies that together account for 90% of global output.
Assuming a phased rise in the federal funds rate to 4% by 2017, we believe that economic growth in all regions except Latin America will slow in 2016, and then slow even more in 2017.
The cumulative loss in this “lift-off” scenario is about ten times as large as any lost economic output under the “delayed lift-off” alternative of only minimal changes to rates over the next couple of years.
Our research shows that any monetary tightening by the Fed will affect the rest of the world, but to differing degrees.
Those emerging markets that were hit severely during the “taper tantrum” episode – for example, Brazil, Indonesia, and Turkey – will certainly suffer.
But the greatest negative impact will be on countries such as Canada and Mexico, which have close trade links with the US economy or those, like Germany, Japan, and Singapore, that are deeply integrated into the global economy.
In other words, though emerging markets – through their dependence on capital inflows – will be at risk when America’s monetary policy eventually returns to “normal,” the same will be true for advanced economies.
This commentary reflects the authors’ personal views, not those of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank or the Eurosystem.
Ready for a US Rate Hike?
MANILA – The possibility that the US Federal Reserve could raise the interest rate for the first time in a decade sent jitters across emerging markets for weeks.
Though the Fed has now decided to keep its policy rate ‎unchanged, it also stated that a rate hike is still on the table for 2015.
The concern is that countries that are dependent on foreign financing could be hit by sudden outflows of international capital, or that currency depreciation following the Fed hike could raise debt-servicing costs for countries and businesses.
Governments in the developing world would be wise to worry less about interest-rate changes in the United States – which, in any case, they cannot control – and think more about policy changes they can make at home to strengthen their economies’ resilience.
An increase in US interest rates is not necessarily bad news for emerging countries.
Many developing countries – especially in Asia – are in much better macroeconomic shape than they were just before the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s or at the onset of the 2008 global financial crisis.
And the Fed is likely to raise rates only if it judges US economic growth to be strong and sustainable, which would be a positive sign for the global economy in general.
Furthermore, a delay in raising rates carries its own dangers, encouraging yield-hungry investors to take larger risks – possibly necessitating a sharper or more abrupt change in interest rates in the future.
Emerging countries can enhance their resilience to fluctuations in global interest rates by pursuing sound fiscal and monetary policies, continuing necessary structural reforms, and strengthening their financial systems.
In particular, recent research suggests four key policy areas in which governments should consider intervening.
For starters, countries should embrace policies that favor foreign direct investment (FDI) over inflows that can be withdrawn more quickly, such as foreign bank loans, debt, or equity investments.
My research with Hui Tong of the International Monetary Fund shows that countries whose capital inflows that are mainly in the form of FDI tend to be more resilient to foreign financial shocks.
When the global financial crisis erupted, countries with high FDI relative to total capital flows tended to experience a less severe liquidity crunch.
Second, exchange rates need to reflect economic fundamentals.
But while theory suggests that flexible exchange rates should blunt foreign monetary or financial shocks, in practice, such a currency regime rarely works on its own.
Indeed, my research with the Asian Development Bank’s Xuehui Han has shown that when the US raises or lowers interest rates, most developing countries tend to follow suit, even when they have a flexible exchange rate.
The key reason is that they want to avoid large swings in the value of their currency.
Appreciation can harm competitiveness, while depreciation increases the cost of servicing foreign-currency debt, erodes market confidence, and leads to higher inflation.
The notable exceptions to this trend are countries that manage cross-border capital flows, especially the corporate sector’s exposure to foreign-currency debt.
Indeed, certain types of capital-flow management – including limiting domestic debt denominated in foreign currency for both firms and households – have been shown to increase resilience.
Third, domestic macroprudential and microprudential policies increase resilience.
These policies should aim at reducing or eliminating the wedge between activities that are good for individuals, banks, and firms, and those that benefit society as a whole.
One example of such a policy is to link banks’ mandatory reserve ratios to the speed at which credit is expanding or to the stage of the business cycle.
Thus, during periods of expansion, when banks are eager to fund ever more risky borrowers, the reserve ratio rises, curbing potentially disruptive asset bubbles or overinvestment.
For those countries capable of designing and implementing prudential regulations, management of cross-border capital flows becomes less useful and less desirable.
Finally, it is no longer appropriate to judge whether a country’s foreign-currency reserves are adequate based on how many months of imports they can cover.
Instead, the question to ask is whether the reserves can comfortably service the public and private sectors’ debt denominated in foreign currencies.
The US will normalize its interest rate policy sooner or later according to its need.
For other countries, it is important to focus on policies that can strengthen resilience to foreign financial or monetary shocks.
When the Yankees Go Home
ISLAMABAD – Relations between the United States and Pakistan have continued to fray since a US Special Forces team killed Osama bin Laden in a comfortable villa near a major Pakistani military academy.
But the tit-for-tat retaliation that has followed the raid reflects deeper sources of mistrust and mutual suspicion.
The latest round has focused on the alleged activities of the Pakistani military’s powerful intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), in the United States.
ISI is accused of watching over the Pakistani diaspora and of sponsoring unregistered lobbyists working to shape congressional opinion.
Indeed, this is not the first time that Pakistan’s relations with the US have been on a slippery slope.
In 1965, after helping the country to build up its economy and its military strength, the US walked out over the war with India that Pakistan had provoked by sending “freedom fighters” into Kashmir.
In 1989, following the Soviet Union’s exit from Afghanistan, the US lost interest in what it now calls AfPak – Afghanistan-Pakistan.
The Americans began returning to Pakistan until, in 1998, the Pakistani government decided to follow India in testing an atomic bomb.
This led to the imposition of US sanctions – and America’s third exit from Pakistan.
That situation remained unchanged when Afghanistan-based Al Qaeda struck America on September 11, 2001.
After receiving a “you are either with us or against us” warning from President George W. Bush’s administration, General Pervez Musharraf’s Pakistan decided to side with the US.
It severed relations with Afghanistan’s Taliban regime, which it had helped to install five years earlier, and allowed America to use its air space to launch strikes on Afghanistan.
For more than a decade, Pakistan and the US were close allies.
Pakistan let the US use its air bases to launch drone attacks on Taliban fighters in Afghanistan and northwestern Pakistan; allowed its territory to be used as a supply route for NATO forces in landlocked Afghanistan; and, less enthusiastically than the US wished, launched military operations against Taliban sanctuaries on the Pakistani side of the porous border with Afghanistan.
In return for its help, Pakistan received large doses of economic and military assistance.
According to the US Congress, Pakistan was provided $20 billion in aid between 2001 and 2011.
In addition, Congress passed the Kerry-Lugar bill, which promised $7.5 billion in economic aid from 2009-2014.
The US also encouraged the International Monetary Fund to give Pakistan emergency financial assistance equivalent to $11 billion, to be disbursed starting in late 2008.
This cozy relationship created a “moral hazard” in Pakistan, as the generous flow of US aid insulated the government and military from any sense of urgency about economic reform: some foreign friend would always rescue the country from its perennial shortage of cash.
So far, that friend has been America, but the US could well pull out of Pakistan for the fourth time in the countries’ turbulent relationship – a threat that several influential figures in the US Congress have already made.
The dynamic that has brought Pakistan-US relations to this point arguably began on December 1, 2009, when President Barack Obama, announcing a surge in the number of US troops in Afghanistan, also indicated his intention to start pulling back American troops beginning in July 2011 – a pledge that he reiterated two months ago.
This alerted Pakistan to the fact that, with the imminent departure of US troops, it would be left alone to fight the insurgency on both sides of its border with Afghanistan.
To do that, Pakistan would need help from some of the Afghan Pashtun tribes with which it had developed strong relations during the war against the Soviet Union.
The Jalaluddin Haqqani group, which was allowed to base itself in a sanctuary in Pakistan’s North Waziristan tribal agency, was one such ally that Pakistan’s government thought could be used to further its interests in Afghanistan.
But the Haqqanis were also the group that threatened the Americans the most.
The US pressed Pakistan to move against them. Pakistan resisted.
And, in the midst of this tussle, the US sent Navy Seals to find Bin Laden at a compound deep in Pakistani territory, informing Pakistan’s government only after the raid was over.
Pakistan’s embarrassed military pressed the government to begin distancing itself from the US.
After the identity of the CIA’s station chief in Pakistan was exposed (probably by Pakistani military officials), America made it known that it had good evidence that a prominent Pakistani journalist was ordered murdered by ISI.
This time around, the break between the US and Pakistan might not be easily repaired.
Pakistan has turned to China for economic and military help, clearly hoping for a less volatile relationship than the one that it has with America.
On one hand, Pakistan is seeking large investments from China to improve its physical infrastructure and exploit its considerable mineral wealth.
On the other hand, the Chinese have been invited to develop Gwadar port on the Balochistan coast, and to use it as a base for their fast-expanding navy.
While China has not responded to these overtures with the degree of enthusiasm that accompanied them, the Chinese would be happy to fill the strategic vacuum likely to be created by America’s accelerated departure from AfPak.
A major realignment of forces in the region is looming, and, with it, a new round of Asia’s old Great Game.
When Women Lead
MUNICH – Would the world be more peaceful if women were in charge?
A challenging new book by the Harvard University psychologist Steven Pinker says that the answer is “yes.”
In The Better Angels of Our Nature, Pinker presents data showing that human violence, while still very much with us today, has been gradually declining.
Moreover, he says, “over the long sweep of history, women have been and will be a pacifying force.
Traditional war is a man’s game: tribal women never band together to raid neighboring villages.”
As mothers, women have evolutionary incentives to maintain peaceful conditions in which to nurture their offspring and ensure that their genes survive into the next generation.
Skeptics immediately reply that women have not made war simply because they have rarely been in power.
If they were empowered as leaders, the conditions of an anarchic world would force them to make the same bellicose decisions that men do.
Margaret Thatcher, Golda Meir, and Indira Gandhi were powerful women; all of them led their countries to war.
But it is also true that these women rose to leadership by playing according to the political rules of “a man’s world.”
It was their success in conforming to male values that enabled their rise to leadership in the first place.
In a world in which women held a proportionate share (one-half) of leadership positions, they might behave differently in power.
So we are left with the broader question: does gender really matter in leadership?
In terms of stereotypes, various psychological studies show that men gravitate to the hard power of command, while women are collaborative and intuitively understand the soft power of attraction and persuasion.
Americans tend to describe leadership with tough male stereotypes, but recent leadership studies show increased success for what was once considered a “feminine style.”
In information-based societies, networks are replacing hierarchies, and knowledge workers are less deferential.
Management in a wide range of organizations is changing in the direction of “shared leadership,” and “distributed leadership,” with leaders in the center of a circle rather than atop a pyramid.
Former Google CEO Eric Schmidt said that he had to “coddle” his employees.
Even the military faces these changes.
In the United States, the Pentagon says that Army drillmasters do “less shouting at everyone,” because today’s generation responds better to instructors who play “a more counseling-type role.”
Military success against terrorists and counterinsurgents requires soldiers to win hearts and minds, not just break buildings and bodies.
Former US President George W. Bush once described his role as “the decider,” but there is much more to modern leadership than that.
Modern leaders must be able to use networks, to collaborate, and to encourage participation.
Women’s non-hierarchical style and relational skills fit a leadership need in the new world of knowledge-based organizations and groups that men, on average, are less well prepared to meet.
In the past, when women fought their way to the top of organizations, they often had to adopt a “masculine style,” violating the broader social norm of female “niceness.”
Now, however, with the information revolution and democratization demanding more participatory leadership, the “feminine style” is becoming a path to more effective leadership.
In order to lead successfully, men will not only have to value this style in their women colleagues, but will also have to master the same skills.
That is a trend, not (yet) a fact.
Women still lag in leadership positions, holding only 5% of top corporate positions and a minority of positions in elected legislatures (just 16% in the US, for example, compared to 45% in Sweden).
One study of the 1,941 rulers of independent countries during the twentieth century found only 27 women, roughly half of whom came to power as widows or daughters of a male ruler.
Less than 1% of twentieth-century rulers were women who gained power on their own.
So, given the new conventional wisdom in leadership studies that entering the information age means entering a woman’s world, why are women not doing better?
Lack of experience, primary caregiver responsibilities, bargaining style, and plain old discrimination all help to explain the gender gap.
Traditional career paths, and the cultural norms that constructed and reinforced them, simply have not enabled women to gain the skills required for top leadership positions in many organizational contexts.
Research shows that even in democratic societies, women face a higher social risk than men when attempting to negotiate for career-related resources such as compensation.
Women are generally not well integrated into male networks that dominate organizations, and gender stereotypes still hamper women who try to overcome such barriers.
This bias is beginning to break down in information-based societies, but it is a mistake to identify the new type of leadership we need in an information age simply as “a woman’s world.”
Even positive stereotypes are bad for women, men, and effective leadership.
Leaders should be viewed less in terms of heroic command than as encouraging participation throughout an organization, group, country, or network.
Questions of appropriate style – when to use hard and soft skills – are equally relevant for men and women, and should not be clouded by traditional gender stereotypes.
In some circumstances, men will need to act more “like women”; in others, women will need to be more “like men.”
The key choices about war and peace in our future will depend not on gender, but on how leaders combine hard- and soft-power skills to produce smart strategies.
Both men and women will make those decisions.
But Pinker is probably correct when he notes that the parts of the world that lag in the decline of violence are also the parts that lag in the empowerment of women.
When Yes Means No
Most commentators routinely assume that a Yes vote in the May 29 French referendum on the proposed European Union Constitution would be good for Europe and the EU.
But there is reason to doubt the conventional wisdom.
The French referendum will determine the political fate of French President Jacques Chirac – not France’s commitment to Europe, which is fixed and immutable.
If the French vote No, M. Chirac is finished.
If they vote Yes, he is re-empowered.
Europe clearly would be better off with Chirac weakened than strengthened, even if it means a temporary slowing of the pace of integration.
Chirac practices the politics of “scapegoatism” and excuses.
According to Chirac, France’s exports are lagging not because France is losing its international competitiveness – although it is, especially to Germany – but because of the strong euro.
Likewise, France’s economic growth is waning not because France has failed to undertake necessary structural reforms, but because European interest rates are too high.
Who does Chirac think is at fault?
The European Central Bank, of course, for allowing the euro to appreciate too much and for not cutting interest rates enough.
Unfortunately, this is typical of Chirac’s leadership style: blame others, excuse yourself, and ignore reform.
This is hardly the type of leadership Europe needs to survive and prosper in the modern world.
But Europe will get more of it if the French vote Yes.
Europe also would continue to be dominated by the interests of the big countries, with the small countries in the back of the bus.
The fate of the Franco-German axis, in particular, hinges on the outcome of the referendum.
A Yes invigorates the axis; a No weakens it.
“Who would follow Chirac if the French vote No?” asked one EU ambassador in a recent interview.
“Even Berlin has options.” But Berlin would not like a No vote.
If Chirac goes down, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder loses face as well.
Two birds would be wounded with one stone.
The prospect of a re-energized Franco-German axis is why the Dutch – who are traditionally pro-European but do not want a Europe that marginalizes small countries – might vote No in their referendum (which follows shortly upon France’s) if the French vote Yes.
A Dutch No would signal rejection of a corporatist Europe dominated by French and German interests, as well as representing a protest against the unpopular conservative and moralistic policies of the Balkenende government.
France is not the only EU country with an unpopular leader.
Eastern Europe also has a big stake in the outcome of the French referendum.
Chirac made it perfectly clear how he feels about the new smaller countries when he told them to “shut up” when they disagreed with him over Iraq.
More recently, Chirac’s foreign minister, Michel Barnier, chastised the Romanian President Traian Barescu for lacking a “European reflex,” because Barescu plans to align Romania with Anglo-Saxon liberal economic policies, and wants a special relationship with the US and UK to improve security in the Black Sea region.
Rather than buckle to France’s will, however, the Romanian president warned France’s leaders to stop lecturing his country – a sure sign that French influence is on the wane even in countries with which it has had close historical ties.
A French No would sit well with the Union’s newer members from Eastern Europe, who know Chirac is not their friend, and who are more attracted by promises of rapid economic growth than social protection and corporate state mischief.
Finally, the referendum contains an unstated question about the future of European Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro.
The Yes camp argues that rejecting the Constitution would damage the European Central Bank (ECB) and the euro.
But why would the EU fall into chaos and the euro wilt if the Treaty of Nice remains in force.
In the area of monetary integration, the European Constitution doesn’t change anything, other than the voting procedures in the Governing Council if EMU grows beyond 15 member countries.
A Yes vote, on the other hand, would encourage a reassured Chirac to continue his policy of no reform and scapegoating the ECB.
External political pressure on the ECB and its president, Jean-Claude Trichet, to lower interest rates and talk the euro down surely would increase.
This is more likely to bring the euro down than a No vote.
Where are the Global Problem Solvers?
NEW YORK – One odd and disturbing aspect of global politics today is the confusion between negotiations and problem-solving.
According to a timetable agreed in December 2007, we have six months to reach a global agreement on climate change in Copenhagen.
Governments are engaged in a massive negotiation, but they are not engaged in a massive effort at problem-solving.
Each country asks itself, “How do I do the least and get the other countries to do the most?,” when they should be asking instead, “How do we cooperate to achieve our shared goals at minimum cost and maximum benefit?”
These might sound like the same thing, but they are not.
Addressing the problem of climate change requires reducing emissions of carbon dioxide from fossil fuels, which in turn involves choices in technology, some of which already exists and much of which needs to be developed.
For example, coal plants, if they are to remain a major part of the energy mix, will need to capture and store their CO2, a process called “carbon capture and sequestration,” or CCS for short. Yet this technology remains unproved. 
Similarly, it will take a decade of public and private investments to demonstrate the feasibility of coal-fired plants that capture their carbon dioxide. 
The switchover to new technologies is not mainly a matter of negotiation but of engineering, planning, financing, and incentives.
How can the world most effectively develop, demonstrate, and then spread these new technologies?
Where the benefits are unlikely to accrue to private investors, who should pay for the early demonstration models, which will require billions of dollars?
How should we preserve private incentives for research and development while committing to transfer successful technologies to developing countries?
These are pressing, unsolved questions.
Yet the global negotiations on climate change are focusing on a different set of questions.
The negotiations are mainly about which groups of countries should cut their emissions, by how much, how fast, and relative to which baseline year.
Countries are being pressed to cut emissions by 2020 by certain percentage targets, without much serious discussion about how the cuts can be achieved.
The answers depend, of course, on which low-emission technologies will be available, and on how fast they can be deployed.
Consider the United States. To cut emissions sharply, the US will need to switch over this decade to a new fleet of automobiles, powered increasingly by electricity.
The US will also have to decide on the renewal and expansion of its nuclear power plants, and on the use of public lands to build new renewable energy plants, especially using solar power.
And the US will need a new power grid to carry renewable energy from low-density population sites – such as the southwestern deserts for solar power and the northern plains for wind power – to the high-density populations of the coasts.
Yet all of this requires a national plan, not simply a numerical target for emissions reduction.
Similarly, China, like the US, can reduce CO2 emissions through increased energy efficiency and a new fleet of electric vehicles. But China must consider the question from the vantage point of a coal-dependent economy.
China’s future choices depend on whether “clean coal” can really work effectively and on a large scale. Thus, China’s emissions path depends crucially on early testing of the CCS technologies.
A true global brainstorming approach would first discuss the best technological and economic options available, and how to improve these options through targeted research and development and better economic incentives.
The negotiations would discuss the range of options open to each country and region – from CCS to solar, wind, and nuclear power – and would sketch a timetable for a new generation of low-emission automobiles, recognizing that market competition as well as public financing will set the actual pace.
Based on these building blocks, the world could agree on allocating the costs for speeding the development and spread of new low-emission technologies.
This global framework would underpin national and global targets for emissions control and for monitoring the progress of the technological overhaul.
As new technologies are proven, the targets would become more stringent.
Of course, part of the strategy would be to create market incentives for new low-emission technologies, so that inventors could develop their own ideas with the prospect of large profits if those ideas are right.
My plea to discuss plans and strategies alongside specific emissions targets might seem to risk impeding the negotiations. But if we don’t have a strategy to accompany our targets, the world’s governments might not accept such targets in the first place, or might accept them cynically, without any intention of actually meeting them.
We need to think hard, and collaboratively, about the world’s real technological options, and then pursue a common global framework that allows us to move into a new era, one based on feasible and sustainable technologies for energy, transport, industry, and buildings.
Where Are the Syrian Peacemakers?
DENVER – Much has been said about the similarities between the chaos in Syria and the Balkan wars of the 1990’s.
But, while the prolonged killing may indeed be reminiscent, the political and diplomatic effort that finally ended the war in Bosnia is hardly in evidence today.
To date, there has been nothing similar to the Contact Group plan that was hammered out in the summer of 1994 by representatives from Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and the United States, and implemented the following year in Dayton, Ohio, after months of on-the-scene diplomacy.
In Syria, the only diplomatic process is in the hands of the courageous, if beleaguered, former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who has understood – better than many analysts of this latest international outrage – that any lasting political settlement must not be a triumph of one side or the other.
No one can watch the ongoing violence in Syria without a sense of horror at the armed attacks on largely unarmed civilians, overwhelmingly by groups that support President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
But those who say that Syria is on the brink of civil war miss what has become more obvious with each passing day: Syria alreadyis in a state of civil war, one whose battle lines were drawn months ago.
On one side is Assad’s minority Alawite tribe, which over the years has attracted secular Sunnis to share in the spoils of a one-party, authoritarian state.
But Assad’s coalition is broader than that, which helps to explain how he has been able to hold on to power while other regimes in the region have not.
Syria’s Christians, many of its 1.5 million Kurds, and even Damascus-based, secular classes have been disinclined to join what is widely perceived in the country – though not by the rest of the world – as a sectarian Sunni opposition that might not be supportive of cultural pluralism were it to assume power.
In the past, characterizing as a civil war a conflict in a complex region was a tacit warning that others should stay out.&nbsp;But the civil war in Syria has much broader ramifications, which could lead to a wider regional conflict.
Given this looming threat, it is becoming increasingly clear that staying out of the Syrian mess may not be an acceptable choice for countries that have an interest in a calmer and more democratic Middle East.
Ominously, the conflict looks increasingly like a proxy war between Iran and&nbsp;the Sunni Arab states, which regard their own minority Shia populations as a potential Iranian fifth column.
Iran has sought to maintain its influence in the Levant (including in Lebanon and among some Palestinian groups) by providing material support to Assad.
By contrast, many Sunni Arab states have provided varying degrees of support to the largely Sunni opposition, a hodgepodge of groups that include the Muslim Brotherhood and other sectarian forces similar to Egypt’s ultra-conservative Salafis.&nbsp;
Russia and China, bruised by their loss of face in the NATO-led intervention in Libya in 2011, have sought to keep the international community out of Syria.
Both countries fear that intervention – whether militarily or through economic sanctions – could harm their interests in Syria, where they – especially the Russians – have been the dominant external players.
A “Contact Group Plan” should be carefully worked out with Annan and his team (the only entity at this point that seems to have access to all sides).
Most importantly, all of the plan’s stakeholders then need to support Annan, publicly and privately.
Publicly declaring support for Annan’s ceasefire plan, and then whispering to journalists that it is “in tatters,” as has occurred repeatedly in recent weeks, will not get the job done.
Clearly, a new way forward is needed, and a good start would be a political/diplomatic plan that Annan could sell to the parties.
In the Balkans, it was a US team that finally sold the Contact Group Plan to the parties directly involved.
We didn’t succeed because we were geniuses. We succeeded because we had tremendous support from every country that wanted to see the horrific conflict in Bosnia brought to an end.
The same unqualified support is what Annan – the best diplomat we have out there – needs and deserves.
Where Did Market Volatility Go?
Television and newspapers continue to trumpet every twist and turn of global financial markets.
In truth, however, the big story is the uneerie calm that has engulfed virtually every major asset class, from stocks to bonds.
Is the whole investment world on Prozac?
Conspiracy theories abound, particularly among the ranks of financial traders, for whom volatility is like wind to a sailor.
These traders confidently figure that as long as markets gyrate, no matter what the direction, they can always make money.
And, thanks to the rest of us who don’t have the time, information, and skill to match wits with them, they are mostly right.
But, with today’s dormant markets, the pickings are slim.
The favored bogeymen of the day are giant government investors, particularly Asian central banks, with their trillions of dollars in assets.
These superfunds, whose managers do not necessarily share the same passion for profit as private investors, are said to be squeezing the life out of interest rates and exchange rates.
“The big Asian central banks are oppressing us,” one young trader recently complained to me.
What a difference a decade makes.
During the 1990’s, private investors looked at big, lumbering central banks as cash cows, long on money and short on financial acumen.
George Soros once made a billion dollars off the Bank of England in just an hour.
His basic strategy was a standard one: bet against any central bank that tries to defend an inconsistent macroeconomic policy.
Traders did not win every battle, of course.
It was the speculators whose blood flowed in the streets when they attacked Hong Kong’s dollar peg in 1998.
But overall, betting against big government financial institutions proved to be a richly rewarding business.
That was the 1990’s.
Today, many traders see formerly inept state giants as financial geniuses, capable of taming complex financial formulas and exploiting their superior size and trading information to squeeze the life out of currency and interest rate markets.
These behemoths’ innate conservatism, having calmed bond and currency markets, is now having a similar effect on stocks.
Although few accuse Asian central banks of explicitly conspiring to calm global markets, some say that their common cautious approach to trading is a form of implicit collusion.
As much as we may sympathize with young would-be millionaire traders, does their story of oppression make any sense?
Could it be true that huge government investors from Asia (not to mention Russia, Latin America, and the Middle East) have quietly taken control of world markets?
Perhaps, but the bogeyman theory seems a bit overblown.
Yes, the big Asian central banks do sit on almost $3 trillion in assets; China’s central bank alone has around a trillion dollars.
This gives them a capital base similar to the combined assets of all the world’s major hedge funds.
But this metric is very deceptive.
Hedge funds constitute only a small percentage of overall world financial markets, which, according to a recent study by the McKinnsey Global Institute, now exceed $120 trillion.
And hedge funds, unlike banks, can leverage their bets, borrowing to take on assets many times the size of their capital base.
Otherwise, George Soros and his wealthy fellow investors could not have dreamed of taking on the Bank of England.
In fact, the explanation for market calm probably lies elsewhere.
So, if a conspiracy of Asian central banks is not to blame for the volatility drought that is parching traders’ earnings, what is?
Surely, today’s low volatility is partly cyclical.
Stock market volatility was also very low during the early 1990’s, before reaching new peaks later in the decade.
Moreover, financial innovation and globalization allow markets to spread risk more effectively than ever before, placing it in the hands of those who can best manage it.
Improved central bank policy is another huge factor.
In the early 1990’s, the average level of world inflation exceeded 30%; now it is less than 4%.
All of these changes have in turn contributed to lower economy-wide output and consumption volatility in both rich and developing countries.
They have also contributed mightily to the high general level of asset prices, helping create the vast riches of which today’s hungry young traders are so jealous.
So will today’s relative market calm continue?
Unfortunately, no.
Today’s brave new world of financial globalization will almost surely face severe new stress tests, reminding us that recessions still happen.
Frankly, although I do not see the five-year-old global expansion coming to an end yet, there is no question that risks are on the rise, with output in the United States having slowed sharply in the third quarter, and central banks’ hands tied by inflation risks. Further ahead, it is not hard to imagine geopolitical instability – possibly emanating from Iran, Iraq, or North Korea – unsettling markets.
Whatever the scenario that ends the calm, today’s age of low volatility will seem like a distant dream to most of us – and a forgotten nightmare for ambitious financial traders.
Which New Middle East?
BERLIN – Regardless of whether democratization in the “new Middle East” succeeds or authoritarian forms of government prevail once again, one fundamental change has already become clear: no one will be able to govern without taking into account domestic public opinion.
This change will shift the foreign-policy parameters of the Middle East conflict (understood as both an Israeli-Palestinian conflict and as a conflict between Israelis and Arabs more generally).
Despite wars in Lebanon and Gaza, and the intifadas in the occupied West Bank, these parameters have proven surprisingly stable for decades, anchored by the peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan and the Oslo accords with the Palestinians.
All this is about to change.
And, while the tectonic shift in the region was triggered by the “Arab Awakening,” its players are not limited to the Arab world or to the confines of the Middle East conflict.
The United States, Europe, Turkey, and, in a certain sense, Iran all play a role – some more directly than others.
Let’s begin with the US.
President Barack Obama’s speech in Cairo two years ago created great expectations, but few or none have been fulfilled.
Instead, the US allowed a political vacuum to form in the absence of any movement on the part of Israel’s government. This vacuum has now been filled by the Arab Awakening.
Europe, meanwhile, is preoccupied with its own crisis.
But, in the last few years, the Europeans, led by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy, have de facto slammed the door to European Union accession in Turkey’s face.
As a result, Turkey has embraced a “neo-Ottoman” foreign policy, in which the Arab world – even more than the Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Balkans – plays the central role.
Of course, Turkey, in accordance with its political, security, and economic interests, has no choice but to pay close attention to its southern neighborhood, and must try to prevent chaotic developments there.
Turkey would be facing the same risks even if it were integrated into a European context, but its priorities would then be completely different.
Because of Europe’s short-sightedness, Turkey has in effect abandoned its ambitions for EU membership and opted for the neo-Ottoman project of becoming a Middle Eastern power – a policy shift that reflects both interests and ideology.
On the one hand, Turkey views regional dominance as a stepping-stone to a greater global role; on the other hand, it views itself as a role model for successful modernization of the Middle East on an Islamic-democratic basis.
This bid for regional preeminence will sooner or later bring Turkey into serious conflict with neighboring Iran.
If Turkey prevails, Iran and the radicals in the region will be caught on the losing side of history – and they know it.
While Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government is trying to maintain good relations with Iran, its ambition to become the leading Sunni power means that Turkey must sooner or later contest Iran’s influence in Iraq, as well as in Syria and Palestine. And that means conflict.
The drastic deterioration in Turkey’s relations with Israel is related to this emerging Iranian-Turkish rivalry.
To be sure, this rivalry also has a positive side from the Israeli point of view – the weakening of Iran and other regional radicals.
But, for Turkey as an aspiring regional leader, the interests of the Palestinians are naturally more important than its relations with Israel.
This has become all the more true in light of the revolutionary changes in the Arab world, and is at the root of Erdoğan’s foreign-policy reorientation.
As a result, Israel is in an increasingly difficult situation.
Without a strategic re-orientation of its own – to remain passive is a risky endeavor in a rapidly changing world order – Israel would further delegitimize and isolate itself internationally.
A viable Israeli answer to the dramatic changes in the region – and to their already foreseeable consequences – can only take the form of a serious offer of negotiations to Mahmoud Abbas’s Palestinian government, with the objective of signing a comprehensive peace treaty.
Security questions must be taken seriously, but they carry less and less weight, because a sufficiently long period can be left between the treaty’s conclusion and its full implementation to resolve them by mutual agreement.
But Israel’s current passivity – with all of its negative long-term consequences for the country – is likely to continue as long as Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu considers his coalition’s survival more important than a decisive peace initiative.
At the same time, the pressure of the Arab revolutions is transforming the Palestinians into a dynamic political factor.
For example, in view of the looming fall of Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, the pressure of the Egyptian revolution, and the new role of Islamism in the region, Hamas’s alliance with Iran is becoming increasingly problematic.
It remains to be seen whether, in the end, the “Turkish course” will prevail against the radicals in Gaza or not.
In any case, Hamas faces some risky and consequential decisions of its own – all the more so should its main rival, Abbas’s Palestinian Authority, succeed in its current diplomatic campaign at the United Nations.
Obama had promised a Palestinian state within one year, and Abbas is now building upon that promise.
But what happens next is crucial.
Will Abbas be able to keep the Palestinians on a diplomatic path, or will the situation degenerate again into violence and another disaster?
And what will the Palestinian road towards peace look like after the UN decision to recognize some form of statehood for Palestine?
Given the current pace of change in the Middle East, we might not have to wait long for answers – or for more questions.
Which Turkey in What Europe?
“A tempest in a teapot” is perhaps the best description of the recent squabbles about opening the European Union’s accession negotiations with Turkey.
The election in Germany was in part fought on the issue, as Chancellor Angela Merkel ran on a platform of offering Turkey a “privileged partnership,” rather than full admission.
The Austrian government’s posturing – motivated as much by its upcoming elections as genuine foreign policy concerns – seemed to threaten the opening of the accession talks themselves.
But German foreign policy has always been marked by continuity, and the new foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the chief of staff under former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, has repeatedly advocated full membership for Turkey.
But much of the debate about Turkey’s possible accession has been focused on the wrong issues: whether Turkey is culturally “in line” with Europe or whether Europe is in some sense “Christian” and could assimilate 100 million Muslims.
The real issue – not disputed even by most Turks – is that Turkey is neither economically ready nor, above all, a mature enough democracy for full EU membership.
and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s prime minister, can place his trust in the near automatic mechanisms that characterize the EU’s instDespite substantial progress, democratization is only a torso.
Human and civil rights still do not meet Western European standards, religious and ethnic minorities are recognized only on paper, acknowledgment of the historic genocide of the Armenians is given mere lip service, and civilian control over the military remains weak.
Raising this long list of shortcomings puts Western critics in an uncomfortable position with their pro-European Turkish interlocutors.
Turkey’s pro-Western forces find just as much fault with their country’s political system as the European critics, but they expect the prospect of EU membership to accelerate the progress of reforms.
Nationalist Turks, on the other hand, regard joining the EU mainly as a confirmation of national power and view all criticism of the country as a violation of Turks’ collective honor.
Had the start of accession negotiations been postponed or canceled, Turkey’s pro-Europeans would have suffered from a nationalist backlash.
Even now, Turkey’s unrequited love for Europe can still fade into aversion, with Islamic fundamentalism and Greater Turkey nationalism continuing to represent other, eastward-leaning options.
Advocates of a conditioned accession are thus under extraordinary pressure to be nice, even as Turkish officials stage provocations, like the recent suit against the noted author Orhan Pamuk for “public denigration of Turkish identity” because he dared to question the official position on the Armenian genocide.
As a result, a general lack of clarity about what kind of Turkey should be accepted characterizes the accession debate, which focuses – much as in the recent referenda on the EU constitution in France and the Netherlands – on rather meaningless generalities.
But, more importantly, the lack of clarity on the Turkish accession question reflects Europe’s ambivalence regarding its image of itself.
To be sure, Turkey shows substantial political and cultural differences, especially when it comes to the importance of civil society, sexual equality, and the role of religion in public life.
But the real question is this: what kind of Europe do Europeans themselves want?
“Deepening” and “widening” European integration are the superficial opposites here.
Austria does not want any more members – with the inconsistent exception of Croatia – but wants to deepen the EU’s political and cultural unity.
Many “old” Europeans, including Germany after Schröder’s resignation and France under a weakened Jacques Chirac, share that stance.
Britain, the leading nation of “new” Europe, has no desire for an EU constitution, more executive and parliamentary power in Brussels, a stronger European Parliament, or the euro.
Like many new members, Britain prefers a loosely connected Europe of different nations – essentially a free-trade zone, but with open borders at its periphery – with sufficient strategic coordination to constitute a quasi-empire in geopolitical terms, on a par with the United States.
The fundamental difference is that a loosely tied Union is attractive to all sorts of aspirants, including Georgia, Ukraine, and other Soviet successor states – and perhaps even North African countries like Morocco – while a “deepened” Europe, with a clear political identity, high social-welfare entitlements, and growing cultural homogeneity, would naturally set itself apart and not be particularly attractive to these countries.
Paradoxically, then, what the British, with their opposition to “deepening” European integration, are really offering the Turks is precisely the sort of “privileged partnership” that Austria, together with Angela Merkel, has been backing.
Both positions reject the idea of making Turkey really “European.”
The structure that Britain seems to have in mind is, according to some, reminiscent of the loose alliance binding the British Commonwealth.
But “History’s ruse” could be that even as the British succeed in improving Turkey’s prospects for admission, the renegotiation of the Nice treaty, which will become necessary if Croatia is admitted, is likely to lead to stronger European integration.
Thus, what we may get is both deepening and widening of the EU – something that today seems like squaring the circle.
Which Way is West for Turkey?
When Turkey's parliament voted in March 2003 against allowing American troops to open a northern front against Iraq, Turkey's traditional strategic partnership with the United States ended.
The two countries still recognize many mutual interests, but now they manage these interests on a far different basis.
The vote shocked "old Europe" and the Arab world as much as the Bush administration.
Europeans who considered Turkey a potential Trojan horse for America within the European Union were forced to reconsider.
For many Arabs, the vote showed that Turkey was not an American lackey and would not cooperate with American imperial designs, despite close Turkish-Israeli relations.
Long-simmering disagreements between Turkey and the US came to a boil with the emergence of the Kurds of northern Iraq as the Pentagon's main allies in the Iraq War.
The American administration made it clear that military intervention by Turkey in Northern Iraq would not be tolerated.
That message was confirmed on July 4, 2003, when American forces arrested several Turkish Special Forces troops in the town of Sulaimaniya, humiliating them by putting sacks over their head as they took them into custody.
Only intervention by US Vice President Dick Cheney two and a half days later secured the release of the soldiers, who were alleged to have been planning clandestine operations within the Kurdish zone.
Despite ongoing tensions, the Turkish government has been eager to mend relations with America, as it is anxious to have some influence over developments in Iraq.
So the authorities responded quickly to the Bush administration's request for Turkish troops to join the coalition, although the idea was stillborn - rejected by both the Kurds and the American-appointed Governing Council in Iraq.
America has its own reasons to patch up the relationship.
Turkey's secular, capitalistic, democratic order has become especially valuable to the Bush administration as it seeks to integrate the wider Middle East into the world system by liberalizing its economy and democratizing its polity.
Thus, America trumpeted its continuing support for Turkish membership in the EU, notably in President Bush's speech in June at Istanbul's Galatasaray University - at a bridge that joins Asia and Europe.
But serious bilateral problems remain.
The government is irritated by US occupation forces' neglect of the northern Iraqi bases of the PKK, the Kurdish separatist insurgents who have fought a 15-year war against Turkey.
More broadly, the government regards the US as too complacent vis-à-vis Kurdish political developments and unmoved by Turkey's concerns about Kurdish independence.
The US, for its part, is unhappy with the government's objections to unrestricted American use of the Incirlik airbase in southeastern Turkey, as well as by recent tensions with Israel.
In the meantime, Turkey is moving closer to the EU, with the government overcoming nationalistic objections in the Parliament to push through comprehensive reforms.
Turkey also showed its good will over Cyprus, removing a nagging political obstacle to EU membership.
These steps led to the European Commission's recent recommendation to begin accession negotiations with Turkey.
The EU accession process has also underpinned a shift in Turkish policy on Iraq.
Previously, Turkey viewed Iraq solely in the context of its domestic Kurdish problem.
But widespread European opposition to the war removed the possibility of Turkish military intervention, forcing the government to develop another vision of Turkey's interests.
At the same time, the Iraqi Kurds also appear to appreciate how much they need a friendly Turkey.
The northern border with Turkey is their lifeline to the outside world.
As a result, Turkey no longer considers a federalized Iraq a threat to its security, as long as each federal unit maintains a measure of ethnic diversity.
Of course, Turkey remains opposed to an independent Kurdistan. But now its concern is more closely tied to regional politics than to the Kurdish issue.
Turkey has no desire to serve as a strategic counterweight to Iran and believes that only a territorially intact Iraq can continue to play that role.
Furthermore, Turkey is concerned about the possibility of civil war in Kurdistan between the two largest Kurdish factions.
But, unlike either Iran or Syria, Turkey genuinely wishes to see a strong and representative government in Baghdad.
Thanks to EU pressures, Turkey's domestic Kurdish problem is well on the way to being resolved democratically, with most Kurdish leaders in Turkey expressing their commitment to Turkish unity.
For Turkey to consider military intervention in Kurdistan, EU member states would first have to renege on their commitment to negotiate Turkish accession.
Equally dramatic would be any attempt by the Kurds to forcibly change the demographic balance of the multiethnic city of Kirkuk.
Turkey would prefer that Kirkuk, with its large Turkmen population, be given special status in the forthcoming draft Iraqi constitution.
The US also shows signs of understanding the importance of maintaining a multiethnic Kirkuk and is putting pressure on its Kurdish allies.
Turkish diplomacy has thus become a well-calibrated balancing act, moving closer to European positions in the Middle East, but eager to maintain close relations with the US.
If this approach succeeds, Europe's bridge to Asia may also become its bridge to America.
White House Sex Crimes
NEW YORK – Sex crime has a telltale signature, even when those directing the outrages are some of the most powerful men and women in the United States.
How extraordinary, then, to learn that one of the perpetrators of these crimes, Condoleezza Rice, has just led the debate in a special session of the United Nations Security Council on the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.
I had a sense of déjà vu when I saw the photos that emerged in 2004 from Abu Ghraib prison.
Even as the Bush administration was spinning the notion that the torture of prisoners was the work of “a few bad apples” low in the military hierarchy, I knew that we were seeing evidence of a systemic policy set at the top.
It’s not that I am a genius. It’s simply that, having worked at a rape crisis center and been trained in the basics of sex crime, I have learned that all sex predators go about things in certain recognizable ways.
We now know that the torture of prisoners was the result of a policy set in the White House by former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Vice President Dick Cheney, and Rice – who actually chaired the torture meetings.
The Pentagon has also acknowledged that it had authorized sexualized abuse of detainees as part of interrogation practices to be performed by female operatives.
And documents obtained by the American Civil Liberties Union have Rumsfeld, in his own words, “checking in” on the sexualized humiliation of prisoners.
The sexualization of torture from the top basically turned Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo Bay into an organized sex-crime ring in which the trafficked sex slaves were US-held prisoners.
Looking at the classic S and M nature of some of this torture, it is hard not to speculate that someone setting policy was aroused by all of this.
The nonsexual torture that was committed ranged from beatings and suffocation, electrodes attached to genitals, and forced sleep deprivation, to prisoners being hung by the wrists from the ceiling and placed in solitary confinement until psychosis was induced.
These abuses violate both US and international law.
Three former military attorneys, recognizing this blunt truth, refused to participate in the “military tribunals” – rather, “show trials” – aimed at condemning men whose confessions were elicited through torture.
Though we can now debate what the penalty for water-boarding should be, America as a nation, maintaining an odd silence, still cannot seem to discuss the sexual crimes involved.
Why?
It’s not as if the sex crimes that US leaders either authorized or tolerated are not staring Americans in the face: the images of male prisoners with their heads hooded with women’s underwear; the documented reports of female US soldiers deployed to smear menstrual blood on the faces of male prisoners, and of military interrogators or contractors forcing prisoners to simulate sex with each other, to penetrate themselves with objects, or to submit to being penetrated by objects.
Indeed, the Military Commissions Act of 2006 was written deliberately with loopholes that gave immunity to perpetrators of many kinds of sexual humiliation and abuse.
There is also the testimony by female soldiers such as Lynndie England about compelling male prisoners to masturbate, as well as an FBI memo objecting to a policy of “highly aggressive interrogation techniques.”
The memo cites a female interrogator rubbing lotion on a shackled detainee and whispering in his ear – during Ramadan when sexual contact with a strange woman would be most offensive – then suddenly bending back his thumbs until he grimaced in pain, and violently grabbing his genitals.
Sexual abuse in US-operated prisons got worse and worse over time, ultimately including, according to doctors who examined detainees, anal sodomy.
All this may sound bizarre if you are a normal person, but it is standard operating procedure for sex offenders.
Those who work in the field know that once sex abusers control a powerless victim, they will invariably push the boundaries with ever more extreme behavior.
Abusers start by undressing their victims, but once that line has been breached, you are likely to hear from the victim about oral and anal penetration, greater and greater pain and fear being inflicted, and more and more carelessness about exposing the crimes as the perpetrator’s inhibitions fall away.
The perpetrator is also likely to engage in ever-escalating rationalizations, often arguing that the offenses serve a greater good.
Finally, the victim is blamed for the abuse: in the case of the detainees, if they would only “behave,” and confess, they wouldn’t bring all this on themselves.
Silence, and even collusion, is also typical of sex crimes within a family.
Americans are behaving like a dysfunctional family by shielding sex criminals in their midst through silence.
Just as sex criminals – and the leaders who directed the use of rape and sexual abuse as a military strategy – were tried and sentenced after the wars in Bosnia and Sierra Leone, so Americans must hold accountable those who committed, or authorized, sex crimes in US-operated prisons.
Throughout the world, this perverse and graphic criminality has added fuel to anxiety about US cultural and military power.
These acts need to be called by their true names – war crimes and sex crimes – and people in America need to demand justice for the perpetrators and their victims.
As in a family, only when people start to speak out and tell the truth about rape and sexual assault can the healing begin.
Whither Africa’s “Frontier Markets”?
NEW YORK – Zimbabwe’s election appears, once again, to confirm a truism: Africa only seems to make international headlines when disasters strike – a drought, a coup, a war, a genocide, or, as in the case of Robert Mugabe, grossly incompetent government.
But, over the past several years, a number of sub-Saharan countries have attracted unprecedented inflows of foreign capital.
Recent global financial turmoil has only added to Africa’s allure, because its frontier markets are less vulnerable to international volatility than are most of the world’s more familiar emerging economies.
There are three main reasons why many sub-Saharan countries are performing well.
First, high commodity prices yield windfall profits for the region’s leading producers of raw materials.
Growing demand for energy, metals, and minerals – particularly in China – has driven unprecedented levels of foreign investment.
Even large pension funds are beginning to take notice.
Moreover, a large number of Africa’s poorest countries have benefited from exponential growth in (primarily United States-based) philanthropy.
But, while both of these positive trends are likely to continue, a third positive factor may not prove as durable. Every year, Africans living outside the continent send roughly $30 billion to family and friends back home.
These remittances are vitally important for economic stability in several African countries.
An economic slowdown in the US and Europe could substantially slow this infusion of cash, because immigrants are often the first to lose their jobs when recession fears take hold.
At the same time, though Africa’s frontier economies are less vulnerable than other emerging markets to global financial turbulence, they are highly vulnerable to political turmoil closer to home.
The three countries that served as pillars of regional stability for the past several years – Nigeria, Kenya, and South Africa – are now too pre-occupied with political troubles of their own to provide the peacekeepers, reconstruction funds, and political pressure that often limit the damage from conflicts elsewhere in the region.
Most of Nigeria’s problems are well known.
Militants in the oil-rich Niger Delta region have at times shut down as much as 30% of the country’s oil exports, a vital source of state revenue.
President Umaru Yar’Adua has taken concrete steps to tackle elite-level corruption in Nigeria, and appears to have made progress toward a comprehensive peace agreement with the Delta rebels.
But Yar’Adua might soon confront a big short-term problem.
The country’s National Election Tribunal, having overturned the outcomes of several provincial elections, may well annul the results of last year’s presidential race, forcing him to run for president all over again.
While Yar’Adua could use the goodwill that he has built up over the past year to win by an even larger margin, the 90-day election campaign would almost certainly trigger civil unrest, and Nigeria’s leadership would be too busy navigating domestic political rivalries to help stabilize conflicts elsewhere in Africa.
Kenya’s troubles run deeper.
Solid economic expansion and one of the world’s fastest-growing stock markets have not helped the country avert a deepening political crisis and mounting ethnic violence since disputed presidential election results in December.
President Mwai Kibaki, whom international observers accuse of rigging the vote, has hinted at a plan to share power in a unity government, but opposition leader Raila Odinga has heard these promises before.
Odinga worked hard to help elect Kibaki in 2002, only to see Kibaki renege on a similar pledge.
Despite the alarming escalation in violence, fears of civil war in Kenya are probably exaggerated.
The country’s Orange opposition movement has recently won key posts in parliament and, for the moment, is heeding calls for calm from former United nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and representatives of the African Union.
But no one should expect Kenya to play a stabilizing regional role again anytime soon.
The continent’s third pillar, South Africa, will spend 2008 mired in an escalating political feud between Thabo Mbeki, the lame-duck president, and Jacob Zuma, a former deputy who is the newly elected leader of the ruling African National Congress and the leading candidate to succeed Mbeki, his bitter rival, next year.
South Africa’s courts have become a political battleground, as Mbeki and his allies use corruption charges to try to cripple Zuma’s candidacy.
The resulting political firestorm may well force Zuma to rely on core support from key allies within the country’s trade union movement and Communist Party, challenging the political elite’s pro-market consensus and provoking debate over the future of South Africa’s economic policy.
No countries in sub-Saharan Africa will have the economic heft and political self-confidence to replace Nigeria, Kenya, and South Africa as pillars of stability anytime soon.
Regional blocs like the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), and the East African Community (EAC) will eventually assume larger roles in helping resolve the continent’s most intractable diplomatic and economic problems.
But that won’t happen this year.
There remain many good reasons for investors to take a chance on Africa’s frontier markets.
But it will not necessarily take a drought, a coup, a war, or a genocide to make them think twice.
Whither Europe?
BEIJING – With the likelihood of a contagious sovereign-debt implosion and European bank failures greatly reduced by the Greek debt deal and the European Central Bank’s lending program, it is time to look ahead.
Where do the European Union, the eurozone, and the EU’s highly indebted countries go from here?
Will Europe be able to roll back its welfare states’ biggest excesses without economic distress and social unrest toppling governments and, in the peripheral countries, undermining already-tenuous agreements with creditors?
Some good news globally will have an impact on how these questions are resolved.
The United States’ economy is gradually reviving, albeit slowly by the standards of recovery from a deep recession.
China, Brazil, and India have not decoupled from their customers in Europe and North America, and so are slowing, though a relatively soft landing is likely if Europe’s recession is as short and mild as predicted.
The EU’s economic output and population are larger than that of the US, so the fate of the 27 EU countries is everyone’s business, from New York to New Delhi, São Paulo to Shanghai.
Formed originally as a free-trade area, the eurozone comprises 17 of the countries.
Knitting together 17 disparate economies, cultures, and institutions was a monumental undertaking, fraught with risk.
The Lisbon Treaty emphasizes unanimity in decision-making.
With some members inside of the eurozone, and others remaining outside of it, and with disparate economic interests and monetary and fiscal traditions even within the eurozone, agreement is difficult.
That sets the stage for three broad scenarios, each with implications for the European and global economy, the financial and banking system, and relations between the member states and EU institutions.
In the first scenario, a more united and homogeneous Europe emerges from the crisis, enforcing greater restrictions on member states’ budgets to reduce apparent risk.
Accompanied by a strong, broad eurozone, risk of a future currency crisis remains.
In the second scenario, a two- or three-tiered Europe includes a two-tiered euro, with the weaker countries using a separate “euro-B” currency that can float against the stronger economies’ “euro-A.”
This arrangement would hold out the promise to fiscally stressed economies that, if they get their act together, they could rejoin euro-A – and do so more readily than they could from their own currency.
In the final scenario, what emerges is a more decentralized Europe, with less top-down agreement in areas beyond trade and a smaller, more homogeneous eurozone composed of the EU’s core economies.
Such a construct would be far more popular with citizens who are unhappy with the accretion of EU power in Brussels and the loss of traditional sovereignty.
Some current euro members – Greece (and perhaps others) – would revert to national currencies.
None of these options is easy; each entails serious difficulties and great risks.
Episodic muddling through may be the best that can be hoped for.
For example, how would Greece (or any country) exit the euro in order to cushion the extreme downward wage adjustment required to regain competitiveness, and to avoid the severe social unrest that could result from reining in debt too rapidly?
As soon as word got out that Greece was seriously considering such a move – well before it could even generate a new drachma currency – euro bank deposits would flee Greece.
As a result, Greece would be forced to impose capital controls.
Some contracts denominated in euros would be subject to Greek law, some to European law, and others – for example, derivatives contracts – to British or US law.
Legal chaos would result.
Yet sticking to the euro and forcing all of the adjustments in wages risks greater unrest; indeed, it might merely postpone the inevitable.
Governments and the bond market will test the seriousness of the newly agreed fiscal guidelines (if they are ratified).
While talk is tough now, the history of such agreements does not inspire optimism.
Before the financial crisis, even Germany violated the EU Stability and Growth Pact’s (SGP) deficit limits.
In the US, the 1980’s deficit limits set by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law were not met, and, like the SGP, were revised and extended.
Agreements with, and access to, the International Monetary Fund and Europe’s new bailout fund provide (soft) constraints.
Regardless of how these governance and fiscal issues are resolved, or muddled through, Europe’s banks remain a thorny issue.
With the time afforded by the ECB’s three-year cheap loans, they have some breathing room to rebuild their capital and clean up their balance sheets.