The current focus on the downpour in Greece is understandable.
But policymakers should not be so distracted by it that they fail to prepare for the other two possible storms – and, much more worrisome, the possibility that they merge into a single more devastating one.
Europe’s leaders must act now to minimize the risks, lest they find their shelters inadequate to the extreme weather that could lie ahead.
Greece’s Aid Addiction
NEW YORK – The ongoing Greek debt saga is tragic for many reasons, not least among them the fact that the country’s relationship with its creditors is reminiscent of that between the developing world and the aid industry.
Indeed, the succession of bailouts for Greece embodies many of the same pathologies that for decades have pervaded the development agenda – including long-term political consequences that both the financial markets and the Greek people have thus far failed to grasp.
As in the case of other aid programs, the equivalent of hundreds of billions of dollars has been transferred from richer economies to a much poorer one, with negative, if unintended, consequences.
The rescue program designed to keep Greece from crashing out of the eurozone has raised the country’s debt-to-GDP ratio from 130% at the start of the crisis in 2009 to more than 170% today, with the International Monetary Fund predicting that the debt burden could reach 200% of GDP in the next two years.
This out-of-control debt spiral threatens to flatten the country’s growth trajectory and worsen employment prospects.
Like other aid recipients, Greece has become locked in a codependent relationship with its creditors, which are providing assistance in the form of de facto debt relief through subsidized loans and deferred interest payments.
No reasonable person expects Greece ever to be able to pay off its debts, but the country has become trapped in a seemingly endless cycle of payments and bailouts – making it dependent on its donors for its very survival.
The country’s creditors, for their part, have an incentive to protect the euro and limit the geopolitical risk of a Greek exit from the eurozone.
As a result, even when Greece fails to comply with its creditors’ demands – for, say, tax hikes or pension reforms – it continues to receive assistance with few penalties.
Perversely, the worse the country performs economically, the more aid it receives.
The long-term consequences of this cycle of dependence could be serious.
As long as Greece’s finances are propped up by international creditors, the country’s policymakers will be able to abdicate their responsibility to manage the provision of public goods like education, health care, national security, and infrastructure.
They will also face few incentives to put in place a properly functioning system to collect taxes.
Dependence on aid undermines the implicit contract between citizens and their government, according to which politicians must keep taxpayers satisfied in order to stay in office.
With foreign infusions of cash easing the need for tax revenues, politicians are likely to spend more time courting donors than caring for their constituents.
The weakened connection between public services and taxes not only makes it easier for officials to cling to power, but also increases the scope for corruption and inefficiency.
Indeed, based on the experience of aid-recipient economies in the emerging world, the Greek people may find it increasingly difficult to hold their government accountable or penalize officials for misbehavior or corruption.
So far, the Greek crisis has been treated as a recurring emergency, rather than the structural problem that it is.
And yet, as long as the country remains locked in a cycle of codependence with its creditors, the state of perpetual crisis is likely to persist.
Effective aid programs have almost always been temporary in nature, working – as was the case with the Marshall Plan – through short, sharp, finite interventions.
Open-ended commitments, like aid flows to poor developing countries, have had only limited success, at best.
As long as Greeks view assistance as guaranteed, they will have little incentive to put their country on a path toward self-sufficiency.
Whatever the way forward for Greece, if there is to be any hope of progress, the assistance provided by the European Union and the IMF must come to be regarded as temporary.
Cutting the umbilical cord in a relationship of aid dependency is never easy, and there is no reason to expect that it will be any different with Greece.
Phasing out transfers, even in a considered and systematic way, works only when the recipient is determined to put in place the measures necessary to survive without assistance.
There are few signs that Greece is ready to walk on its own, and as long as the aid continues to flow, that is unlikely to change.
In this sense, markets should view the Greek situation as an equilibrium, not a transition.
Deescalating Europe’s Politics of Resentment
ATHENS – A German television presenter recently broadcast an edited video of me, before I was Greece’s finance minister, giving his country the middle-finger salute.
The fallout has shown the potential impact of an alleged gesture, especially in troubled times.
Indeed, the kerfuffle sparked by the broadcast would not have happened before the 2008 financial crisis, which exposed the flaws in Europe’s monetary union and turned proud countries against one another.
When, in early 2010, Greece’s government could no longer service its debts to French, German, and Greek banks, I campaigned against its quest for an enormous new loan from Europe’s taxpayers to pay off those debts.
I gave three reasons.
First, the new loans did not represent a bailout for Greece so much as a cynical transfer of private losses from the banks’ books onto the shoulders of Greece’s most vulnerable citizens.
How many of Europe’s taxpayers, who have footed the bill for these loans, know that more than 90% of the €240 billion ($260 billion) that Greece borrowed went to financial institutions, not to the Greek state or its people?
Second, it was obvious that if Greece already could not repay its existing loans, the austerity conditions on which the “bailouts” were premised would crush Greek nominal incomes, making the national debt even less sustainable.
When Greeks could no longer make payments on their mountainous debts, German and other European taxpayers would have to step in again.
(Wealthy Greeks, of course, had already shifted their deposits to financial centers like Frankfurt and London.)
Finally, misleading peoples and parliaments by presenting a bank bailout as an act of “solidarity,” while failing to help ordinary Greeks – indeed, setting them up to place an even heavier burden on Germans – was destined to undermine cohesion within the eurozone.
Germans turned against Greeks; Greeks turned against Germans; and, as more countries have faced fiscal hardship, Europe has turned against itself.
The fact is that Greece had no right to borrow from German – or any other European – taxpayers at a time when its public debt was unsustainable.
Before Greece took any loans, it should have initiated debt restructuring and undergone a partial default on debt owed to its private-sector creditors.
But this “radical” argument was largely ignored at the time.
Similarly, European citizens should have demanded that their governments refuse even to consider transferring private losses to them.
But they failed to do so, and the transfer was effected soon after.
The result was the largest taxpayer-backed loan in history, provided on the condition that Greece pursue such strict austerity that its citizens have lost one-quarter of their incomes, making it impossible to repay private or public debts.
The ensuing – and ongoing – humanitarian crisis has been tragic.
Five years after the first bailout was issued, Greece remains in crisis.
Animosity among Europeans is at an all-time high, with Greeks and Germans, in particular, having descended to the point of moral grandstanding, mutual finger-pointing, and open antagonism.
This toxic blame game benefits only Europe’s enemies.
It has to stop.
Only then can Greece – with the support of its European partners, who share an interest in its economic recovery – focus on implementing effective reforms and growth-enhancing policies.
This is essential to placing Greece, finally, in a position to repay its debts and fulfill its obligations to its citizens.
In practical terms, the February 20 Eurogroup agreement, which provided a four-month extension for loan repayments, offers an important opportunity for progress.
As Greece’s leaders urged at an informal meeting in Brussels last week, it should be implemented immediately.
In the longer term, European leaders must work together to redesign the monetary union so that it supports shared prosperity, rather than fueling mutual resentment.
This is a daunting task.
But, with a strong sense of purpose, a united approach, and perhaps a positive gesture or two, it can be accomplished.
This is an updated and extended version of a post at yanisvaroufakis.eu.
Down and Out in Athens and Brussels
NEW YORK – The Greek catastrophe commands the world’s attention for two reasons.
First, we are deeply distressed to watch an economy collapse before our eyes, with bread lines and bank queues not seen since the Great Depression.
Second, we are appalled by the failure of countless leaders and institutions – national politicians, the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund, and the European Central Bank – to avert a slow-motion train wreck that has played out over many years.
If this mismanagement continues, not only Greece but also European unity will be fatally undermined.
To save both Greece and Europe, the new bailout package must include two big things not yet agreed.
First, Greece’s banks must be reopened without delay.
The ECB’s decision last week to withhold credit to the country’s banking system, and thereby to shutter the banks, was both inept and catastrophic.
That decision, forced by the ECB’s highly politicized Executive Board, will be studied – and scorned – by historians for years to come.
By closing the Greek banks, the ECB effectively shut down the entire economy (no economy above subsistence level, after all, can survive without a payments system).
The ECB must reverse its decision immediately, because otherwise the banks themselves would very soon become unsalvageable.
Second, deep debt relief must be part of the deal.
The refusal of the rest of Europe, and especially Germany, to acknowledge Greece’s massive debt overhang has been the big lie of this crisis.
Everyone has known the truth – that Greece can never service its current debt obligations in full – but nobody involved in the negotiations would say it.
Greek officials have repeatedly tried to discuss the need to restructure the debt by slashing interest rates, extending maturities, and perhaps cutting the face value of the debt as well.
Yet every attempt by Greece even to raise the issue was brutally rebuffed by its counterparties.
Of course, as soon as the negotiations collapsed two weeks ago, the truth about the Greek debt began to be stated.
The IMF was the first to break the silence, acknowledging that it had been urging debt relief but to no avail.
The United States then let it be known that President Barack Obama and Treasury Secretary Jack Lew had been trying to convince German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble to offer debt relief to Greece, also without success.
Then even Schäuble himself, by far the staunchest opponent of debt relief, admitted that Greece needed it; but he also claimed that such relief would violate European Union treaty provisions barring bailouts of governments.
Following Schauble’s remarkable acknowledgment (made publicly only after utter catastrophe had struck), Merkel herself opined that perhaps certain kinds of relief (such as cuts in interest rates, rather than in the debt’s face value) could do the job in a way that would be consistent with EU rules.
The fact that the Greek debt overhang was acknowledged only after negotiations had collapsed exposes the deep systemic failures that have brought Greece and Europe to this point.
We see a European system of crisis management that is fraught with ineptitude, extreme politicization, gamesmanship, and unprofessionalism.
I certainly do not mean to excuse Greek clientelism, corruption, and mismanagement as ultimate causes of the country’s predicament.
Yet the failure of the European institutions is more alarming.
Unless the EU can now save Greece, it will not be able to save itself.
The EU today operates something like the US under the Articles of Confederation, which defined the US’s ineffectual governing structure after independence from Britain in 1781 but prior to the adoption of the Constitution in 1787.
Like the newly independent US, the EU today lacks an empowered and effective executive branch capable of confronting the current economic crisis.
Instead of robust executive leadership tempered by a strong democratic parliament, committees of national politicians run the show in Europe, in practice sidelining (often brazenly) the European Commission.
It is precisely because national politicians attend to national politics, rather than Europe’s broader interests, that the truth about Greece’s debt went unspoken for so long.
The Eurogroup, which comprises the 19 eurozone finance ministers, embodies this destructive dynamic, meeting every few weeks (or even more frequently) to manage Europe’s crisis on the basis of national political prejudices rather than a rational approach to problem-solving.
Germany tends to call the shots, of course, but the discordant national politics of many member states has contributed to one debacle after the next.
It is the Eurogroup, after all, that “solved” Cyprus’s financial crisis by partial confiscation of bank deposits, thereby undermining confidence in Europe’s banks and setting the stage for Greece’s bank panic two years later.
Amid all this dysfunction, one international institution has remained somewhat above the political fray: the IMF.
Its analysis has been by far the most professional and least politicized.
Yet even the IMF allowed itself to be played by the Europeans, especially by the Germans, to the detriment of resolving the Greek crisis many years ago.
Once upon a time, the US might have pushed through policy changes based on the IMF’s technical analysis.
Now, however, the US, the IMF, and the European Commission have all watched from the sidelines as Germany and other national governments have run Greece into the ground.
Europe’s bizarre decision-making structure has allowed domestic German politics to prevail over all other considerations.
And that has meant less interest in an honest resolution of the crisis than in avoiding the appearance of being lenient toward Greece.
Germany’s leaders might rightly fear that their country will be left holding the bill for European bailouts, but the result has been to sacrifice Greece on the altar of an abstract and unworkable idea: “no bailouts.”
Unless some rational compromise is agreed, insistence on that approach will lead only to massive and even more costly defaults.
We are now truly at the endgame.
Greece’s banks have closed, its debt has been acknowledged as unsustainable, and yet the future of both the banks and the debt remains uncertain.
The decisions taken by Europe in the next several days will determine Greece’s fate; wittingly or not, they will determine the EU’s fate as well.
Europe’s Civil War
WASHINGTON, DC – The negotiations leading up to the latest tentative deal on Greece’s debt brought into relief two competing visions of the European Union: the flexible, humane, and political union espoused by France, and the legalistic and economy-focused union promoted by Germany.
As François Heisbourg recently wrote, “By openly contemplating the forced secession of Greece [from the eurozone], Germany has demonstrated that economics trumps political and strategic considerations.
France views the order of factors differently.”
The question now is which vision will prevail?
The Greeks, for their part, have been putting their national identity ahead of their pocketbooks, in ways that economists do not understand and continually fail to predict.
It is economically irrational for Greeks to prefer continued membership in the eurozone, when they could remain in the EU with a restored national currency that they could devalue.
But, for the Greeks, eurozone membership does not mean only that they can use the common currency.
It places their country on a par with Italy, Spain, France, and Germany, as a “full member” of Europe – a position consistent with Greece’s status as the birthplace of Western civilization.
Whereas that stance reflects the vision of an “ever-closer union” that motivated the EU’s founders, Germany’s narrower, economic understanding of European integration cannot inspire ordinary citizens to support the compromises necessary to keep the EU together.
Nor can it withstand the inevitable attacks directed against EU institutions for every action and regulation that citizens dislike and for which national politicians want to avoid responsibility.
The original European Economic Community, created by the Treaty of Rome in 1957, was, as the name indicates, economic in nature.
The Treaty itself was hard-headed, grounded in the converging economic interests of France and Germany, with the Benelux countries and Italy rounding out the basis of a new European economy.
But economic integration was underpinned by a vision of peace and prosperity for Europe’s peoples, after centuries of unprecedented violence had culminated in two world wars that reinforced the seemingly eternal enmity between France and Germany.
And, indeed, the language of a larger political union was embedded in Europe’s treaties, to be interpreted by the European Court of Justice and subsequent generations of European decision-makers in ways that supported the construction of a common European polity and identity, as well as a unified economy.
My mother, a young Belgian in the 1950s, remembers the idealism and the excitement of the European federalist movement, with its promise that her generation could create a different future for Europe and the world.
To be sure, the vision of a United States of Europe, espoused by many of those early federalists, looked backward to the founding of the US, rather than forward to a distinctive European venture.
Nonetheless, the EU that emerged – which pools sovereignty sufficiently to benefit from being a powerful regional entity in a world of almost 200 countries while maintaining its members’ distinct languages and cultures – is something new.
That experiment cannot survive if supported only by economic rigor and rules.
What can continue to justify a political entity after the urgent realities and convictions that drove its establishment have faded to the pages of history and civics books or, at best, are the subject of grandparents’ stories?
For the US, those questions arose in the 1840s and 1850s, when the urgent need for a union to secure independence had faded, causing issues and conflicts that had been papered over to resurface.
In particular, slavery was allowed in some states, but prohibited in others, and the 1787 compromise to count each slave as three-fifths of a person when determining a state’s population for representation and taxation was fraying.
Economic differences between the industrial north and the agricultural south meant that discussions over states’ rights were about livelihoods as well as lives.
A horrific war resulted, in which the US defeated the secessionist southern Confederacy and imposed its vision of the union.
Before the war’s end, President Abraham Lincoln created a new narrative, declaring in the Gettysburg Address that it was fought for democracy as much as equality, with the goal of ensuring that “government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”
This account simplified – and, in many ways, distorted – the historical record.
But no matter; the speech became as important a part of American national identity as the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
The EU is now facing its own civil war, though one that, fortunately, is free of physical violence.
Without statesmen and stateswomen able to articulate a vision of a shared future worth working and even sacrificing for, the side of unity may not win.
Europe’s national anthem, a circle of stars, and talk of fiscal rectitude and structural reforms cannot compete with the potent messages of the EU’s opponents.
Those opponents, on both the right and the left, are focusing on the everyday living conditions of European citizens – those who feel threatened by migrants and those who are suffering as a result of austerity.
For the EU to continue its march toward a stronger and closer polity and economy –one that nevertheless falls far short of a federal state – it must offer the credible prospect of a better life for all of its citizens.
Just before the final round of the recent Greek negotiations, French President François Hollande said that he did not want a Europe that “no longer progresses.”
Fair enough.
But progress toward what?
Toward liberty, equality, and fraternity for all of Europe?
Toward the dignity and solidarity of all European citizens?
Toward a shared European house that is kept in order?
These are the questions that a new generation of European politicians must answer.
Statesmanship and the Greek Crisis
NEW YORK – Sovereign-debt crises such as the one in Greece can be resolved only through bold steps by both debtor and creditor.
The debtor needs a fresh start through a debt write-off; the creditor must find a way to provide one without rewarding bad behavior.
For a deal to be struck, both sides must have their needs addressed.
Thus, serious reforms and deep debt relief need to go hand in hand.
It is for this reason that Greece and Germany, its largest creditor, need a new modus vivendi in order to resume negotiations.
To begin with, the Greek government must be clear about the need for urgent economic reforms.
The country’s economy has not just collapsed; it is structurally moribund.
The roots of Greece’s problems stretch far deeper than the austerity of recent years.
In 2013, for example, resident inventors in Germany filed some 917 patent applications for every million inhabitants.
Resident inventors in Greece, by contrast, filed just 69 patent applications for every million.
If Greece wants the prosperity associated with a technologically advanced, twenty-first-century economy, it will have to earn it, by producing innovative products that are competitive on world markets, just as Germany does.
Doing so is likely to be a generational challenge.
For its part, Germany must acknowledge the enormity of Greece’s collapse.
The Greek economy has shrunk by around 25% since 2009; unemployment stands at 27%, with youth unemployment at nearly 50%.
When Germany faced comparable conditions in the early 1930s, its creditors shrugged, and the resulting instability allowed for the rise of Adolf Hitler.
After World War II, however, Germany’s debt was slashed, enabling it to rebuild.
Given this experience, it should understand the importance of cutting a country’s debt when the burden of servicing it becomes unsustainable.
The case for offering a country a fresh financial start is both economic and moral.
This makes it difficult for many bankers to understand, as their industry knows no morality – only the bottom line.
Politicians, too, tend to have their moral compasses calibrated to the relentless hunt for votes.
Finding effective and moral solutions requires genuine statesmanship – something that has been all too rare during the euro crisis.
Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras and German Chancellor Angela Merkel now have the opportunity to rise to the occasion as European statesmen.
Since Tsipras’s election in January, German officials have barely been able to contain their fury that a left-wing upstart government of a tiny, bankrupt country would dare to challenge one of the world’s great economies.
Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, for example, has repeatedly sought to provoke Greece into leaving the eurozone.
Tsipras’s response to these provocations has been clear and consistent: Greece should stay in the eurozone, and it needs a fresh financial start to do so.
On July 5, the Greek people backed their young, charismatic leader with a decisive “No” vote on the unreasonable demands of their country’s creditors.
Their decision will one day be recognized as a victory for Europe over those who preferred to carve up the eurozone, rather than give Greece the chance to start anew within it.
At the likely meeting between Tsipras and Merkel this week in Brussels, the stakes could not be higher.
The economic costs of the impasse have been catastrophic for Greece, and pose a grave threat to Europe.
The breakdown of negotiations last week sparked a bank panic, leaving Greece’s economy paralyzed and its banks on the verge of insolvency.
If the banks are to be revived at all, they must be saved within days.
If Tsipras and Merkel meet as mere politicians, the results will be catastrophic.
Greece’s banks will be pushed to the point of failure, making the costs of saving Greece and the eurozone prohibitively high.
If the two leaders meet as statesmen, however, they will save Greece, the eurozone, and the faltering European spirit.
With the promise of deep debt relief for Greece and a rapprochement between Greece and Germany, economic confidence will return.
Deposits will flow back into Greek banks.
The economy will come back to life.
Tsipras needs to assure Merkel that Greece will live within its means, not as a chronic ward of Europe.
To ensure such an outcome, debt relief and tough reforms should be phased in over time, according to an agreed schedule, with each party following through on its commitments, as long as the other does, as well.
Fortunately, Greece is a country of exceptional talents, capable of building new competitive sectors from the ground up, if given the chance.
Merkel must now take a stance that is the opposite of the one her finance minister has pursued to date.
Schäuble is undoubtedly one of Europe’s towering political figures, but his strategy for saving the eurozone by pushing Greece out was misguided.
Merkel now must step in to save Greece as part of the eurozone – and that means easing the country’s debt burden.
To do otherwise at this stage would create an irreparable split between Europe’s rich and poor, and powerful and weak.
Some – in particular, the ever-cynical bankers – argue that it is too late for Europe to save itself.
It is not.
In Europe, many influential leaders and citizens still view the marketplace as constrained by moral considerations, such as the need to alleviate economic suffering.
This is an invaluable asset.
It makes it possible for Merkel to offer Greece a fresh start, because it is the right thing to do and because it accords with Germany’s own experience and history.
That idea of an ethical approach to the Greek crisis might sound absurd to readers of the financial press, and many politicians will undoubtedly consider it naive.
Yet most European citizens could embrace it as a sensible solution.
Europe rose from the rubble of World War II because of the vision of statesmen; now it has been brought to the verge of collapse by the everyday vanities, corruption, and cynicism of bankers and politicians.
It is time for statesmanship to return – for the sake of current and future generations in Europe and the world.
Don’t Lend to Your Euro Friends
MUNICH – After months of games and brinkmanship, and only a week after Greek voters rejected the conditions for a €7.5 billion ($8.2 billion) rescue package, the end came swiftly.
The eurozone’s political leaders agreed to start negotiations on a much larger package, worth €86 billion, almost half of Greece’s GDP.
Unfortunately, the deal reveals Europe’s apparent determination to reenact the same tragedy in the future.
Over the past five years, a whopping €344 billion has flowed from official creditors like the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund into the coffers of the Greek government and the country’s commercial banks.
But after six months of near-futile negotiations, exhaustion had set in and holidays were beckoning; so the actual conditions for a new Greek rescue were given short shrift.
Although the European Financial Stability Facility had officially declared Greece bankrupt on July 3, the eurozone’s leaders kicked the insolvency can down the road yet again.
The latest agreement did halt, or at least interrupt, the eurozone’s biggest crisis to date, culminating in an unprecedented period of antipathy, opprobrium, humiliation, pestering, and blackmail within Europe.
Indeed, Greece came within a hair’s breadth of leaving the eurozone.
Former Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis revealed that after taking office, he assembled a group, with the consent of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, that met in secret to prepare the introduction of a parallel currency and the takeover of Greece’s central bank – effectively an exit (or “Grexit”) from the eurozone.
Germany’s government also was ready to accept what appeared to be the inevitable.
Had French President François Hollande not advised Greece behind German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s back about how to negotiate, events could have taken an entirely different course.
The bitter dispute within the Eurogroup (comprising the eurozone countries’ finance ministers) not only strained relations among the monetary union’s members, but also fueled tensions within national governments.
Many European leaders are still smarting and licking their wounds.
But this should also be a time for them to reflect on what happened and why.
The spat resulted from an attempt to set politics above the laws of economics.
The dogma of European policymakers’ infallibility and the irrevocability of every step toward integration collided with reality.
Europe will face many such conflicts in the future if it continues to apply the same approach to its debt problems that it used in the Greek case.
The fundamental error occurred in April and May 2010, when official lenders – in the form of other eurozone member states – replaced Greece’s private creditors.
That arrangement was proposed by then-ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet, in clear breach of the Maastricht Treaty’s no-bailout rule, which had been Germany’s fundamental condition for giving up the Deutschmark.
But French President Nicolas Sarkozy threatened to leave the euro (as Spain’s former prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, later revealed to the newspaper El País) unless Germany signed on to the bailout agreement.
Christine Lagarde, the French finance minister at the time, said, “We violated all the rules because we wanted to close ranks and really rescue the eurozone.”
The rules were indeed violated, but whether the bailout decision rescued the euro remains to be seen.
It certainly rescued many commercial banks, whose exposure toward the Greek state was substantial by the first quarter of 2010.
Greek banks had lent most to the Greek government (€29 billion), followed by French banks (€20 billion), German banks (€17 billion), and US banks (€4 billion).
The bailout also rescued the ECB, insofar as the fiscal credit replaced some of the Bank’s Target credit that had built up from the beginning of 2008.
At that time, the Greek economy confronted a sudden stop of private capital inflows, and the Greek central bank financed the country’s entire current-account deficit with additional refinancing credit from its local electronic printing press.
But rescuing banks is not the same as rescuing the euro.
Moreover, rescuing the euro is not the same as rescuing the European project.
The bailout decision in 2010 transformed a normal commercial dispute between creditors and debtors – one that always arises when debtors fail to repay – into a dispute among sovereign states.
This whipped up animosity among Europe’s peoples and provided ammunition for radical parties of all stripes, severely damaging the European integration process.
Without the socialization of debt provided by the rescue packages, Varoufakis, or whoever led Greece’s finance ministry, would have had to declare insolvency and then confront private creditors from a variety of countries.
These countries’ governments would then have felt compelled to rescue tottering banks with their taxpayers’ money.
To be sure, rescuing local banks would have been no walk in the park.
But it would have spared Europe the spectacle of its member states’ governments baring their teeth at one another.
In 2008, Germany rescued Hypo Real Estate, and in 2011 Belgium, France, and Luxembourg bailed out Dexia Bank.
As these cases suggest, cleaning one’s own porch could have been done without much of a fuss, or at least without stoking international tension.
Banks and their media enablers always predict disaster when write-offs loom.
Trembling politicians then usually acquiesce and put their taxpayers on the hook.
But the more than 180 sovereign defaults that have occurred since 1945 did not push the defaulters off a cliff.
Instead, as a rule, they gained a fresh start.
In fact, the dangers that are now facing Europe as a result of socializing debts are far greater than those posed by a mere potential financial crisis.
The lesson to be drawn from the Greek debacle is that the eurozone must develop sovereign insolvency procedures as quickly as possible, thereby preventing other sovereigns from becoming creditors through debt mutualization.
If the European Union’s national governments want to help one another in a crisis, they should unilaterally provide humanitarian aid, without conditionality and without redemption.
If you lend to your friend, he will no longer be your friend.
Unless that wisdom is heeded, it will be impossible to hold Europe together.
A Greek Suicide?
LONDON – The good news is that a Greek default, which has become more likely after Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’ provocative rejection of what he described as the “absurd” bailout offer by Greece’s creditors, no longer poses a serious threat to the rest of Europe.
The bad news is that Tsipras does not seem to understand this.
To judge by Tsipras’s belligerence, he firmly believes that Europe needs Greece as desperately as Greece needs Europe.
This is the true “absurdity” in the present negotiations, and Tsipras’ misapprehension of his bargaining power now risks catastrophe for his country, humiliation for his Syriza party, or both.
The most likely outcome is that Tsipras will eat his words and submit to the conditions set by the “troika” (the European Commission, European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) before the end of June.
If not, the ECB will stop supporting the Greek banking system, and the government will run out of money to service foreign debts and, more dramatically, to pay Greek citizens their pensions and wages.
Cut off from all external finance, Greece will become an economic pariah – the Argentina of Europe – and public pressure will presumably oust Syriza from power.
This outcome is all the more tragic, given that the economic analysis underlying Syriza’s demand for an easing of austerity was broadly right.
Instead of seeking a face-saving compromise on softening the troika program, Tsipras wasted six months on symbolic battles over economically irrelevant issues such as labor laws, privatizations, even the name of the troika.
This provocative behavior lost Greece all potential allies in France and Italy.
Worse still, the time wasted on political grandstanding destroyed the primary budget surplus, which was Tsipras’s trump card in the early negotiations.
Now Tsipras thinks he holds another trump card: Europe’s fear of a Greek default.
But this is a delusion promoted by his finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis.
A professor of game theory, Varoufakis recently boasted to the New York Times that “little Greece, in order to survive, [could] bring down the financial world,” and that his media image “as an irrational fool… is doing my work for me” by frightening other EU finance ministers.
Apparently, Varoufakis believes that his “sophisticated grasp of game theory” gives Greece a crucial advantage in “the complicated dynamics” of the negotiations.
In fact, the game being played out in Europe is less like chess than like tic-tac-toe, where a draw is the normal outcome, but a wrong move means certain defeat.
The rules of this game are much simpler than Varoufakis expected because of a momentous event that occurred in the same week as the Greek election.
On January 22, the ECB took decisive action to protect the eurozone from a possible Greek default.
By announcing a huge program of bond purchases, much bigger relative to the eurozone bond market than the quantitative easing implemented in the United States, Britain, or Japan, ECB President Mario Draghi erected the impenetrable firewall that had long been needed to protect the monetary Union from a Lehman-style financial meltdown.
The ECB’s newfound ability to print money, essentially without limit, to support both banks and governments has reduced Greek contagion to insignificance.
That represents a profound change in Europe’s financial environment, which Greek politicians, along with many economic analysts, still fail to understand.
Before the ECB’s decision, contagion from Greece was a genuine threat.
If the Greek government defaulted or tried to abandon the euro, Greece’s banks would collapse, and Greeks who failed to get their money out of the country would lose their savings, as occurred in Cyprus in 2013.
When savers in other indebted euro countries such as Portugal and Spain observed this, they would fear similar losses and move their money to banks in Germany or Austria, as well as sell their holdings of Portuguese or Spanish government bonds.
As a result, the debtor countries’ bond prices would collapse, interest rates would soar, and banks would be threatened with collapse.
If the contagion from Greece intensified, the next-weakest country, probably Portugal, would find itself unable to support its banking system or pay its debts.
In extremis, it would abandon the euro, following the Greek example.
Before January, this sequence of events was quite likely, but the ECB’s bond-buying program put a firebreak at each point of the contagion process.
If holders of Portuguese bonds are alarmed by a future Greek default, the ECB will simply increase its bond buying; with no limit to its buying power, it will easily overwhelm any selling pressure.
If savers in Portuguese banks start moving their money to Germany, the ECB will recycle these euros back to Portugal through interbank deposits.
Again, there is no limit to how much money the ECB can recycle, provided Portuguese banks remain solvent – which they will, so long as the ECB continues to buy Portuguese government bonds.
In short, the ECB bond-buying program has transformed the ECB from a passive observer of the euro crisis, paralyzed by the outdated legalistic constraints of the Maastricht Treaty, into a proper lender of last resort.
With powers to monetize government debts similar to those exercised by the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England, the ECB can now guarantee the eurozone against financial contagion.
Unfortunately for Greece, this has been lost on the Tsipras government.
Greek politicians who still see the threat of financial contagion as their trump card should note the coincidence of the Greek election and the ECB’s bond-buying program and draw the obvious conclusion.
The ECB’s new policy was designed to protect the euro from the consequences of a Greek exit or default.
The latest Greek negotiating strategy is to demand a ransom to desist threatening suicide.
Such blackmail might work for a suicide bomber.
But Greece is just holding a gun to its own head – and Europe does not need to care very much if it pulls the trigger.
What Is Plan B for Greece?
TOKYO – Financial markets have greeted the election of Greece’s new far-left government in predictable fashion.
But, though the Syriza party’s victory sent Greek equities and bonds plummeting, there is little sign of contagion to other distressed countries on the eurozone periphery.
Spanish ten-year bonds, for example, are still trading at interest rates below US Treasuries.
The question is how long this relative calm will prevail.
Greece’s fire-breathing new government, it is generally assumed, will have little choice but to stick to its predecessor’s program of structural reform, perhaps in return for a modest relaxation of fiscal austerity.
Nonetheless, the political, social, and economic dimensions of Syriza’s victory are too significant to be ignored.
Indeed, it is impossible to rule out completely a hard Greek exit from the euro (“Grexit”), much less capital controls that effectively make a euro inside Greece worth less elsewhere.
Some eurozone policymakers seem to be confident that a Greek exit from the euro, hard or soft, will no longer pose a threat to the other periphery countries.
They might be right; then again, back in 2008, US policymakers thought that the collapse of one investment house, Bear Stearns, had prepared markets for the bankruptcy of another, Lehman Brothers.
We know how that turned out.
True, there have been some important policy and institutional advances since early 2010, when the Greek crisis first began to unfold.
The new banking union, however imperfect, and the European Central Bank’s vow to save the euro by doing “whatever it takes,” are essential to sustaining the monetary union.
Another crucial innovation has been the development of the European Stability Mechanism, which, like the International Monetary Fund, has the capacity to execute vast financial bailouts, subject to conditionality.
And yet, even with these new institutional backstops, the global financial risks of Greece’s instability remain profound.
It is not hard to imagine Greece’s brash new leaders underestimating Germany’s intransigence on debt relief or renegotiation of structural-reform packages.
It is also not hard to imagine Eurocrats miscalculating political dynamics in Greece.
In any scenario, most of the burden of adjustment will fall on Greece.
Any profligate country that is suddenly forced to live within its means has a huge adjustment to make, even if all of its past debts are forgiven.
And Greece’s profligacy was epic.
In the run-up to its debt crisis in 2010, the government’s primary budget deficit (the amount by which government expenditure on goods and services exceeds revenues, excluding interest payments on its debt) was equivalent to an astonishing 10% of national income.
Once the crisis erupted and Greece lost access to new private lending, the “troika” (the IMF, the ECB, and the European Commission) provided massively subsidized long-term financing.
But even if Greece’s debt had been completely wiped out, going from a primary deficit of 10% of GDP to a balanced budget requires massive belt tightening –&nbsp;and, inevitably, recession.
Germans have a point when they argue that complaints about “austerity” ought to be directed at Greece’s previous governments.
These governments’ excesses lifted Greek consumption far above a sustainable level; a fall to earth was unavoidable.
Nonetheless, Europe needs to be much more generous in permanently writing down debt and, even more urgently, in reducing short-term repayment flows.
The first is necessary to reduce long-term uncertainty; the second is essential to facilitate near-term growth.
Let’s face it: Greece’s bind today is hardly all of its own making.
(Greece’s young people – who now often take a couple of extra years to complete college, because their teachers are so often on strike – certainly did not cause it.)
First and foremost, the eurozone countries’ decision to admit Greece to the single currency in 2002 was woefully irresponsible, with French advocacy deserving much of the blame.
Back then, Greece conspicuously failed to meet a plethora of basic convergence criteria, owing to its massive debt and its relative economic and political backwardness.
Second, much of the financing for Greece’s debts came from German and French banks that earned huge profits by intermediating loans from their own countries and from Asia.
They poured this money into a fragile state whose fiscal credibility ultimately rested on being bailed out by other euro members.
Third, Greece’s eurozone partners wield a massive stick that is typically absent in sovereign-debt negotiations.
If Greece does not accept the conditions imposed on it to maintain its membership in the single currency, it risks being thrown out of the European Union altogether.
Even after two bailout packages, it is unrealistic to expect Greek taxpayers to start making large repayments anytime soon – not with unemployment at 25% (and above 50% for young people).
Germany and other hawkish northern Europeans are right to insist that Greece adhere to its commitments on structural reform, so that economic convergence with the rest of the eurozone can occur one day.
But they ought to be making even deeper concessions on debt repayments, where the overhang still creates considerable policy uncertainty for investors.
If concessions to Greece create a precedent that other countries might exploit, so be it.
Sooner rather than later, other periphery countries will also need help.
Greece, one hopes, will not be forced to leave the eurozone, though temporary options such as imposing capital controls may ultimately prove necessary to prevent a financial meltdown.
The eurozone must continue to bend, if it is not to break.
Reforming Greek Reform
PRINCETON – Greece's new government, led by the anti-austerity Syriza party, presents the eurozone with a challenge that it has not yet had to face: dealing with national officials who are outside the traditional European mainstream.
Syriza is in many ways a radical party, and its views on economic policy are often described as hard left; but the party's take on debt and austerity is supported by many perfectly mainstream economists in Europe and America.
So what sets Syriza apart?
All negotiations between debtors and creditors involve bluff and bluster to some extent.
But Greece's maverick finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, has taken his case boldly to the media and the public in a way that leaves little doubt as to his willingness to play hard ball.
One might expect that the negotiations between the Greeks and the "troika" (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) would be mainly about reaching an agreement about the economics of the situation.
But that would be wishful thinking.
The Germans, along with smaller creditor countries, are dead-set against any relaxation of austerity and are adamant that “structural reform" must remain a condition of further financing.
They think that offering easier terms would be economically counterproductive, not least because it would give the Greeks an opportunity to go back to their bad old ways.
So what is unfolding before our eyes is not a rational discussion of economics but pure haggling.
And just about the only bargaining chip that Varoufakis holds may be the implicit threat that Greece could leave the euro ("Grexit").
The threat is only implicit; most Greeks do not want Grexit, and Varoufakis and Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras have shied away of late from stating such intentions.
But, without the threat, Varoufakis's claims of democratic legitimacy would most likely fall on deaf ears in Berlin, Frankfurt, and Brussels.
Syriza would have no choice but to continue the economic program it was elected to revoke.
The effectiveness of the Grexit threat depends on two conditions.
First, Germany and other eurozone members must regard Grexit as a significant risk to themselves.
Second, a return to the drachma must offer the prospect that the Greek economy will eventually do better on its own than in the currency union (and under the existing economic program).
In the absence of the first condition, the eurozone will respond to Greece by saying, "Be our guest, leave."
In the absence of the second condition, Greece's threat will not be credible.
And here is where economics re-enters the picture.
Consider the first condition.
Some observers seem to have convinced themselves that any Grexit spillovers would be manageable.
Greece is both small and in a uniquely desperate position.
So it is possible that other fragile members – Spain, Portugal, and Italy – would be spared from financial contagion and the euro's viability would not be dramatically affected.
But the consequences are so unpredictable, and the costs of any domino effect potentially so large, that Germany and other creditors have no interest in precipitating a Grexit scenario.
On the contrary, presiding over the eurozone's breakup must be one of German Chancellor Angela Merkel's worst nightmares.
And if it is not, it should be.
The second condition, concerning the effects on the Greek economy, is tougher to sort out.
Here, too, there are plenty of disaster scenarios.
Grexit would require capital controls and financial isolation, at least for some time.
The resulting uncertainty about policies and prices might produce a severe adverse shock on the real economy, sending unemployment to even greater heights.
But there are clear examples of positive economic outcomes resulting from breaking a similar currency bond.
Britain dropped out of the Gold Standard early, in 1931, so that it could ease monetary conditions and reduce interest rates, and it did better than countries that delayed the exit until later.
Argentina abandoned its fixed exchange rate against the US dollar in 2001, and experienced rapid recovery after two bad quarters.
In both cases, regaining monetary sovereignty allowed a more competitive currency, which in turn increased export demand and assisted economic recovery.
Under Grexit, Greece's best hope would be something similar – a sharp boost in external competitiveness.
The Greek government has limited room for fiscal stimulus, and it would be shut out of financial markets.
A cheaper currency could, in principle, reverse the effects of austerity.
Currency depreciation works by lowering domestic costs in foreign-currency terms.
One such cost has already come down significantly in Greece.
Since the onset of the crisis, Greek wages have dropped by more than 15% – a process called, appropriately enough, internal devaluation.
Yet the response in terms of exports has been disappointing.
Though the country's whopping current-account deficit is gone, this reflects a collapse of imports – a result of austerity – rather than an export boom.
This fact on its own suggests that bringing back the drachma might not help Greece much.
Greek exports appear to have been hampered by other factors.
Higher energy costs (owing to increases in both excise taxes and electricity rates), credit bottlenecks, specialization in stagnant export markets, and generalized policy uncertainty all seem to have played a role.
As a result, Greek export prices have not come down nearly as much as wages.
Grexit might conceivably help with some of these costs, but it will aggravate others (such as policy uncertainty).
In the short to medium run, increasing Greek competitiveness requires remedies targeted at specific binding constraints faced by exporters.
A Greek program that identifies these constraints and proposes remedies would be much better economics than blind adherence to the troika's laundry list of structural reforms.
It would also offer a credible alternative to remaining in the eurozone under current terms, thereby strengthening Greece's hand in bargaining for a deal that ensures that Grexit does not in fact occur.
Greek Lessons for Europe
BERLIN - “It’s when the tide goes out that you find out who has been swimming naked,” the legendary investor Warren Buffett aptly remarked when the global economic crisis hit.
And, as we have found out in the meantime, this is as true for countries as it is for companies.
Following Ireland, Greece is now the second euro-zone member to have gotten into massive payment difficulties due to the crisis, almost to the point of national bankruptcy.
Ireland was able to resolve its problems by itself, through a restructuring policy that was painful yet unflinching.
It could do so because its economy, apart from its excessive debt burden following the collapse of an asset bubble, was basically sound.
The situation in Greece is different.
A restructuring of the economy will be much more difficult, because it will have to be more far-reaching.
The fiscal deficit must now be redressed resulted not just from internal financial imbalances, but also from a political system that for too long time has been in denial of reality, allowing the country to live beyond its means.
Nevertheless, the European Union can neither allow Greece to slide into national bankruptcy nor hand it over to the International Monetary Fund, since other euro-zone members – namely, Portugal, Spain, and Italy – would probably be next in line to be attacked by the financial markets.
In that case, the euro would be in danger of failing, for the first time seriously imperiling the entire project of European integration.
The real problem at the heart of the Greek crisis is so grave because it involves the fundamental weakness of the euro: its lack of support by a government policy.
The caps on member states’ budget deficits and public debt imposed by the Maastricht criteria have proven relatively early on to be of limited use in the real world, and the same is true for the monitoring tools linked to these limits.
In any case, the Maastricht rules were never designed for a perfect storm like the one triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
The euro, which turned out to be the critical tool for defending European interests in this crisis, will now be subjected to an endurance test directed at the soft political heart of its construction.
Europe’s leaders – first and foremost Germany and France, which will play the deciding role – must act quickly and put through new, imaginative solutions.
This will not come cheap, and therefore will entail substantial political risks.
But, given a global economic environment that promises scant sustainable growth in the coming years, things could otherwise get very tough very soon.
The solutions that Europe’s leaders provide must go beyond Maastricht, but without triggering new institutional debates, which would lead us nowhere.
Moreover, new instruments like Eurobonds will have to be made available in order to reduce the affected euro-zone countries’ interest burden, provided that they have taken serious steps – subject to effective control mechanisms – toward credible restructuring.
The current crisis has, however, also shown that the Council of Finance Ministers (Ecofin) is unable to assert such control over EU member states’ fiscal policies.
The direct leadership of heads of state and government is needed, at least in these times of extreme crisis.
One sign of hope is that, following the recent Franco-German summit, German Chancellor Angela Merkel for the first time did not publicly oppose the idea of a European economic government.
Spelling out such a body’s structure, costs, decision-making procedures, and control mechanisms as quickly as possible is now the order of the day.
Indeed, there is no time to lose.
But even with one, two, or three steps forward, the German and French governments will be taking great political risks domestically if the euro crisis in the Mediterranean worsens and a financial bailout there becomes necessary to save the common currency.
The populations in the countries that will have to foot the bill are unprepared for the reality check ahead of them, adding fuel to a years-long growth in Euro-skepticism, which now pervades all political camps.
This applies increasingly to Germany as well, making it very likely that we will see an extremely large political problem emerge there in the near future.
Pay for the southern European countries or resign oneself to the end of the euro?
The question alone makes clear what this crisis is about: the future of the European project.
At the same time, muddling through – a typically European answer that limits political risk while not really changing anything – will be difficult, because the consequences of the global economic crisis have not yet been fully addressed.
What is necessary now is statesman-like leadership – and even more so states woman -like leadership.
Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy are facing the defining challenge of their respective terms in office.
They must navigate the European ship safely through this storm.
Only courageous thinking and action will enable them to steer clear of the rocks.
The Greece of the Caribbean
NEW YORK – There was a time when it might have been said that Puerto Rico, in the midst of a wrenching debt crisis, was returning to its Latin roots.
After all, Latin American governments were once world leaders in over-indebtedness.
But the United States’ public debt now stands at over 100% of its GDP, and Detroit has just gone through bankruptcy.
Perhaps Puerto Rico is, at last, becoming more American.
Or perhaps it is becoming more European, given the resemblance of its debt problems to those of Greece.
After the adoption of the euro, Greece was able to borrow at interest rates not much higher than those paid by northern European countries, even though its fiscal policy was worlds apart from that of Germany or Finland.
The result was massive debt accumulation to fund current expenditure, not investment.
Puerto Rico – a US territory – was also allowed to borrow too much for too long.
Its government bonds are tax-exempt everywhere in the US, and hence particularly attractive to US investors, who, despite the increasingly perilous state of the island’s finances, have gorged on them.
So, Bloomberg reports, Puerto Rico has more debt – over $70 billion – than any US state government except California and New York, while its economy is smaller than that of Kansas.
Another similarity has to do with relative prices.
Once it gave up the drachma, Greece was no longer able to devalue in order to cut the value of domestic wages in terms of foreign currency, and thus spur exports.
With competitiveness lagging, the trade deficit soared, and so did unemployment.
Puerto Rico’s predicament is similar, but again with a twist that makes it more serious.
The island uses the US dollar, and the US Congress imposed on Puerto Rico the federal minimum wage, even though its per capita income is – as Anne Krueger has pointed out – about half that of the poorest US state.
Puerto Ricans’ freedom to move to the mainland was not enough to keep unemployment from becoming a secular problem: around 11% before the 2008 financial crisis, a 17% peak in 2010, and above 12% recently.
As in Greece, there is plenty of blame to go around.
Critics point to weak budget institutions, muddled accounting, and rampant fiscal populism among island politicians.
Proud Puerto Ricans retort that US banks and hedge funds were complicit by happily loading up on island debt.
Both sides are right.
Puerto Rico and its leaders can learn three important lessons from Greece.
First, it is no use pretending that debt reduction can be avoided.
And when the time comes, action must be sufficiently bold to do away with the debt overhang and encourage private investment.
The European Union dithered for years before acknowledging that private loans to Greece should be written down.
Then it negotiated an insufficient haircut and ended up dithering again – resorting to accounting tricks to avoid writing down European public-sector loans.
The story would have been very different if the need for substantial debt reduction had been accepted upfront.
The same holds for Puerto Rico, except that – yet again – the situation is more complicated, owing to the vagaries of US law.
Puerto Rico cannot declare bankruptcy under Chapter 9 (neither can any of the 50 states).
In 1984, Congress adopted an amendment that also denied Puerto Rico’s municipalities and public corporations access to Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection.
Puerto Rico recently tried to enact legislation modeled on Chapter 9 that would allow for an orderly restructuring of the debt of public corporations and municipalities.
But creditors have challenged the move in court, with the US Supreme Court set to issue a ruling by the end of June.
So exactly how debt reduction will happen in Puerto Rico remains unclear.
But whether it will happen is in little doubt; when it does, it better be large.
The second lesson is that policymakers must put fiscal policy on a sustainable path, while recognizing that austerity alone is not the answer.
Puerto Rico’s economy had been shrinking before the fiscal crisis, and the spending cuts and tax increases since it erupted have only made matters worse.
The island risks sharing Greece’s fate, with the debt-to-GDP ratio continuing to rise as austerity deepens the recession.
In exchange for help, congressional Republicans are threatening to impose on Puerto Rico a fiscal control board similar to the one established in 1995 in response to the fiscal crisis in Washington, DC.
Bad idea.
Not only would such a board smack of colonialism and be politically untenable; the scheme would also lack the flexibility needed to avoid a depression in Puerto Rico, while reassuring everyone, including investors, that fiscal policy will remain prudent in the future.
A much better solution is a rule of fiscal responsibility like those adopted in countries as different as New Zealand, Sweden, Colombia, and Chile.
The idea is to keep expenditure below what the government can raise in taxes in the long run (thereby ensuring sustainability), while allowing deficits whenever the economy is operating below potential and tax revenue is abnormally low (thereby guaranteeing flexibility and contributing to macroeconomic stabilization).
In Chile, the rule allowed the government to pay back debt gradually and eventually turn itself into a net creditor, while at the same time reducing the volatility of public investment and output.
There is no reason why a similar arrangement could not work in Puerto Rico.
The third lesson from Greece is that macro tinkering is not enough; highly indebted countries also need a credible growth strategy.
Puerto Rico is no exception.
For a long time, the island’s economy grew on the basis of corporate tax incentives.
But, beginning in 1996, the US Congress did away with those tax breaks, without producing any blueprint for development.
On the contrary, Puerto Rico is stuck with an early-twentieth-century law that forces all trade with the mainland to be conducted with expensive US ships, increasing transport costs and undermining economic competitiveness.
All that must change.
Puerto Rico will not pay its debts – not even what is left after debt reduction – unless its economy grows.
US creditors and lawmakers must accept that reality, and act accordingly.
Greek Lessons for the World Economy
CAMBRIDGE – The $140 billion support package that the Greek government has finally received from its European Union partners and the International Monetary Fund gives it the breathing space needed to undertake the difficult job of putting its finances in order.
The package may or may not prevent Spain and Portugal from becoming undone in a similar fashion, or indeed even head off an eventual Greek default.
Whatever the outcome, it is clear that the Greek debacle has given the EU a black eye.
Deep down, the crisis is yet another manifestation of what I call “the political trilemma of the world economy”: economic globalization, political democracy, and the nation-state are mutually irreconcilable.
We can have at most two at one time.
Democracy is compatible with national sovereignty only if we restrict globalization.
If we push for globalization while retaining the nation-state, we must jettison democracy.
And if we want democracy along with globalization, we must shove the nation-state aside and strive for greater international governance.
The history of the world economy shows the trilemma at work.
The first era of globalization, which lasted until 1914, was a success as long as economic and monetary policies remained insulated from domestic political pressures.
These policies could then be entirely subjugated to the demands of the gold standard and free capital mobility.
But once the political franchise was enlarged, the working class got organized, and mass politics became the norm, domestic economic objectives began to compete with (and overwhelm) external rules and constraints.
The classic case is Britain’s short-lived return to gold in the interwar period.
The attempt to reconstitute the pre-World War I model of globalization collapsed in 1931, when domestic politics forced the British government to choose domestic reflation over the gold standard.
The architects of the Bretton Woods regime kept this lesson in mind when they redesigned the world’s monetary system in 1944.
They understood that democratic countries would need the space to conduct independent monetary and fiscal policies.
So they contemplated only a “thin” globalization, with capital flows restricted largely to long-term lending and borrowing.
John Maynard Keynes, who wrote the rules along with Harry Dexter White, viewed capital controls not as a temporary expedient but as a permanent feature of the global economy.
The Bretton Woods regime collapsed in the 1970’s as a result of the inability or unwillingness – it is not entirely clear which – of leading governments to manage the growing tide of capital flows.
The third path identified by the trilemma is to do away with national sovereignty altogether.
In this case, economic integration can be married with democracy through political union among states.
The loss in national sovereignty is then compensated by the “internationalization” of democratic politics.
Think of this as a global version of federalism.
The United States, for example, created a unified national market once its federal government wrested sufficient political control from individual states.
This was far from a smooth process, as the American Civil War amply demonstrates.
The EU’s difficulties stem from the fact that the global financial crisis caught Europe midway through a similar process.
European leaders always understood that economic union needs to have a political leg to stand on.
Even though some, such as the British, wished to give the Union as little power as possible, the force of the argument was with those who pressed for political integration alongside economic integration.
Still, the European political project fell far short of the economic one.
Greece benefited from a common currency, unified capital markets, and free trade with other EU member states.
But it does not have automatic access to a European lender of last resort.