Clearly, other factors – ranging from supply-side factors and global demand to speculative demand and inventory adjustment – are also playing a major role in driving outcomes in commodity markets.
So what does China’s continuing slowdown imply for commodity prices?
Even though China’s growth has moderated since 2011, the country’s commodity-consumption growth still outpaces that of the rest of the world.
As a result, its share in global commodity consumption has been rising.
This should not be surprising, given that Chinese GDP growth, though down significantly from its double-digit heyday, remains above 6%.
While the shift from an investment-led to a consumption-driven growth model will weaken growth in demand for metals and energy, it will also bring an increase in demand for food products and services, and hence for agricultural commodities.
The conclusion is clear: China’s changing economic situation does not spell disaster for commodity exporters.
On the contrary, even if, as many fear, China’s economic growth slows further, its impact on commodity prices will be limited.
Bolstering prospects for commodity prices further is the promise that demand in other emerging giants, such as India and Indonesia, will accelerate in the coming years.
The rest of developing Asia’s economy is currently about 4% larger than China’s, and twice as large as China was in 2000, when growth in the country’s commodity demand began to accelerate.
If solid growth in Asia’s other emerging economies continues over the next decade and a half, it will generate commodity demand at least as large as China’s in the boom years.
The drag on commodity prices from China’s growth moderation is real.
But the sharp and generalized drop seen in commodity prices should not be laid entirely at China’s feet.
Perhaps more important, with the country still importing large volumes of commodities and the rest of developing Asia set to generate a new surge in commodity demand, the prospects for a commodity-price rebound look brighter.
Making Space for China
LONDON – When the United Kingdom announced earlier this month that it had agreed to become a founding member of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), most of the headlines focused not on the news itself, but on the friction the decision had caused between the UK and the United States.
The White House issued a statement urging the British government to “use its voice to push for adoption of high standards."
And one senior US administration official was quoted accusing the UK of “constant accommodation of China, which is not the best way to engage a rising power."
In fact, it is the US that is advocating the wrong approach.
In the UK, the diplomatic spat served as an occasion for the British press to air criticism from those who believe that the government should adopt a stronger stance on China.
For example, they say that the government should have spoken out more forcefully in support of last year's pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong, and that it should not have distanced itself from the Dalai Lama (as it seems to have done) during Prime Minister David Cameron's visit to China in 2013.
The UK does need to stand up for itself, but there is no reason for it to become confrontational about internal Chinese matters – especially in the case of Hong Kong, where it lost its standing when it agreed to return the city to Chinese control in 1997.
The US, too, would be wise to stop resisting the fact that the world is changing.
The US Congress has yet to ratify a 2010 agreement providing China and other large emerging economies greater voting power in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
In the meantime, the agreement has become obsolete; China's economy has nearly doubled in size since the deal was struck.
America's reluctance – and that of France, Germany, and Italy – to give the emerging powers an appropriate voice in the established international financial institutions is counterproductive.
It drives the creation of new parallel institutions such as the AIIB and the New Development Bank, founded in 2014 by the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa).
In the coming days, I will be visiting China in my role as Chair of the British government's Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, and also as a participant in the Boao Forum for Asia, an event similar to the annual gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos.
I hope to encourage Chinese policymakers to make the fight against antimicrobial resistance a priority when China chairs the G-20 in 2016.
And though I am not the British ambassador, I will be happy to state my belief that the UK government was wise to join the AIIB, and that the US administration, in voicing its opposition, was not.
China's $10 trillion economy is bigger than those of France, Germany, and Italy combined.
Even if its annual output growth slows to 7%, the country will add some $700 billion to global GDP this year.
Japan would have to grow at something like 14% to have that type of impact on the world.
For anyone who wants to engage in global trade, it is thus vital to identify what China wants.
In the case of the UK, this obviously includes finance (as well as sports, music, fashion, and perhaps health care).
The UK is simply being smart when it promotes its own interests by cooperating with China.
One of the few positive consequences of the 2008 financial crisis was the elevation of the G-20's global role; in principle, it is a far more representative forum for international leadership than the G-7 ever was.
There is, however, a downside to the G-20's emergence: the large number of participants can make it difficult to reach agreements and get things done.
A new G-7 needs to be created within the G-20, thereby providing China with a degree of influence that reflects its economic weight and requires it to assume a commensurate proportion of global responsibility.
Space at the table for China could be obtained if the eurozone countries, signaling their commitment to the common currency, agreed to surrender their individual seats in exchange for one representing the entire monetary union.
The US, too, would finally have to accept China's heightened global role.
Later this year, the IMF will recalibrate the weights in its unit of account, the so-called Special Drawing Rights, which comprises a basket of currencies that currently includes the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen.
According to almost every economic and financial criterion, the SDR basket should now include China's renminbi.
The US would be wise to not oppose such a move.
Otherwise, it would risk accelerating the decline of the established international financial institutions.
Similarly, the US Congress should ratify the agreed changes to the governance of the IMF and the World Bank.
By founding the AIIB and the New Development Bank, China and other emerging powers have signaled that they will not wait for their voices to be better heard.
And decisions like that of the UK – and France, Germany, and Italy – show that they are not alone.
China’s New World Order
SEOUL – China – already the world’s largest exporter, manufacturer, and international-reserve-asset holder – is poised to overtake the United States as the world’s largest economy (measured according to purchasing power parity) this year.
Now, it is using its growing clout to reshape global economic governance.
Indeed, the country’s days of following Deng Xiaoping’s injunction to “hide brightness and cherish obscurity” are long gone.
After decades of actively participating in international economic institutions – including the G-20, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization – China has begun to resemble a revisionist power seeking to create a new world order.
Last month, China and 20 other Asian countries signed a memorandum of understanding to establish a new multilateral development bank, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
Viewed as the first serious institutional challenge to the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the AIIB was proposed by China.
Moreover, the advanced economies have staked their claim to leadership in these institutions.
Europeans have led the IMF and Americans have controlled the World Bank since their establishment after World War II.
Likewise, the ADB has had Japanese presidents since its founding in 1966.
Meanwhile, emerging economies like China face significant barriers to boosting their capital contributions to – and their status in – these institutions.
And reforms, though widely discussed, have faced long delays.
For example, IMF quota and governance reform, on which G-20 leaders agreed in 2010, has yet to be implemented.
Frustrated, China finally decided to push for the establishment of the AIIB, in which it will be the largest shareholder, with a stake of up to 50%.
China will also provide the AIIB’s first president, and the bank’s headquarters will be in Beijing.
China can leverage its considerable influence over the AIIB to bolster its international image, particularly by strengthening its relationships with developing countries.
Many developing Asian countries, for example, have significant unmet need for infrastructure investment to buttress their long-term economic growth.
The AIIB can not only channel more resources toward developing countries; it can do so in a way that is better suited to their needs, with fewer bureaucratic barriers and more flexibility than its more established counterparts.
The AIIB would complement China’s rapidly increasing bilateral development financing, with the added benefit of a multilateral structure that ensures better governance and higher operating standards.
What the AIIB may not be able to do is contribute to improved economic governance in Asia – not least because Japan, Australia, Indonesia, and South Korea, whose total GDP is roughly equal to China’s, are not yet members.
Without these economies to counterweigh China’s influence or a resident board of directors, the AIIB could allow China to impose its will on members and beneficiaries alike.
For example, as former Indian Minister of State for External Affairs Shashi Tharoor has suggested, China may use the AIIB to help finance a new Silk Road, an overland and maritime route connecting East Asia with Europe.
While the project could have significant regional benefits, stimulating economic development by promoting integration and connectivity, it would serve primarily China’s interests, expanding the country’s international influence and reducing the gap between its eastern and western regions.
At the same time, it could exacerbate geopolitical tensions and territorial disputes between China and its neighbors.
More generally, some development experts have raised concerns about whether the AIIB can operate according to international standards of governance and transparency, enforce safeguards, refuse to work with incompetent or corrupt governments, and follow effective procedures.
They also worry that, by fragmenting international development finance, the AIIB could weaken its impact considerably.
To be sure, China has made an effort to address such concerns, emphasizing repeatedly that the AIIB aims to complement, not compete with, other institutions.
Following the AIIB’s launch, Chinese President Xi Jinping declared that it “needs to follow multilateral rules and procedures” and should learn from “existing multilateral development institutions in their good practices and useful experience.”
But China must support such statements with an active commitment to fair and efficient governance.
Specifically, it should consider lowering its own voting share, instituting a rotating presidency, and broadening membership to include advanced Asian economies.
The AIIB is a welcome initiative.
But, given deep mistrust and a multitude of conflicts involving China, its regional neighbors, and the United States over security, environmental, and human-rights issues, its success is far from guaranteed.
It is up to China to make the necessary compromises to enable the AIIB to reach its potential.
China’s approach to influencing global governance is only beginning to emerge.
One hopes that it starts off on the right foot.
China’s New Global Leadership
NEW YORK – The biggest economic news of the year came almost without notice: China has overtaken the United States as the world’s largest economy, according to the scorekeepers at the International Monetary Fund.
And, while China’s geopolitical status is rising rapidly, alongside its economic might, the US continues to squander its global leadership, owing to the unchecked greed of its political and economic elites and the self-made trap of perpetual war in the Middle East.
According to the IMF, China’s GDP will be $17.6 trillion in 2014, outstripping US output of $17.4 trillion.
Of course, because China’s population is more than four times larger, its per capita GDP, at $12,900, is still less than a quarter of the $54,700 recorded in the US, which highlights America’s much higher living standards.
China’s rise is momentous, but it also signifies a return.
After all, China has been the world’s most populous country since it became a unified state more than 2,000 years ago, so it makes sense that it would also be the world’s largest economy.
And, indeed, the evidence suggests that China was larger (in terms of purchasing power parity) than any other economy in the world until around 1889, when the US eclipsed it.
Now, 125 years later, the rankings have reversed again, following decades of rapid economic development in China.
With rising economic power has come growing geopolitical clout.
Chinese leaders are feted around the world.
Many European countries are looking to China as the key to stronger domestic growth.
African leaders view China as their countries’ new indispensable growth partner, particularly in infrastructure and business development.
Similarly, economic strategists and business leaders in Latin America now look to China at least as much as they look to the US.
China and Japan seem to be taking steps toward better relations, after a period of high tensions.
Even Russia has recently “tilted” toward China, establishing stronger connections on many fronts, including energy and transport.
Like the US after World War II, China is putting real money on the table – a lot of it – to build strong economic and infrastructure links with countries around the world.
This will enable other countries to boost their own growth, while cementing China’s global economic and geopolitical leadership.
The number of Chinese initiatives is staggering.
In just the past year, China has launched four major projects that promise to give it a greatly expanded role in global trade and finance.
China joined Russia, Brazil, India, and South Africa in establishing the New Development Bank, to be based in Shanghai.
A new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, to be based in Beijing, will help to fund infrastructure projects (roads, power, and rail, among others) throughout the region.
The New Silk Road land belt seeks to connect China with the economies of East Asia, South Asia, Central Asia, and Europe through an expanded grid of rail, highways, power, fiber, and other networks.
And the new 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is aimed at boosting ocean-based trade in East Asia and the Indian Ocean.
All told, these various initiatives are likely to leverage hundreds of billions of dollars in investment over the coming decade, speeding growth in the counterpart countries while deepening their production, trade, and financial linkages with China.
There is no guarantee that all of this will succeed or proceed smoothly.
China faces huge internal challenges, including high and rising income inequality, massive air and water pollution, the need to move to a low-carbon economy, and the same risks of financial-market instabilities that bedevil the US and Europe.
And if China becomes too aggressive toward its neighbors – for example, by demanding rights to offshore oil or territory in disputed waters – it will generate a serious diplomatic backlash.
No one should assume smooth sailing for China (or for any other part of the world, for that matter) in the years ahead.
Still, it is striking that just as China is rising economically and geopolitically, the US seems to be doing everything possible to waste its own economic, technological, and geopolitical advantages.
The US political system has been captured by the greed of its wealthy elites, whose narrow goals are to cut corporate and personal tax rates, maximize their vast personal fortunes, and curtail constructive US leadership in global economic development.
They so scorn US foreign assistance that they have thrown open the doors to China’s new global leadership in development financing.
Even worse, as China flexes its geopolitical muscles, the only foreign policy that the US systematically pursues is unceasing and fruitless war in the Middle East.
The US endlessly drains its resources and energy in Syria and Iraq in the same way that it once did in Vietnam.
China, meanwhile, has avoided becoming enmeshed in overseas military debacles, emphasizing win-win economic initiatives instead.
China’s economic rise can contribute to global wellbeing if its leaders emphasize investment in infrastructure, clean energy, public health, and other international priorities.
Still, the world would be better off if the US also continued to lead constructively, alongside China.
The recent announcement by Presidents Barack Obama and Xi Jinping of bilateral agreements on climate change and clean energy show the best of what’s possible.
America’s perpetual war-making in the Middle East shows the worst.
China Going Forward
BEIJING – China’s per capita income, at $3,800, has now surpassed the threshold for a middle-income country.
But, even as economists and strategists busily extrapolate China’s future growth path to predict when it will catch up to the United States, the mood inside China became somber and subdued in 2010.
Indeed, Premier Wen Jiabao sees China’s growth as “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and ultimately unsustainable.”
Economic growth, of course, has never been linear in any country.
Throughout history, there are countless examples of middle-income countries becoming stuck in that category for decades and/or eventually falling back to low-income status.
The Nobel laureate economist Michael Spence has pointed out that after WWII, only a handful of countries were able to grow to a fully-industrialized level of development.
China’s progress over the past three decades is a successful variation on the East Asian growth model that stems from the initial conditions bequeathed by a planned socialist economy.
That growth model has now almost exhausted its potential.
So China has reached a crucial juncture: without painful structural adjustment, its economic-growth momentum can suddenly be lost.
China’s rapid growth has been achieved at extremely high cost.
Only future generations will know the true price.
The country’s investment rate now stands at more than 50% – a clear reflection of China’s low capital efficiency.
There are two worrying aspects of this high rate.
First, local governments influence a large proportion of investment decisions.
Second, investment in real-estate development accounts for nearly one-quarter of the total.
Some local governments are literally digging holes and then filling them in order to create GDP.
As a result, there are simply too many luxurious condominiums, magnificent government office buildings, and soaring skyscrapers.
Hotels in China’s provincial cities can make five-star hotels in Western capitals looked shabby.
China has become one of the most polluted countries in the world.
Dust and smog choke its cities.
All of the country’s major rivers are contaminated.
Deforestation and desertification are rampant.
Drought, floods, and landslides have become commonplace.
Relentless extraction is quickly depleting China’s resource deposits.
With China’s trade-to-GDP ratio and exports-to-GDP ratio already exceeding 60% and 30%, respectively, the economy cannot continue to depend on external demand to sustain growth.
Unfortunately, with a large export sector that employs scores of millions of workers, this dependence has become structural, which implies that to reduce China’s trade dependency and trade surplus is much more than a matter of adjusting macroeconomic policy.
After decades of rapid expansion, China has become the workshop of the global economy.
The problem is that it is no more than a workshop: lack of innovation and creation form the economy’s Achilles’ heel.
For example, in volume terms, China now is the largest car producer in the world, churning out 17 million this year.
But the share of models developed by Chinese carmakers is negligible.
In an era of rapid technological progress, creativity, and innovation, the global economic landscape can change rapidly.
Without a strong capacity for innovation and creativity, even a giant has feet of clay.
And when a giant falls, many are hurt.
Indeed, while China’s living standards have risen dramatically over the past 30 years, the gap between rich and poor has widened sharply.
Income distribution has skewed in favor of the rich for too long, and the government has failed to provide decent public goods.
With the contrast between the opulent lifestyle of the rich and the slow improvement of living conditions for the poor fomenting social tension, a serious backlash is in the making.
If China fails to tackle its structural problems in a timely fashion, growth is unlikely to be sustainable.
Any structural adjustment is painful.
But the longer the delay, the more painful it will be.
China’s strong fiscal position today gives it a window of opportunity.
But that window will close fast, because beneficiaries of specific reform policies have morphed into vested interests, which are fighting hard to protect what they have.
What the Chinese public resents most is the collusion between government officials and businesspeople, described by the respected Chinese economist Wu Jianglian as “capitalism of the powerful and rich.”
Breaking this unholy alliance will be the big test for China’s leadership in 2011and beyond.
Under China’s current institutional arrangements, meritocracy is a prerequisite for good governance.
But meritocracy has been eroded by a political culture of sycophancy and cynicism.
So once again, the dialectics of economic development has brought political reform back to the fore.
Abroad, China’s rise has caused admiration, envy, suspicion, and even outright hostility in some corners.
No matter how often Chinese leaders repudiate any hegemonic ambition, wariness about China’s true intentions will remain.
That is understandable: the rise of new powers has always disrupted the established international order.
When this new power is a nation of 1.3 billion people living under an alien political system and ideology, its rise is bound to cause even more uneasiness.
Fortunately, because of globalization, China’s rise is in everyone’s interest, as is the rise of other emerging economies.
In the coming years, in areas such as climate change, global imbalances, and reform of the international monetary system, China should and will play a more active role as a major global stakeholder.
Needless to say, reciprocity will be necessary.
China’s Intervention Lessons
BEIJING – China’s stock market has been a hot topic since the summer, when a rapid rise gave way to a major plunge, triggering a global equities sell-off.
The question now is what can be done to prevent further volatility.
To answer that question requires understanding how China got to this point.
For years, with the authorities’ encouragement (or at least acquiescence), China’s securities companies spared no effort in pumping up China’s stock exchanges with fashionable financial instruments and practices, the sole aim being to realize capital gains from rising prices (dividends are rarely distributed).
As a result, after years of poor performance, the Shanghai Composite Index soared by more than 100% in less than seven months, from 2,505 points in November 2014 to over 5,178 last June – a level that was not merited by China’s economic fundamentals.
In mid-June, the prolonged surge in stock prices finally drove an unnerved China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) to impose restrictions on offline private fund matching.
The decision immediately triggered a sell-off, with the Shanghai Composite Index falling 2% in just one day.
Initially, this looked like a natural correction.
But the prevalence of margin trading caused the decline to turn quickly into a rout.
First, as plummeting stock prices caused the equity in investors’ accounts to fall below the maintenance margin, brokers began issuing margin calls, forcing investors to offload more assets to come up with the needed cash.
When they failed to pay margin calls on time, their shares were sold by brokers, pushing stock prices down further.
The authorities scrambled to stanch the bleeding.
On June 27, the People’s Bank of China lowered the reserve requirement ratio and the benchmark interest rate.
But the Shanghai Composite Index kept falling, reaching 4,200 on July 1.
At that point, the CSRC launched a succession of desperate measures: it suspended initial public offerings, allowed companies to stop trading, and limited short selling.
It even organized a “national team” of 21 large securities companies, led by a government-controlled financial corporation, to purchase shares to buttress the Shanghai Composite Index.
In doing so, China’s regulatory authority changed many well-established rules of the game virtually overnight.
And, while massive official intervention may have halted the rout, it could have permanently damaged regulators’ credibility.
And it was not even merited; the banks were not overly exposed, so there were no systemic risks.
But the policy failures fueling this stock-market fiasco go back further, to the massive government-fueled surge in credit since the global financial crisis.
Without that, brokerages would not have had all of that liquidity to lend for margin trading.
After the crisis struck, instead of recognizing the decline in potential growth and adjusting accordingly, the government remained implicitly wedded to an unrealistic target of 10% annual GDP growth.
But, while the CN¥4 trillion stimulus package propped up growth temporarily, return on investment was deteriorating, because potential growth was already lower than actual growth.
As a result, credit demand was relatively weak; in many cases, commercial banks had to persuade enterprises to accept loans, with a large proportion of the credit ultimately devoted to chasing assets in the capital market.
At first, the excess liquidity fueled real-estate bubbles.
After the government clamped down on lending for residential and commercial projects, risky shadow banking activity surged.
After the government clamped down on that too, the liquidity was channeled toward stock exchanges; once those crashed, it sloshed into the bond market.
But the bond market is not large enough to absorb it all, so some has now returned to the stock exchanges, leading to a partial recovery in share prices, with the Shanghai index reaching 3,500.
Declining economic growth strengthens the temptation to loosen monetary policy.
But in today’s deflationary environment, typical monetary expansion alone can do little to help the real economy, because the money either remains idle or fuels asset bubbles and capital outflows.
If China’s government is to prevent a debt-deflation spiral from causing a hard landing, it should shift its focus to targeted expansionary fiscal policy.
With a budget deficit of 2.3% of GDP, China can certainly afford to increase government expenditure and reduce taxes.
Critically, the package should be financed by government bonds issued by the Ministry of Finance, not by commercial banks via local-government financing vehicles.
Any loosening of monetary policy should be aimed directly at accommodating fiscal policy.
That way, financial resources would be channeled into the real economy, rather than inflating asset bubbles.
To support this effort, China’s government should loosen its grip on the exchange rate, while maintaining appropriate capital controls.
Renminbi internationalization should not be a policy priority.
China’s experience in recent years holds valuable lessons for the country’s leaders.
With a more balanced approach to intervention that reflects those lessons, they could put China’s economy on a much more stable path.
That said, as China undergoes structural economic transition, the stabilization potential of macroeconomic policy is limited.
Without more fundamental reforms, even an impeccable macroeconomic policy mix would not work.
Reforms take time, which means that China may need to brace itself for more troubles and a protracted period of slow growth.
Revolusi Energi Hijau di Tiongkok
SYDNEY – Tiongkok memperoleh sebagian besar listriknya melalui pembakaran bahan bakar fosil, sama halnya dengan negara-negara lain yang ekonominya sedang berkembang sejak masa Revolusi Industri.
Namun penekanan pada satu fakta ini saja dikhawatirkan dapat mengabaikan trend penting dan patut diperhatikan.
Sistem pembangkit tenaga listrik di Tiongkok beralih menjadi sistem yang ramah lingkungan dan pergeseran ini terjadi lebih cepat dibandingkan dengan negara lain yang memiliki sistem dengan skala yang serupa.
Trend ini dapat diamati dalam tiga bidang.
Pertama, produksi listrik.
Berdasarkan data yang dipublikasikan oleh Dewan Listrik Cina (China Electricity Council), jumlah energi yang dihasilkan dari bahan bakar fosil pada tahun 2014 di Tiongkok secara year on year berkurang 0,7% dan ini merupakan penurunan pertama selama beberapa waktu.
Sementara itu produksi energi yang berasal dari sumber energi bahan bakar non-fosil meningkat 19%.
Luar biasanya, kontribusi tenaga nuklir dalam perubahan ini relatif rendah.
Listrik yang dihasilkan oleh sumber energi yang benar-benar ramah lingkungan – tenaga air, angin, dan surya – meningkat 20%, sementara pertumbuhan terbesar terjadi pada pembangkit listrik tenaga surya, yang melonjak sebesar 175%.
Tenaga surya juga melampaui nuklir dalam hal produksi energi baru, menghasilkan tambahan 17,43 terawatt-jam tahun lalu, dibandingkan dengan 14,70 terawatt-jam dari tenaga nuklir.
Selain itu, tahun ketiga ini secara berturut-turut, Tiongkok menghasilkan lebih banyak listrik dari tenaga angin dibandingkan dengan nuklir.
Dengan demikian, argumen bahwa Tiongkok akan lebih bergantung pada pembangkit listrik tenaga nuklir sebagai sumber energi non-karbon untuk menghasilkan listriknya nampaknya kurang beralasan.
Bidang kedua yang mencerminkan trend hijau kini terlihat nyata adalah kapasitas total produksi listrik yang dimiliki Tiongkok.
Kini sistem tenaga listrik di Tiongkok adalah yang terbesar di dunia dengan kapasitas produksi 1,36 terawatt, dibandingkan dengan kapasitas produksi Amerika Serikat yaitu 1 (satu) terawatt.
Perbandingan langsung atas berbagai jenis sumber energi dinilai sulit sebab penggunaan pembangkit listrik tenaga angin, surya, nuklir, dan bahan bakar fosil berbeda sesuai dengan jamnya.
Namun tinjauan terhadap data tahunan dapat memberikan gambaran atas perubahan yang terjadi dalam keseluruhan sistem.
Tahun lalu merupakan kali kedua ketika Tiongkok menambah kapasitas produksi dari sumber energi bahan bakar non-fosil dibandingkan dengan bahan bakar fosil.
Tiongkok menaikkan kemampuannya untuk menghasilkan listrik dari bahan bakar fosil sebesar 45 gigawatt hingga mencapai total 916 gigawatt.
Di saat yang sama, Tiongkok menambah kapasitas produksi listrik dari sumber energi bahan bakar non-fosil sebesar 56 gigawatt dan mencapai total 444 gigawatt.
Pembangkit listrik tenaga angin, air, dan surya menambah kapasitas produksi sebesar 51 gigawatt.
Sebagai akibatnya, tenaga angin, air, dan surya mewakili 31% dari total kapasitas produksi listrik yang dimiliki Tiongkok, meningkat dari awalnya 21% di tahun 2007, sedangkan tenaga nuklir menyumbangkan tambahan 2%.
Hasil ini melebihi sasaran yang ditetapkan dalam Rencana Lima Tahunan Tiongkok yang ke-12 yang memperkirakan bahwa kapasitas produksi listrik yang berasal dari sumber bahan bakar non-fosil akan berkisar pada angka 30% dari sistem listrik nasional di tahun 2015.
Selain itu, trend menuju energi hijau terlihat pada pola investasi Tiongkok.
Buktinya nyata: negara ini mengeluarkan dana lebih besar untuk sumber energi hijau dibandingkan aliran dana untuk sumber energi dari bahan bakar fosil.
Sesungguhnya investasi yang dilakukan Tiongkok untuk energi hijau lebih besar dibandingkan negara-negara lain.
Investasi sarana produksi energi dari bahan bakar fosil terus-menerus berkurang, dari angka CN¥167 miliar (sekitar $24 miliar) pada tahun 2008 menjadi CN¥95 miliar pada tahun 2014 ($15.3 miliar), sementara itu investasi pada sumber energi dari bahan bakar non-fosil meningkat dari angka CN¥118 miliar pada tahun 2008 menjadi setidaknya CN¥252 miliar pada tahun 2014.
Jumlah investasi energi menuju produksi energi terbarukan kini terus-menerus meningkat dan mencapai 50% pada tahun 2011 dan menunjukkan kenaikan dibandingkan empat tahun sebelumnya ketika masih 32%.
Di tahun 2013, jumlah investasi energi terbarukan mencapai setidaknya 59%.
Banyak hal bergantung pada keberhasilan reformasi energi di Tiongkok dan khususnya pada upaya Tiongkok membangun sistem energi terbarukan yang terbesar di dunia – ambisi yang jauh lebih besar dibandingkan harapan dan upaya yang ada di dunia Barat.
Kebutuhan akan adanya pelaporan yang akurat mengenai perkembangan sistem ini menjadi jauh lebih penting agar kita dapat memahami perubahannya secara menyeluruh.
Sistem tenaga listrik yang dimiliki Tiongkok tetap lebih banyak diperoleh dari batubara dan masih akan ada lebih banyak pembakaran sebelum sistem ini layak disebut hijau daripada hitam.
Namun arah perubahan sudah jelas.
Perubahan ini harus diakui dan dipertimbangkan dalam pembahasan mengenai energi global dan kebijakan energi.
China’s Dual-Track Challenge
HONG KONG – With China's economic slowdown more apparent than ever, its prospects of avoiding a hard landing are weakening.
Moreover, the renminbi has come under downward pressure, owing partly to economic recovery in the United States, which has fueled capital outflows.
Given huge declines in industrial profit growth (from 12.2% in 2013 to 3.3% last year) and in local-government revenues from land sales (which fell by 37% in 2014), there is considerable anxiety that today's deflationary cycle could trigger corporate and local-government debt crises.
China hopes to secure its long-term economic development by shifting from a state-directed to a market-led economy.
But the process has created significant discrepancies in economic performance, with state-owned enterprises (SOEs) performing significantly worse than their private-sector counterparts, despite having better access to credit.
And there is a widening disparity between real-estate prices in China's thriving first- and second-tier cities and its lagging third- and fourth-tier cities (though higher household incomes in the former make housing there more affordable).
The authorities' task now is to determine how to support continued growth on the better performing track (the private sector and the first- and second-tier cities), while eliminating overcapacity and boosting productivity on the weaker track (SOEs and third- and fourth-tier cities).
To succeed, they must address the fallout of the previous approach, which, by providing more money and preferential policies to the lagging track, ended up fueling overcapacity and unsustainable local debts.
In other words, China must confront the sunk costs of bad local-planning decisions.
Instead of continuing to hope that bureaucratic intervention can repair flawed projects, officials should take a market-based approach, allowing losses to be allocated through the bankruptcy process, thereby enabling all stakeholders to move on to more productive activities.
The Chinese economy's dual-track structure also presents unique challenges for macro-financial management.
As the fast-growing sectors absorb an increasing amount of resources, a shift toward more market-oriented interest rates is needed to ensure efficient allocation.
Meanwhile, the slow-growing sectors risk falling into a “balance-sheet recession," with highly indebted SOEs and local governments becoming so focused on paying down their debts that they stop investing in needed infrastructure, even when interest rates fall.
As a result, conventional monetary and macro-prudential policies are caught between competing demands for credit, with one track needing to support productive growth and the other attempting to buy time for restructuring.
The People's Bank of China (PBOC) has attempted to confront this dilemma by differentiating reserve requirements according to sector or type of financial institution.
The results have not been encouraging.
For example, when the PBOC cut its benchmark interest rate last November, in order to help reduce private-sector borrowing costs, it triggered a speculative stock-market boom.
Following January's disappointing macroeconomic data, the PBOC acted again, by lowering the reserve ratio for banks by 50 basis points, with additional cuts for banks focused on small and medium-size enterprises (50 basis points) and for the Agricultural Development Bank of China (400 basis points).
Despite these efforts, neither track seems satisfied that their credit demands are being met.
Efforts to address these structural challenges are being frustrated not just by institutional barriers, but also by entrenched official corruption.
The problem is that anti-corruption measures, despite enjoying broad public support, undermine bureaucratic effectiveness in the short term – a significant issue in a critical reform year, especially given slowing growth.
Institutional reforms aimed at combating corruption, reducing overcapacity, and dealing with unsustainable local debts will generate long-term dividends and sustainable payoffs.
But the news is not all bad: a substantial portion of the economy continues to expand, underpinning much higher overall growth rates than in most other economies.
Moreover, despite some concerns about capital outflows, China's consolidated net foreign-asset position, which stands at $1.7 trillion (17.6% of GDP), remains sufficient to sustain China through this tough transition.
China's leaders recognize the long-term imperative of serious institutional reform, even as concerns about slowing growth heighten the temptation to embrace short-term fixes.
The authorities are taking strong action to curb pollution, improve energy efficiency, implement pension reform, and expand access to health care and low-cost housing.
More immediately, China's leadership is committed to excising the cancer of corruption.
The key, as with any critical surgery, is to ensure that the necessary life-support systems are in place.
In China's case, that means maintaining adequate liquidity.
In the end, sustainable development will require that China's two economic tracks merge.
With the right approach, relatively stable and rapid growth can be maintained throughout the reform process. Avoiding a hard landing would be good not only for China; it would ensure much-needed growth and stability for the global economy.
Why China Can Grow According to Plan
BEIJING – China’s recently finalized 13th five-year plan maps out its economic strategy and ambition for the 2016-2020 period.
Among its objectives are a doubling of GDP and average rural and urban household incomes relative to their 2010 levels.
These targets would require China’s economy to grow at an average annual rate of at least 6.5% during the next five years.
While this pace would be significantly slower than the 9.7% growth the country has averaged since 1979, it is undeniably fast by international standards.
And, given that China’s growth has decelerated every quarter since the beginning of 2010, some have questioned whether it is achievable.
I believe that it is.
Economic growth results from increases in labor productivity caused by technological advance and industrial upgrading.
High-income countries, already on the cutting edge of productivity, must earn their increases through technological and organizational breakthroughs; as a result, their typical growth rate is about 3%.
Developing countries, however, could potentially accelerate productivity growth, and thus GDP growth, by borrowing technology from advanced countries – that is, tapping the latecomers’ advantage, as China has done.
The question for China, after 36 years of catching up, is how much longer it can continue to benefit from this process.
Some scholars believe it has reached its limits.
Using historical data compiled by the economic historian Angus Maddison, they show how other East Asian countries experienced a deceleration of economic growth after their per capita GDP reached about $11,000 in purchasing-power-parity terms relative to constant 1990 US dollar prices, or $17,000 in constant 2005 US dollar prices.
For example, in the five years after Japan reached that level, its economy grew at an average annual rate of 3.6%.
In South Korea, growth fell to 4.8%.
In Hong Kong, it slowed to 5.8%.
Given that China is projected to cross the same threshold sometime this year, many believe its average annual growth over the next five years will fall well below 7%.
I disagree.
What this analysis fails to take into account is the fact that advanced countries are not sitting by idly; they are growing and making technological breakthroughs.
And that creates opportunities for developing countries to continue to learn.
Those who predict a slowdown in China are correct to look at its per capita GDP, which is a reflection of a country’s average labor productivity and thus the level of its technical and industrial advancement.
But the best indicator of China’s growth potential is not its per capita GDP relative to some arbitrary threshold; it is the difference in per capita GDP between China and the United States, the world’s most advanced economy.
And on this measure, China has plenty of room for expansion.
When Japan crossed the $11,000 threshold in 1972, its per capita GDP was 72% of the US level.
When Taiwan crossed it in 1992, its per capita GDP was 48% of America’s.
The comparable figure for China today is only about 30%.
In 2008 – the last year for which Maddison provided figures before he died in 2010 – China’s per capita GDP was 21% of the US level.
By examining how other East Asian economies performed when they were at a similar point compared to the US, we can estimate China’s potential for growth.
Japan’s per capita GDP was 21% of America’s in 1951, and in the following 20 years it grew at an average rate of 9.2%.
In the two decades after Singapore hit that level in 1967, it grew at an average of 8.6%.
And the story is similar in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and South Korea; in the 20 years after their per capita GDP were 21% of the US level, they grew at around 8%.
There is no reason not to believe that China has the potential to do the same until 2018.
The Chinese economy’s current slowdown is the result of external and cyclical factors, not some natural limit.
China has been suffering from the aftereffects of the 2008 financial crisis and plummeting export demand.
From 1979 to 2013, annual export growth averaged 16.8%.
In 2014, it dropped to 6.1%; in 2015, it dropped further, to -1.8 %.
This external drag is likely to continue, as politics in developed countries impedes efforts to implement the structural reforms – such as reducing wages, lowering social benefits, financial deleveraging, and consolidating budget deficits – needed to revive economic growth.
Indeed, like Japan beginning in 1991, much of the developed world risks lost decades.
To achieve its growth targets, China will have to rely on domestic demand, including investment and consumption.
Thankfully, it has strong prospects in both areas.
Unlike developed countries, which often struggle to find productive investment opportunities, China can pursue improvements in infrastructure, urbanization efforts, environmental management, and high-tech industries.
And, unlike many of its developing-country rivals, China has ample fiscal space, household savings, and foreign-exchange reserves for such investments.
The investments will generate jobs, household income, and consumption.
As a result, even if external conditions do not improve, achieving 6.5% and above annual growth is well within China’s reach.
In that case, the country will continue to be the world’s primary economic engine, contributing about 30% of global growth until at least 2020.
China’s Not-So-New Not-So-Normal
HONG KONG – I just spent a week in China, where I participated in the Boao Asia Forum, a conference similar to the annual gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos.
The topic of my panel was what President Xi Jinping has called the Chinese economy’s “new normal”: an era of relatively slower growth, following three decades of double-digit economic expansion.
But what strikes me most about China’s economy is how remarkable it is.
Indeed, its performance continues to astound me.
Though it undoubtedly faces plenty of challenges, the key question is how likely they are to bring down the economy.
Of the four BRIC countries – Brazil, Russia, India, and China – Xi’s is the only one that has met my expectations for growth so far this decade.
From 2011 to 2014, the Chinese economy grew at an average annual rate of 8% per year.
If it continues to grow by around 7% for the rest of the decade, as the authorities and many observers expect, it will achieve an average pace of expansion of 7.5%, in line with my projections.
The phrase “new normal” is a clever bit of messaging by China’s leaders, who must explain to the country’s 1.4 billion citizens why the economy will no longer be growing by 10% a year.
But there is nothing normal about an economy that is already twice as large as the next largest, Japan, and will possibly outstrip the European Union within the next five years.
I was in China primarily in my role as Chair of the British government’s Review on Antimicrobial Resistance; but I also sought opportunities to speak to people about the challenges facing the economy.
Many international observers have been worried about the country’s oversupply of housing and the related credit boom, making me wonder whether I have been overly sanguine about these risks.
But my conversations persuaded me that both problems are likely to be manageable.
To be sure, the housing market is in the doldrums.
But, as many pointed out to me, this is partly the result of deliberate government measures to deflate it (also comforting is the fact that consumers are in general not overleveraged).
Some builders will experience problems with credit, and so might some local authorities.
But spending by the central government is such a small percentage of the country’s total GDP that policymakers have a lot of room for maneuver if intervention becomes necessary in these areas.
Foreign observers frequently speculate that the Chinese authorities may be deliberately overstating the economy’s strength.
But it is equally possible that the size of some sectors is being understated.
After spending a few days in Beijing, it was abundantly clear that China is undergoing a boom in Internet use, including as a consumer platform.
Online commerce is offsetting some of the other weaker areas of the economy, and its full impact might actually be underreported in official statistics.
I do worry that the government is not moving fast enough to grant the country’s millions of migrant workers official residency in the cities where they work and live.
Migrants’ continued lack of access to public services might prevent a large rise in consumption as a share of GDP.
But, as I was told during my visit, the central government’s reluctance to move more quickly reflects its wariness of imposing immense fiscal pressures on local authorities.
Another area of serious concern is health care.
At some stage, the central government will have to address the sector’s deficiencies.
I learned about one example when discussing antimicrobial resistance, to which the government has responded by attempting to limit the quantity of antibiotics a patient may take.
The trouble is that many hospitals and doctors rely on drug sales for a large portion of their revenues, which creates a powerful incentive to find ways to circumvent the rules.
Pollution remains a grave challenge as well.
But it must also be noted that China’s carbon dioxide emissions declined notably in 2014, offering what is perhaps the first tangible evidence that the country is making some progress on this front.
Energy efficiency and renewable energy use are both on the rise as well.
Most important, despite the challenges it faces, the Chinese economy’s singular importance is now widely recognized.
The country’s recent international achievements – particular its ability to secure the backing of the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Italy for its Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in the face of opposition from the United States – imply a high degree of confidence that China will address its problems successfully.
China’s role within existing international financial institutions could change this year as well.
In December, the International Monetary Fund will consider adding renminbi to the basket of currencies that comprise the Fund’s unit of account, known as Special Drawing Rights, alongside the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen.
And the world is still waiting for the US to implement a 2010 reform of the IMF that would strengthen the position of China and other large emerging economies in the institution’s governance structure.
Given the significance of the Chinese economy, continuing to leave this unaddressed is anything but normal.
China’s Next Agenda
CAMBRIDGE – I recently returned from Beijing, where I had spent a week talking with Chinese officials and attending the China Development Forum (CDF), the major annual gathering of Chinese and senior foreign officials and top business executives.
The Chinese government had just released its 13th Five-Year Plan, and officials were eager to explain what it means for China’s future.
Although the latest plan contains a seemingly endless list of specific projects and goals, the major new theme this year is “supply-side restructuring,” a term that includes a wide range of policies aimed at boosting economic growth and living standards.
The term “supply side” is intended to distinguish these new policies from the traditional demand-side measures of easy money and a slightly larger fiscal deficit that are already aimed at strengthening economic activity.
High on the list of supply-side policies is eliminating some of the excess capacity of state-owned firms in the steel and coal industries.
This means shedding some four million workers, a number equal to about 0.5% of China’s workforce.
The plan authorizes a special fund to provide assistance to those who remain unemployed.
Experts believe that much more downsizing is needed; but the authorities are starting small to see how it works and to monitor the public’s response.
China will also be shifting millions of people from low-productivity agricultural areas to dozens of new cities, accompanied by ambitious plans to build 50 new airports and thousands of miles of new roads and railroads.
The authorities also tout the One Belt, One Road project, which will use Chinese financial assistance and resources to develop ports, railroads, and highways linking China with other parts of Asia, central Asia, and potentially even Europe.
The foreign-policy goal is to expand Chinese influence in the region and beyond.
It will also provide an opportunity to export some of China’s excess industrial capacity.
Moreover, officials intend to stimulate innovation through research and development, including by lowering tax rates for high-technology firms.
Tax reform will also extend China’s value-added tax to the service sector.
And financial reforms will eliminate the limits on interest rates that banks can pay on deposits and charge on loans.
At the same time, there is substantial confusion about China’s new foreign-exchange regime.
In recent years, the renminbi’s decline relative to the dollar has prompted complaints from American firms that compete with Chinese products.
But the renminbi has also strengthened by 25% relative to other advanced-country currencies since 2010.
The authorities promise to allow the market to determine the exchange rate, and that there is no reason for a sustained decline.
But officials continue to report the renminbi’s movements relative to the dollar because they fear that emphasizing exchange-rate management relative to a currency basket will suggest further decline relative to the dollar, an expectation that would increase capital outflows.
Policies to improve the environment are also high on the government’s agenda for the next five years.
The public is eager for cleaner air, rivers, and land.
To achieve this, the government will adopt new regulations and create “green bonds” to finance remediation and low-carbon energy sources.
Chinese auto firms are being encouraged to produce hybrid cars, and the government is warning foreign auto companies that it will take steps to reduce their market share if they don’t conform.
Improving the quality of life also requires boosting the quality of products that Chinese consumers can buy.
One government minister at the CDF noted that the one million Chinese tourists who went abroad last year used their credit cards to buy about $1 billion worth of goods that they cannot obtain at home (while noting the irony that some of those European and American branded goods are actually manufactured in China).
China is still a low-income country, with per capita GDP of just $14,000, about one fourth of that in the United States.
Although Beijing and Shanghai are relatively prosperous, there is still much poverty.
It is revealing that to achieve the Five-Year Plan’s goal of eliminating poverty by 2020, which requires reducing the number of poor people by 55 million, the poverty line is defined as just $354 a year, or less than one dollar a day.
Chinese corporations’ high level of debt could be a source of financial instability, although several officials stressed that they were not worried.
Government data show that the ratio of bank loans to GDP is about twice that of the United States.
More worrying, the share of nonperforming loans may be dangerously high.
But even if that share is higher than official statistics indicate, China’s bad-debt problem is very different from that of the West.
China’s largest corporate debtors are state-owned firms, and their creditors are state-owned banks.
So resolving the bad debts would involve transferring the losses from the state-owned banks to the government.
And, because the government debt is relatively low – about 17% of GDP – it would not be difficult for the government to absorb these losses.
If necessary, it could also deal with the excess debts that local governments, encouraged by the central authorities, incurred in 2008 and 2009.
What was not discussed at the CDF is the major crackdown on high-level corruption that President Xi Jinping is pursuing and that many say is impeding economic decision-making and slowing GDP growth.
Nor was there any discussion of the widespread concern about an ideological shift to the left that could threaten property rights, leading to capital flight as individuals seek to protect their wealth.
But while China remains a complicated puzzle, the authorities are clearly pursuing pro-market reforms designed to produce real annual growth of 6.5% or more during the next five years, leading to the doubling of real per capita income by 2020 that the Chinese Communist Party called for in 2010.
If that target is missed, it will not be for a lack of effort on the part of the Chinese government.
China’s High-Income Future
LONDON – “What if this is ‘as good as it gets’?”
Jack Nicholson asks, as he walks through his psychiatrist’s waiting room in the eponymous film.
At the recent meeting of G-20 finance ministers in Shanghai, participants were asking much the same question – and not just with regard to medium-term expectations of weak global growth.
Many are now wondering whether China’s current growth rate will be as good as it gets for a long time to come.
Determining the validity of such fears requires understanding what is driving China’s economic slowdown.
Some offer a straightforward explanation: China, along with other major emerging economies, has become ensnared in the dreaded “middle-income trap,” unable to break through to advanced-economy status.
But this assumes that some exogenous force or tendency causes countries to become “stuck” at a particular income level – a view that one academic study after another has debunked.
To be sure, countries do often struggle to achieve high-income status.
According to the World Bank, only 13 of 101 countries classified as middle income in 1960 had reached high-income status in 2008.
Moreover, some middle-income countries, after promising growth, spent decades “trapped” at a certain per capita income level.
Argentina, for example, kept pace with the United States in per capita income growth from 1870 to 1940; since then, the gap has been widening steadily.
In this manner, even countries that make it to high-income status sometimes regress to middle-income levels.
But there is no historical necessity that dictates that countries get stuck at particular levels of income.
On the contrary, studies suggest that fast-growing low-income economies are also likely to become fast-growing middle-income economies, and ultimately to graduate to high-income status.
If an economy gets stuck, it is because it has failed to adjust, as the basis for growth changes.
And, in fact, the lack of capacity for self-transformation normally would have been visible at low-income levels, too.
What, exactly, does the needed adjustment entail?
While the specifics vary across countries, the innovation-focused Neo-Schumpeterian growth theory, proposed by the economists Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt, offers some important insights.
Aghion and Howitt view innovation as any change that leads to the introduction of new products or processes in the market where a firm operates.
Countries far from the world technology frontier are better off imitating existing technologies and adapting them to local conditions, but over time such countries must improve their capacity for innovation.
Studies have also shown a positive link between innovation and social mobility, and even between innovation and income inequality.
Central to the innovation-focused perspective is the notion that economic growth requires technology transfers and an environment in which new firms can form, grow, and exit (thereby reallocating factors of production to more successful firms).
Quality of management obviously plays a key role, but institutions and human capital also matter; corruption, credit constraints, and lack of access to high-quality education all make economic transformation more difficult.
But fostering innovation is not a silver bullet.
While providing returns to innovators can help to spur more innovation, it can also allow businesspeople to capture too large a share of the transformation process.
For example, whereas Bill Gates has probably been good for economic transformation, the Mexican telecoms billionaire Carlos Slim has not.
Encouraging one kind of innovator could easily give rise to the other.
What does all this mean for China?
As the country attempts to create the conditions for greater genuine innovation, it must also address myriad short-term challenges.
It is caught in a deflationary spiral, with falling prices and increased anxiety over the economy’s prospects reinforcing each other.
And excessive lending to the corporate sector, particularly in manufacturing, has led to massive excess capacity and a growing mountain of bad debt, suppressing growth.
Compounding the challenge, China’s economy is more globally relevant and interconnected than ever before, which means that any action it takes can have far-reaching effects.
With tried and tested policies unlikely to work in this new context, the government is having to improvise.
And, as anxious markets clearly recognize, that approach carries the potential for policy mistakes.
Nonetheless, there is good reason to believe that China can succeed, given that the country’s economic history indicates an impressive capacity for transformation.
Of course, China’s economy has come a long way since Deng Xiaoping initiated the policy of reform and opening up in 1978.
But even in more recent years, the skill content in China’s output has improved radically, and resources have been successfully transferred from agriculture to the services sector, rather than to the manufacturing sector, where large state-owned firms still dominate many industries.
If the recent research debunking the middle-income trap is correct, China – one of history’s most miraculous growth stories – has a very good chance of succeeding in the transition to high-income status with similar vigor.
The underlying structural changes that have occurred in China in recent years reinforce this optimism.
China will need to continue reforms and overcome vested interests, particularly in the state-owned sector, but its chances of success remain high.
The China Delusion
NEW YORK – China’s management of its exchange-rate peg continues to rattle global financial markets.
Ongoing uncertainty about renminbi devaluation is fueling fears that deflationary forces will sweep through emerging markets and deliver a body blow to developed economies, where interest rates are at or near zero (and thus cannot be lowered to defend against imported deflation). Fiscal gridlock in both Europe and the United States is heightening the angst.
But the current bout of exchange-rate anxiety is really just a symptom of the fact that China’s transition from an export-led growth strategy to one propelled by domestic consumption is proceeding far less smoothly than hoped.
For some people, visions of the wonders of capitalism with Chinese characteristics remain undiminished.
They are certain that, after more than three decades of state-directed growth, China’s leaders know what to do to turn their slumping economy around.
The optimists’ unreality is rivaled by that of supply-siders, who would apply shock therapy to China’s slumping state sector and immediately integrate the country’s underdeveloped capital markets into today’s turbulent global financial system.
That is a profoundly dangerous prescription.
The power of the market to transform China will not be unleashed in a stagnant economy, where such measures would aggravate deflationary forces and produce a calamity.
The persistent downward pressure on the renminbi reflects a growing fear that Chinese policymakers have no coherent solution to the dilemmas they face.
Floating the renminbi, for example, is a dangerous option.
After all, with the Chinese economy undergoing wholesale economic transformation, estimating a long-term equilibrium exchange rate that will anchor speculation is virtually impossible, particularly given persistent doubts about data quality, disclosure, and opaque policymaking processes.
But if the current exchange-rate peg to a basket of currencies fails to anchor the renminbi and prevent sharp depreciation, the deflationary consequences for the world economy will be profound.
Moreover, they will feed back on the Chinese export sector, thus dampening the stimulative impact of a weakened currency.
The key to stabilizing the exchange rate lies in creating a credible development policy.
Only then will the pressure on the renminbi, and on China’s foreign-exchange reserves, subside, because investors both within and outside the country will see a clear way forward.
Establishing policy credibility will require diminishing the muddled microeconomic incentives of state control and guarantees.
It will also require reinvigorating aggregate demand by targeting fiscal policy to support the emerging economic sectors that will underpin the new growth model.
But, as usual with China, such a strategy is riddled with contradictions.
For example, reducing the size of the state-enterprise sector is necessary, yet would be certain to depress aggregate demand at a time when demand is already soft.
Likewise, cutting fiscal support (via government-directed bank lending) to zombie firms would free up fiscal capacity and enable resources to be redirected to new sectors that facilitate services and urban employment; but this would exacerbate – at least at first – today’s demand shortfall.
Slashing the state sector abruptly and expecting to achieve transformation through austerity is not the way forward.
Economic historians, notably Michael A. Bernstein in his study of the Great Depression in the United States, have convincingly shown that an economy in transition requires strong aggregate demand to pull resources into new sectors.
If both the old and new sectors of an economy are in a slump, capital formation will sputter, investment in upgrading human capital will decline, and structural adjustment will stall.
Robust aggregate demand is always essential to successful transformation.
An equally large obstacle to China’s economic transition – the problem that almost dare not speak its name – is the widespread worship of China’s hybrid market economy.
Simply put, today’s muddled market incentives impede transformation by favoring state-owned enterprises.
In early 2012, when the Chinese leadership moved toward stronger private ownership, stocks in the private-sector sub-index outperformed the state-owned sector sub-index on both the Shanghai and Hong Kong stock exchanges.
But since the spring of 2014, this trend has reversed, and the state-owned sector sub-index has outperformed the private-sector sub-index.
As the Chinese economy slows and default risk grows, the value of state guarantees rises, directing capital away from private-sector growth.
This hybrid system clearly impedes credit allocation from catalyzing development, while creating and sustaining vested interests opposed to reform.
This holding pattern is particularly harmful because profound transformation will surely depend on financing from a sound sovereign bond market, which cannot function properly until uncertainty related to the government’s contingent liabilities – all those implicit guarantees – has been resolved.
China has it within its power to stabilize its exchange rate via credible reforms, particularly policies that redirect resources to invigorate domestic demand and pull resources toward the newer high-value sectors.
The reforms China needs cannot be accomplished in a slump, or by a large exchange-rate depreciation that deflates the world in a vain effort to turn back the clock to an era of export-led growth that stagnant demand in the West has rendered nonviable.
China, Inc. Goes Global
NEW YORK – China’s economy is now taking its next great leap forward: parts of its manufacturing sector are now moving up the value-added chain and out of the country.&nbsp; The China challenge is now a global one.
The reasons are not difficult to fathom.
Production costs (wages, office rents, land, capital, etc.) in China’s coastal provinces – where most of the country’s manufacturing and service production, as well as foreign direct investment, are located – have been rising fast.
Since last year alone, minimum wages in nine of twelve coastal provinces (including Beijing) rose by an average of more than 21%.
At the same time, the renminbi is appreciating, making domestic production of export-oriented goods and services even more expensive.
This matters, especially for labor-intensive activities (ranging from toy manufacturing to data-entry services), whether by affiliates of foreign multinational enterprises (which account for more than half of China’s exports) or by local firms, which are losing competitiveness in international markets.
To maintain its export-oriented production base, output must move up the value-added chain, toward more sophisticated products.
Multinational enterprises can do that within their integrated global production networks, which allow them to organize an international intra-firm division of labor.
Any part of these production chains can be located wherever it suits the firms’ international competitiveness best.
And such firms have the experience to scout the globe for the right investment locations.
Domestic Chinese firms, too, need to respond to these pressures.
They are helped in this effort by the rapid deepening of China’s skills and technology base.
This partly reflects training in foreign affiliates, but the main reason has been the Chinese government’s sustained effort to foster education and training, encourage technology transfers from foreign to domestic firms, and, in particular, to build up research and development capabilities.
In short, producers of more sophisticated goods and services in developed and emerging-market countries need to be prepared for growing competition from China.