The difference between the two principles is most clearly apparent in their implications for the relationship between science and technology.
Precautionary policymakers invoke scientific uncertainty to curb technological innovation, whereas their proactionary counterparts encourage innovation as an extension of scientific hypothesis testing.
They also differ subtly over their conception of humans.
Precautionary types aspire to a “sustainable” humanity, which invariably means bringing fewer of us into existence, with each of us making less of an impact on the planet.
Those with a proactionary bent are happy to increase the planet’s human population indefinitely as nothing more or less than a series of experiments in living, regardless of outcomes.
Not surprisingly, conventional political and business leaders are not entirely comfortable with either group.
After all, precautionary policymakers would have business value conservation over growth, while the proactionary camp would have the state encourage people to transcend current norms rather than adhere to them. A precautionary firm would look like a miniature version of today’s regulatory state, whereas a proactionary state would operate like a venture capitalist writ large.
But perhaps most conspicuously absent from both precautionary and proactionary thinking is the old welfare-state ideal – that we might procreate at will in a world where our offspring are assured a secure existence.
For all of their substantial disagreements, both sides dismiss this prospect as a twentieth-century fantasy that was only temporarily realized in Northern Europe for a few decades after World War II.
Lurking behind this dismissal is a sense that humanity itself is undergoing a massive transformation in its self-understanding.
However, that transformation is moving at once in two diametrically opposed directions, which I have called “Humanity 2.0.”
Precautionary types would reacquaint us with our humble animal origins, from which we have strayed for much too long, whereas exponents of the proactionary principle would expedite our departure from our evolutionary past.
At the very least, they would re-engineer our biology, if not replace it altogether with some intellectually superior and more durable substratum.
To be sure, the precautionary and proactionary principles remain relatively marginal to mainstream political discourse.
But they have the potential to shift the ideological axis by 90 degrees.
The right is currently divided into traditionalists and libertarians; the left into communitarians and technocrats.
In the future, I suggest, the traditionalists and the communitarians will form the precautionary pole of the political spectrum, while the libertarians and technocrats will form the proactionary pole.
These will be the new right and left – or, rather, down and up.
One group will be grounded in the earth, while the other looks toward the heavens.
The Future of Internet Search
NEW YORK – Imagine that Googling an address gave you a list of the closest buildings, ranked by distance.
Not exactly what you were looking for, most likely.
But that is pretty close to what we still accept for most Internet searches.
You don't get what you actually want to finish your task; you get a list of pages that might lead you to it.
That is beginning to change.
Even as the online world has turned its attention from searching to social networking, search is getting interesting again.
Consider the development of online search in the broadest terms.
First came Yahoo!, with its carefully cultivated (by human editors) catalogue of interesting web pages.
Then along came Google, with co-founder Larry Page’s innovative ranking of Web pages not just by their content, but also by the quantity and quality of other pages that link to them.
Social networking brings a new insight.
People are likely to buy what their friends recommend, which is why marketers should spend time on social networks and join the conversation, rather than interrupt it with traditional advertising.
But what happens when, influenced by their friends, people actually go to buy something or take some action?
That long list of blue links to pages that may or may not contain what they want looks pretty old.
Now, however, something is happening to fix this, and it’s not just a prettier background.
It’s structure – the same sort of context the old Yahoo! catalogue supplied, but this time automatically generated and deeper – and across more than just a few categories such as sports and travel.
For example, what people want (and are now getting) in  product search is not a list of pages, but a set of products displayed in some meaningful fashion.
They want a map of the product space, not a list.
The challenge of course, is that each kind of product has a different structure and a different set of attributes.
Consider wines: you can sort them by price, year, or region of origin, by red, white, or rosé, or by sparkling or still.
For clothes, you want sizes and colors – and perhaps some filters depending on your personal characteristics – and of course a “buy now” button.
Some areas, such as travel, are even more complex.
To “map” travel properly, the software needs to understand such things as time zones, flight duration, layovers, and the like, along with concepts such as coach or first class, deluxe and standard rooms, double vs. single, and so on.
That is why there is a whole separate vertical market for travel, but one that first Bing, and now Google (with the acquisition of ITA Software), may be claiming.
For a long time Google didn’t need to do much to remain the leader in Internet search, focusing primarily on the “access” part of its self-proclaimed mission “to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful.”
But runner-up Microsoft went out and bought Medstory in 2007 and then Powerset in 2008.
(I was an investor in both of them, so I have been watching these developments with interest, but I have no inside information on either company since the acquisitions.)
Medstory has a deep understanding of health care, including the relationships between diseases and treatments, drugs and symptoms, and side effects.
Powerset, a tool for creating and defining such relationships in any sphere of interest, is broader but less deep.
This all happened a couple of years ago – just before Yahoo! gave up on search entirely and handed that part of its business over to Microsoft.
Also around that time, Bill Gates uttered one of the smartest things he has ever said: “The future of search is verbs.”
But he said it at a private dinner and it never spread.
To me, the meaning was clear: when people search, they aren't just looking for nouns or information; they are looking for action.
They want to book a flight, reserve a table, buy a product, cure a hangover, take a class, fix a leak, resolve an argument, or occasionally find a person, for which Facebook is very handy.
They mostly want to find something in order to do something.
As a result, Bing launched a few forays into vertical integration.
And in the last few months Google has begun to react.
First, it bought ITA Software, which provides the underlying data to several travel-booking sites (Hotwire and Orbitz) and to Kayak, as well as to Bing.
Most resellers, a little nervous about Bing’s tool that sends users to book directly with airlines and hotels, are even more concerned about what Google might be up to.
Then, last month, Google acquired Metaweb and its user-generated database Freebase.
While Powerset was a tool for understanding natural language and for structuring it “under the covers” (where programmers could see it), Metaweb lets partners and end-users create data structures or add information to structures created by others.
For example, Metaweb/Freebase has an extensive structured database of movies, actors who appear in them, and their directors.
You can ask (and get the answer) to “movies directed by Roman Polanski” and get only those movies – not those in which he only appeared.
Try doing that with Google.
You soon will be able to.
Other categories include business (with entities such as employers, industries, and employees), biology, space flight, and many more, and include representations – such as graphs, timelines, and tables – of how they are connected.
Most things don’t exist in isolation.
They have complex relationships to other things, and by representing that information using verbs – for example, “the company that Google acquired” vs. “the company that Google competes with” – we can represent the world more accurately.
And that means better, more meaningful responses when we search.
The Future of Power
CAMBRIDGE – Global government is unlikely in the twenty-first century, but various degrees of global governance already exist.
The world has hundreds of treaties, institutions, and regimes for governing interstate behavior involving telecommunications, civil aviation, ocean dumping, trade, and even the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
But such institutions are rarely self-sufficient. They still require the leadership of great powers.
And it remains to be seen whether this century’s great powers will live up to this role.
As the power of China and India increases, how will their behavior change?
Ironically, for those who foresee a tri-polar world of the US, China, and India at mid-century, all three of these states – the world’s most populous – are among the most protective of their sovereignty.
Some argue that our current global institutions are sufficiently open and adaptable for China to find it in its own interests to become what Robert Zoellick, president of the World Bank, once called a “responsible stakeholder.”
Others believe that China will wish to impose its own mark and create its own international institutional system as its power increases.
The countries of the European Union have been more willing to experiment with limiting state sovereignty, and they may push for more institutional innovation.
But it is unlikely that, barring a disaster like World War II, the world will witness “a constitutional moment” such as it experienced with the creation of the United Nations system of institutions after 1945.
Today, as a universal institution, the UN plays a crucial role in legitimization, crisis diplomacy, peacekeeping, and humanitarian missions, but its very size has proven to be a disadvantage for many other functions.
There will be many multilateralisms and “mini-lateralisms,” which will vary by issue with the distribution of power resources.
For example, on monetary affairs, the Bretton Woods conference created the International Monetary Fund in 1944, and it has since expanded to include 186 countries.
But the dollar’s global pre-eminence was the crucial feature of monetary cooperation until the 1970’s.
After the weakening of the dollar and President Richard M. Nixon’s decision to end its convertibility into gold, in 1975 France convened leaders of five countries in the library of the Chateau de Rambouillet to discuss monetary affairs.
The group soon grew to seven, and later broadened in scope and membership – including Russia and a vast bureaucratic and press apparatus – to become the G-8.
Subsequently, the G-8 began the practice of inviting five guests from the emerging economies.
In the financial crisis of 2008, this framework evolved into the G-20, which boasts a more inclusive membership.
At the same time, the G-7 continued to meet on a narrower monetary agenda; new institutions, such as the Financial Stability Board, were created, while bilateral discussions between the US and China played an increasingly important role.
As one experienced diplomat put it, “if you’re trying to negotiate an exchange-rate deal with 20 countries or a bailout of Mexico, as in the early Clinton days, with 20 countries, that’s not easy.
If you get above 10, it just makes it too darn hard to get things done.”
He’s right, of course.
After all, with three countries, there are three bilateral relationships; with ten, there are 45; and with 100 players, there are nearly 5,000.
That is why, on issues like climate change, the UN will continue to play a role, but more intensive negotiations are likely to occur in smaller groups such as the Major Economies Forum, where fewer than a dozen countries account for 80% of greenhouse gas emissions.
Much of the work of global governance will rely on formal and informal networks.
Network organizations (such as the G-20) are used for setting agendas, building consensus, coordinating policy, exchanging knowledge, and establishing norms.
As Anne-Marie Slaughter, Director of Policy Planning in the US State Department, argues, “the power that flows from this type of connectivity is not the power to impose outcomes.
Networks are not directed and controlled as much as they are managed and orchestrated.
Multiple players are integrated into a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts.”
In other words, the network provides power to achieve preferred outcomes with other players rather than over them.
To cope with the transnational challenges that characterize a global information age, the international community will have to continue to develop a series of complementary networks and institutions that supplement the global framework of the UN.
But if major countries are divided, it is unlikely that even network organizations like the G-20 can set the agenda for the UN and the Bretton Woods financial institutions to act upon.
In the immediate aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, the G-20 seemed to help governments to coordinate their actions and avoid rampant protectionism.
The world waits anxiously to see how it will perform when it meets again in Seoul this November.
The Future of the Japan-US Alliance
Cambridge – Many analysts currently detect malaise in Japan about its alliance with the United States.
Some of this relates to North Korea’s nuclear weapons and a concern that the US will not adequately represent Japan’s interests (such as accounting for Japanese citizens abducted by North Korea years ago.)
Other issues concern the basing of US marines in Okinawa and sharing the costs of moving some to Guam.
The list is long, but they might best be thought of as “housekeeping” issues: many a couple can quarrel over them without contemplating divorce.
There is a deeper level of concern, however, which relates to Japan’s fear of being marginalized as the US turns toward a rising China.
For example, some Japanese complain that China receives far more attention than Japan in the American election campaign.
Such anxiety is not surprising: US and Japanese defense capabilities are not symmetrical, and that is bound to agitate the more dependent party.
Over the years, various suggestions have been made with a view to making the alliance more symmetrical, including that Japan become a “normal” country with a full panoply of military capabilities, even nuclear weapons.
But such measures would raise more problems than they would solve.
Even if Japan implemented them, they would still not equal the capacity of the US or eliminate the asymmetry.
It is worth noting that during the Cold War, America’s European allies had similar anxieties about dependency and abandonment, despite their own military capabilities.
The real guarantee of American resolve to defend Japan is the presence of US troops and bases, and cooperation on issues – such as ballistic missile defense – aimed at protecting both Americans and Japanese.
Moreover, there are two good answers to the question of whether the US would abandon Japan in favor of China: values and threat. 
Japan and the US, unlike China, are both democracies, and they share many values.
In addition, both Japan and the US face a common challenge from China’s rise and have a strong interest in ensuring that it does not become a threat.
The US regards a triangular Japan-China-US relationship as the basis of stability in East Asia, and wants good relations between all three of its legs.
But the triangle is not equilateral, because the US is allied with Japan, and China need not become a threat to either country if they maintain that alliance.
On the other hand, China’s power should not be exaggerated.
A recent poll indicates that one-third of Americans believe that China will “soon dominate the world,” while 54% see its emergence as a “threat to world peace.”
To be sure, measured by official exchange rates, China is the world’s fourth largest economy, and it is growing at 10% annually.
But China’s income per capita is only 4% that of the US.
If both countries’ economies continue to grow at their current rates, China’s could be larger than America’s in 30 years, but US per capita income will still be four times greater.
Furthermore, China’s lags far behind in military power, and lacks America’s “soft power” resources, such as Hollywood and world-class universities.
China’s internal evolution also remains uncertain.
It has lifted 400 million people out of poverty since 1990, but another 400 million live on less that $2 per day.
Along with enormous inequality, China has a migrant labor force of 140 million, severe pollution, and rampant corruption.
Nor has its political evolution matched its economic progress.
While more Chinese are free today than ever before in Chinese history, China is far from free.
The danger is that Party leaders, trying to counter the erosion of communism, will turn to nationalism to provide ideological glue, which could lead to an unstable foreign policy – including, for example, conflict over Taiwan.
Faced with such uncertainty, a wise policy combines realism with liberalism.
By reinforcing their alliance, the US and Japan can hedge against uncertainty while at the same time offering China integration into global institutions as a “responsible stakeholder.”
The greatest danger is that an escalating fear of enmity in the three countries becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In that sense, the US-Japan alliance rests on deeply rooted joint interests.
There is a new dimension to the alliance, however, and to the relationship with China.   This year, China surpassed the US as the world’s largest emitter of greenhouse gases.
China argues, correctly, that it is still behind the US and Japan in per capita emissions, but this does not reduce the costs imposed on the world (including Japan and the US).
A cooperative program that helps China to burn its coal more cleanly is in the interests of all three countries.
In general, transnational threats such as climate change or pandemics can cause damage on a scale equivalent to military conflict.
(In 1918, avian flu killed more people than died in World War I).
Responding to such threats requires cooperation, soft power, and non-military instruments, and this is an area in which Japan is a much more equal and important ally.
If anything, the new and growing dimension of transnational threats, when added to traditional security concerns, makes the future of the Japan-US alliance look more promising than ever.
The Rise of the Robots
LONDON – What impact will automation – the so-called “rise of the robots” – have on wages and employment over the coming decades?
Nowadays, this question crops up whenever unemployment rises.
In the early nineteenth century, David Ricardo considered the possibility that machines would replace labor; Karl Marx followed him.
Around the same time, the Luddites smashed the textile machinery that they saw as taking their jobs.
Then the fear of machines died away. New jobs – at higher wages, in easier conditions, and for more people – were soon created and readily found.
But that does not mean that the initial fear was wrong.
On the contrary, it must be right in the very long run: sooner or later, we will run out of jobs.
For some countries, this long-run prospect might be uncomfortably close.
So, what are people to do if machines can do all (or most of) their work?
Recently, automation in manufacturing has expanded even to areas where labor has been relatively cheap.
In 2011, Chinese companies spent ¥8 billion ($1.3 billion) on industrial robots.
Foxconn, which build iPads for Apple, hopes to have their first fully automated plant in operation sometime in the next 5-10 years.
Now the substitution of capital for labor is moving beyond manufacturing.
The most mundane example is one you will see in every supermarket: checkout staff replaced by a single employee monitoring a bank of self-service machines.
(Though perhaps this is not automation proper – the supermarket has just shifted some of the work of shopping onto the customer.)
For those who dread the threat that automation poses to low-skilled labor, a ready answer is to train people for better jobs.
But technological progress is now eating up the better jobs, too.
A wide range of jobs that we now think of as skilled, secure, and irreducibly human may be the next casualties of technological change.
As a recent article in the Financial Times points out, in two areas notoriously immune to productivity increases, education and health care, technology is already reducing the demand for skilled labor.
Translation, data analysis, legal research – a whole range of high-skilled jobs may wither away.
So, what will the new generation of workers be trained for?
Optimists airily assert that “many new types of job will be created.”
They ask us to think of the lead drivers of multi-car road trains (once our electric cars join up “convoy-style”), big data analysts, or robot mechanics.
That does not sound like too many new jobs to me.
Imagine a handful of technicians replacing a fleet of taxi drivers and truckers, a small cadre of human mechanics maintaining a full robot workforce, or a single data analyst and his software replacing a bank of quantitative researchers.
What produces value in such an economy will no longer be wage labor.
We can see hints of that future now.
Twitter, the social-media giant, is an employment minnow.
It is valued at $9 billion, but employs just 400 people worldwide – about as many as a medium-size carpet factory in Kidderminster.
It is not true that automation has caused the rise of unemployment since 2008.
What is noticeable, though, is that structural unemployment – the unemployment that remains even after economies have recovered – has been on an upward trend over the last 25 years.
We are finding it increasingly difficult to keep unemployment down.
Indeed, the days when we in Britain thought it was normal to have an unemployment rate of 2% have long since passed.
It was considered a great achievement of the last government that it brought unemployment down to 5% at the height of an unsustainable boom.
And it only succeeded in doing so by subsidizing a lot of unnecessary jobs and useless training schemes.
No doubt some of the claims made for robots replacing human labor will prove as far-fetched now as they have in the past.
But it is hard to resist the conclusion that “technological unemployment,” as John Maynard Keynes called it, will continue to rise, as more and more people become redundant.
The optimist may reply that the pessimist’s imagination is too weak to envisage the full range of wonderful new job possibilities that automation is opening up.
But perhaps the optimist’s imagination is too weak to imagine a different trajectory – toward a world in which people enjoy the fruits of automation as leisure rather than as additional income.
During the Industrial Revolution, working hours increased by 20% as factories replaced feasting.
With our post-machine standard of living, we can afford to shed some of the Puritan guilt that has, for centuries, kept our noses to the grindstone.
Today we find a great deal of work-sharing in poor countries.
It is the accepted means of making a limited amount of available work go around.
Economists call it “disguised unemployment.”
If escape from poverty is the goal, disguised unemployment is a bad thing.
But if machines have already engineered the escape from poverty, then work-sharing is a sensible way of “spreading the work” that still has to be done by human labor.
If one machine can cut necessary human labor by half, why make half of the workforce redundant, rather than employing the same number for half the time?
Why not take advantage of automation to reduce the average working week from 40 hours to 30, and then to 20, and then to ten, with each diminishing block of labor time counting as a full time job?
This would be possible if the gains from automation were not mostly seized by the rich and powerful, but were distributed fairly instead.
Rather than try to repel the advance of the machine, which is all that the Luddites could imagine, we should prepare for a future of more leisure, which automation makes possible.
But, to do that, we first need a revolution in social thinking.
The Future(s) of Civil Aeronautics
HAMPTON, VIRGINIA -- Civil aeronautics is in the midst of becoming a “mature” industry, with all the drawbacks that this entails.
For decades, technological advances have been essentially incremental, and the industry remains largely based on long-haul transport aircraft, with an emerging small jet component and a legacy of general aviation markets and products.
But it has become increasingly clear that the industry cannot survive in this form.
The problems bedeviling the industry include pollution from emissions, increasing competition (particularly from communications technology, which has made business travel less necessary), air traffic control delays and inefficiencies, expanding noise restrictions, safety and security concerns, and an overall business environment highly dependent on fuel prices.
Solutions for all of these problems will probably require a complete reinvention of airplane technology.
The greatest hope is to be found in the ongoing information, Bio-, Nano-, Energetics, and Quantum technology revolutions.
The IT revolution and associated “swarm” technologies enable the foremost solution: a “digital airspace” that is wholly automatic in terms of air traffic control, navigation, and vehicle operations.
Automatic aircraft operation is already becoming commonplace – especially in the military – but further increases will require a similarly automatic airspace.
A digital airspace would in turn enable a complete revolution in personal mobility.
Together with new technologies enabling Super-Short Takeoff and Landing (superSTOL) a digital airspace would put safe, quiet, affordable, street-in-front-of-your-house personal air vehicles within sight.
So-called flying HumVee’s (high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicles) would create a superb transportation system for areas lacking intercity roads, and eventually would supplement – or perhaps supplant – automobiles.
There are several alternatives, such as the blended wing body and strut/truss braced wings, which offer major potential increases in lift-to-drag ratio and improvements in structural weight fraction.
Such improvements in these parameters would provide design margins to address most of the current problems, with the exception of emissions.
The issue of water emissions can be addressed by designs that enable long-haul aircraft to cruise below 9,000 meters.
Such designs could be enabled by using circulation control for high lift and employed at cruising altitude for ride quality.
The resulting STOL (short takeoff and landing) performance could also improve airport productivity.
On the other hand, emissions of carbon dioxide can be reduced simply by using biofuels, made from plants whose carbon dioxide “price” was paid via uptake of the very same gas from the atmosphere during their growth.
Reductions of other greenhouse gases, such as nitric oxide, are attainable through clever combustor design.
Given the number and severity of problems currently plaguing civil aeronautics, the conventional approach of evolutionary changes to current paradigms is no longer sufficient.
Instead, the industry must re-invent itself.
With the advent of a digital airspace, and with appropriate research support, success would be both possible and likely.
The G-20’s Helpful Silence on Capital Controls
NEW YORK – When French President Nicolas Sarkozy took the reins as host of this year’s G-20 summit, to be held in Cannes on November 3-4, he called on the International Monetary Fund to develop an enforceable “code of conduct” for the use of capital controls (or capital-account regulations, as we prefer to call them) in the world economy.
The IMF followed through by publishing a preliminary set of guidelines this past April.
Regulation of cross-border capital flows has been strangely absent from the G-20’s agenda, which is aimed at strengthening financial regulation.
But they are a central element in the financial volatility that incited calls for stronger regulation in the first place.
The IMF has shown that those countries that deployed capital-account regulations were among the least hard-hit during the worst of the global financial crisis.
Since 2009, it has accepted and even recommended that such regulations are useful to manage the massive inflows of “hot money” into emerging markets.
That said, while the IMF’s proposed code is a step in the right direction, it is misguided.
So, the G-20’s endorsement of the Fund’s guidelines would not be wise for a world economy trying to recover from one financial crisis while preventing the next one.
With low interest rates and a slow recovery in the developed countries, accompanied by high interest rates and rapid growth in emerging markets, the world’s investors flocked from the former to the latter – Brazil, Chile, South Korea, Taiwan, and others.
Then, in recent months, they flocked out of those emerging countries, showing once again how volatile and dangerous such flows are.
Indeed, as the IMF has pointed out in its World Economic Outlook, these flows threaten to inflate asset bubbles, make it harder for countries to pursue an independent monetary policy, and trigger currency appreciation and associated losses in export competitiveness.
Brazil’s currency, for instance, appreciated more than 40% from 2009 until August 2011, before weakening in recent months.
Some countries responded by doing nothing, but many, including industrialized countries like Japan and Switzerland, intervened heavily in currency markets.
Some resorted to capital-account regulations on inflows, such as taxes on the foreign purchases of bonds, equities, and derivatives, reserve requirements on short-term inflows, and so forth.
Brazil’s finance minister referred to these numerous actions as the “currency wars.”
This is where Sarkozy came in, using his platform as G-20 host to try to forge a set of enforceable guidelines to govern capital-flow management.
The IMF’s proposed guidelines recommend that countries deploy capital-account regulations only as a last resort – that is, after such measures as building up reserves, letting currencies appreciate, and cutting budget deficits.
In response to these suggestions, an independent Task Force, made up of former government officials and academics, was established to examine the use of capital-account regulations and come up with an alternative set of guidelines for the use of such regulations in developing countries.&#160;
Among other findings and recommendations, our task force pointed out that in the cases where the IMF found capital-account regulations to be effective, such measures were part of a broader macroeconomic toolkit, and were deployed early on, alongside other measures, not as a “last resort.”
Unless countries have signed trade and investment treaties that restrict the use of such regulations (and many have), the IMF’s Articles of Agreement give them full policy scope to manage capital flows as they see fit.
Consigning such measures to “last resort” status would reduce the available options precisely when countries need as many tools as possible to prevent and mitigate crises.
Rather than embracing a globally enforceable code of conduct that could paradoxically lead to a compulsory opening of capital accounts across the globe, the IMF, the G-20, the Financial Stability Board, and other bodies should try to reduce the stigma attached to capital-account regulations and protect countries’ ability to deploy them.
Indeed, the IMF could help countries to prevent evasion of the regulations, and, together with the G-20 and the FSB, should lead a global dialogue about the extent to which countries should coordinate such regulations.
Countries’ interests are considerably aligned in favor of such coordination.
Industrialized economies are seeking to recover from the crisis, and want credit and capital to stay home to boost growth, while developing countries have little interest in gaining short-term capital inflows.
This could form the basis for industrialized countries to adjust their tax codes and deploy other types of regulation to keep capital at home, while emerging markets implement measures aimed at changing the composition and reducing the level of potentially destabilizing inflows.
The G-8’s Broken Aid Promises
The Millennium Development Goals are the world’s agreed goals to cut poverty, hunger, and disease.
Established in 2000, their targets were to be met by 2015.
We are now at the halfway point.
So far, despite endless words about increasing aid to poor countries, the rich G-8 countries are reneging on their part of the bargain.
Cynicism abounds here.
At the G-8 Gleneagles Summit in 2005, member countries pledged to double aid to Africa by 2010.
Soon after the summit, I was invited to a small, high-level meeting to discuss the summit’s follow-up.
I asked for a spreadsheet showing the year-by-year planned increases, and the allocation of those planned increases across donor and recipient countries.
The response I received was chilling.
“There will be no spreadsheets.
The US has insisted on no spreadsheets.”
The point was clear.
Though the G-8 had made a clear promise, there was no plan on how to fulfill it; indeed, there were clear instructions that there would be no such plan.
The G-8 is now reaping the consequences of its inaction.
For the first year after the Gleneagles meeting, aid numbers were padded by misleading accounting on debt cancellation operations.
With those debt cancellation operations largely completed, the data are now revealing the stark truth: development aid to Africa and to poor countries more generally is stagnant, contrary to all the promises that were made.
Specifically, between 2005 and 2006, overall aid to Africa, excluding debt cancellation operations, increased by a meager 2%.
In fact, total official development assistance to all recipient countries, net of debt cancellation, actually declined by 2% between 2005 and 2006.
Even the World Bank, which usually takes the donors’ point of view, recently acknowledged that except for debt cancellation, “promises of scaled up aid have not been delivered.”
Private reactions among senior government officials in the G-8 are surprising.
One senior G-8 official told me that the aid promises are all lies anyway.
I don’t agree with that, but the cynicism that such a view reflects is alarming.
It shows the nature of discussions at the highest reaches of the G-8.
All this would seem to be insurmountable if the basic economics were not clear.
We are not talking about unachievable financial goals.
Indeed, the sum of money is minuscule.
The G-8, representing nearly one billion people, has promised to increase aid to Africa from $25 billion in 2004 to $50 billion in 2010 – a difference that represents less than one-tenth of one 1% of the income of the rich donor world!
To put it in perspective, the Christmas bonuses paid this year on Wall Street – just the bonuses – amounted to $24 billion.
Spending on the Iraq war, which achieves nothing but violence, is more than $100 billion per year.
So the G-8’s commitment could be honored, if rich countries cared to honor it.
To salvage its credibility, the G-8 needs to make crystal clear ­– once again – that it will honor its commitment to increase aid to Africa by $25 billion per year by 2010.
That way, cynics within the G-8 governments can understand their assignments.
Moreover, unlike in 2005, the G-8 needs to present a plan of action.
The lack of specific commitments by specific countries is a shocking display of governance at its poorest.
Finally, recipient countries need to be informed about the year-to-year increases in aid that they can expect, so that they can plan ahead.
The increased aid should be directed at building roads, power grids, schools, and clinics, and at training teachers, doctors, and community health workers.
All of that investment requires plans and years of implementation.
Aid cannot be a guessing game.
It must be committed in clear terms over a period of several years, so that recipients can use it in a sensible and accountable manner.
Admittedly, part of the problem with the G-8 is not simply lack of good faith or political will, but basic competence.
The US government doesn’t really know what it is doing in Africa, because over the years America’s aid agency has been largely emptied of its leading thinkers and strategists.
Moreover, the Bush administration politicized the delivery of aid by channeling it through private religious groups that are part of the administration’s political coalition.
That’s the reason that much of the US funding on AIDS follows religious strictures rather than science.
Fortunately, what needs to be done is not complicated.
African countries have already identified their high-priority investments in health, education, agriculture, and infrastructure (including roads, power, and internet connectivity).
These investments could be increased systematically during the period from now until 2015, in order to enable these countries to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
The plans are already on the table, or at least on the shelf, waiting for the G-8 funding to arrive.
It’s time for the rich countries to stop giving lectures to the poor, and instead to follow through on their own words.
And G-8 citizens must hold their governments accountable for what they have pledged but not delivered.
The Gambler of North Korea
SEOUL – After a painstaking investigation, South Korea is pointing the finger of blame at North Korea for the sinking of its warship, the Cheonan, on March 26.
The debate about how to respond is complicated by the fact that the Cheonan’s sinking does not seem to be a stand-alone event, but was, instead, part of a change in North Korea’s general pattern of behavior.
Indeed, North Korea has become increasingly bold and impetuous ever since Kim became ill (probably from a stroke) in August 2008.
In the past, top North Korean leaders tended to calculate carefully the costs and benefits when they acted to put pressure on the outside world.
And they were inclined to play only one of their “threat” cards at a time.
But in April and May 2009, they threw diplomatic caution to the wind, launching a long-range rocket (as well as various missiles) and conducting a second nuclear test – all in the space of several weeks.
As soon as the international community reacted, by adopting United Nations Security Council Resolution 1874, North Korea quickly shifted to a charm offensive aimed at the United States and South Korea.
The authorities released two American journalists and a South Korean worker whom they had seized in August 2009 on charges of violating North Korean law.
But when the North Korean regime realized that smile diplomacy did not get it whatever it was they wanted, the country’s rulers shifted back to hostility.
This time, the authorities froze South Korean real estate in the Geumgang Mountain tourist zone and, most seriously of all, attacked the Cheonan.
The regime even dispatched two spies to Seoul to assassinate Hwang Jang-yop, the highest-level North Korean official ever to defect to South Korea.
I believe that this change in North Korea’s pattern of behavior is profoundly related to recent fundamental changes there.
First, Kim Jong-il and his third son, Kim Jong-un, may have become much more confident as a result of North Korea’s emergence as a de facto nuclear state.
They seem to believe that possession of nuclear weapons provides them with far wider room for strategic and tactical boldness.
After all, they achieved what they wanted in defiance of enormous international pressure, and even succeeded in transferring nuclear technology to Syria several years ago without being punished.
Given such a run of successful gambles, why be timid?
The second change concerns Kim’s successor.
North Korea’s new boldness may reflect Kim Jong-il’s wish to polish the 26-year-old Kim Jong-un’s image as a strong and decisive leader.
Or, it may be that all of the provocations that have followed Kim Jong-il’s illness may be the work of Kim Jong-un himself.
In other words, the process of power transfer may be progressing much faster than anyone outside of North Korea has guessed.
Finally, long-term mismanagement and international sanctions have pushed the North Korean economy to the brink of collapse.
As a result, the regime may be trying to divert people’s attention from internal difficulties and push them to unite behind the emerging new leader.
The attack on the Cheonan may have been particularly useful in cementing the regime’s hold on the military, which felt disgraced by North Korea’s inept performance in a confrontation with the South Korean navy near the Northern Limit Line in the West Sea in November 2009.
But, compared to the more fundamental factors discussed above, I believe that this is probably a secondary motive for the attack on the Cheonan.
The problem is that all three factors – nuclear-armed boldness, the succession, and economic malaise – will continue to influence North Korea’s behavior for the time being.
Without a strong and internationally coordinated response to the sinking of the Cheonan, such reckless provocations are not only likely to continue, but may become more frequent.
Thus, South Korea and the international community must respond firmly.
A joint South Korea-US military exercise near the Demilitarized Zone or a joint anti-submarine exercise at the Northern Limit Line should be considered.
A UN Security Council resolution denouncing North Korea’s brutal attack on the Cheonan must be an essential part of any international diplomatic response.
Making North Korea pay a high economic cost for its rash behavior should be considered as well.
All of these options are, however, short-term responses, and will likely be insufficient to bringing about any serious change in North Korea.
A more fundamental, long-term strategy is needed to face the new reality and achieve lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula.
One of the messages that Chinese President Hu Jintao delivered to Kim Jong-il at their bilateral summit on May 5 – concerning North Korea’s need to launch serious economic reform and open up to the world – has provided a clue as to how to move forward.
So far, the international community has focused mainly on the immediate concern of denuclearizing North Korea.
But this is merely addresses the symptom, not the disease.
It is past time for the international community – particularly China, Russia, the US, Japan, and South Korea – to devote similar diplomatic effort to persuading and pressuring North Korea to reform and open its economy. 
The world must develop a more carefully calibrated policy toward North Korea, one aimed at simultaneously implementing denuclearization and economic reform.
The added benefit of such an approach is that it is far more likely to gain Chinese support than today’s single-minded focus on denuclearization.
The Gaza Prison
GAZA CITY – It is easier to enter a maximum-security prison than it is to enter the strip of land – 45 kilometers long and maybe eight wide – that is home to Gaza’s 1.5 million Palestinians.
Surrounded by a forbidding wall, watchtowers, and deadly buffer zones, I entered with a hard-to-obtain visa at the Erez crossing – iron gates, an interrogation by bored young immigration officers and scanners.
On the other side is a kilometer-long caged walkway that leads into this part of Palestine, trapped between Israel, Egypt, the Mediterranean, and the general indifference of the international community.
The view walking – in sweltering heat – through that long cage is apocalyptic.
Small groups of Palestinians smash up the remains of Gaza’s bombed industrial infrastructure – the concrete blocks that litter the sandy landscape.
They pummel the blocks for gravel and the steel bars inside.
The result of their labor is hauled away in carts pulled by mangy horses or donkeys.
This is much of what passes for industry in Gaza.
The world periodically wakes up to the horrors of life in Gaza, and then goes back to watching the World Cup or planning summer holidays.
We were awakened, for example, by the military assault of December 2008 and January 2009, when more than 1,300 Palestinians (including over 300 children) and 13 Israelis died.
We noticed the long-running horror story again when the Israeli Defense Forces attacked a Turkish flotilla, carrying relief supplies, in May, with nine civilian fatalities.
You have to be careful with language when discussing Israeli actions.
Those who argue that there is a humanitarian crisis in Gaza should not compare the situation with Ethiopia or Sudan in the middle of a drought or a war.
Conditions in Gaza are harsh and the population does suffer.
Israel’s government has denied that people are starving and has relaxed its import restriction regime.
But the siege was never intended to starve Gazans; as Dov Weissglass, a former aid to Ariel Sharon, famously observed, the aim was “to put the Palestinians on a diet.”
The intention was collective punishment, imposed partly in response to Hamas’s political control of Gaza.
Hamas won the 2006 elections in the whole of occupied Palestine and formed a national unity government with Fatah.
America, Israel, and much of the international community then torpedoed that arrangement.
It was all very well having elections – until the wrong side won.
With the changes in the import controls on Gaza – there is now a list of what cannot be taken in, rather than of what can – more goods should arrive.
But the ability to buy the jams, muesli, balsamic vinegar, and pots of lemon curd that I saw in an up-market Gazan supermarket will not do much for ordinary people, 80% of whom depend on emergency food rations.
Moreover, ordinary Gazans cannot rebuild their homes and schools, because building materials remain proscribed, or are dribbled in only for UN projects.
No raw materials, which would allow the revival of Gaza’s commerce and industry, are permitted.
This is a central part of Israel’s policy, in flat defiance of international law and customary norms of civilized behavior.
With chocolate and cardamom now allowed into Gaza, Israel is applying a “smarter” siege, which will keep Palestinians here isolated, poor, and aid-dependent, but not starving.
When I was in Gaza before the Second Intifada, there were many examples of entrepreneurial activity – factories and farms.
Most of that has been stamped out.
As the assault on Gaza ended in 2009, Israeli military bulldozers flattened factories.
The imposition of a border zone has gobbled up 29% of the strip’s agricultural land.
But Israel and Egypt – partners in the siege – turn a blind eye most of the time to tunnels (perhaps as many as a thousand) that snake under the Egyptian border at Rafah and bring in black-market goods, which Hamas then taxes.
Decent would-be Palestinian businessmen (the potential backbone of a middle class) are destroyed.
Racketeers flourish.
Kafkaesque politics produces “Alice in Wonderland” economics.
You see some of the humanitarian problems stemming from the siege most clearly when visiting hospitals, as I did with the charity Medical Aid for Palestinians, of which I am President.
Life-saving drugs are in short supply, and equipment often does not work because of power cuts or the absence of spare parts.
Seriously ill patients require permission to be treated in West Bank hospitals, and some are reportedly pressed to collaborate with Israel’s security services in return for being allowed out.
Doctors and students can leave Gaza only rarely to attend conferences or universities abroad.
I strongly opposed the international call a year ago to boycott Israel’s universities.
But the Gaza blockade means that Israel boycotts Palestinian academic life.
It is time that Israel took its boot off Gaza’s windpipe.
Some in Israel, such as Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman, seem to want to cut off Gaza completely from the West Bank, in contravention of the Oslo accords (and the prospect of a two-state solution!), and push it in the direction of Egypt.
But Gaza remains an integral part of Palestine – and a growing part.
With its population increasing at 3.5% a year, the number of Gazans will double in about 15 years (the same timeframe in which the World Health Organization estimates that Gaza will run out of water for its population).
What type of world will the children you see in such prodigious numbers in Gaza inherit?  Will collective punishment make them moderate, law-abiding helots?
History is not on the side of this immorality.
I want to see Israel, a free, democratic society, live up to its original values and be at peace with its neighbors.
It will not achieve this through its appalling Gaza policy.
The world – starting with the US administration and the European Union – should tell that to Israel.
But don’t hold your breath.
The Gazpromization of European Energy Security
The term “energy security” in Europe has been hijacked to empower suppliers and weaken importers, implying a drastic reduction in competition, rising political vulnerability, and the erosion of the rule of law.
The fact that Russian President Vladimir Putin’s likely successor, Dmitry Medvedev, is Chairman of Gazprom leaves little doubt about the Kremlin’s determination to maintain an iron grip on the energy sector.
But the asymmetry in European Union-Russian energy relations must end.
Concerns in the EU over energy security, fueled by increasing dependence on Russia, have never been greater.
Together with the Russian authorities’ expropriation of oil company Yukos, foreigners have been squeezed out of Russia’s energy extraction sector. Inevitably, many in Europe are questioning the value of the Kremlin’s word.
Rather than turning away, the EU should seek deeper engagement and reciprocity.
It should facilitate further incorporation of Gazprom into the EU market through market liberalization and downstream integration.
Yet it must also press for Gazprom’s ultimate restructuring and real market entry into Russia for European companies, because Russia’s unwillingness to do so guarantees energy insecurity for Europe.
Indeed, the Putin administration established a track record of bending rules and bullying foreign investors, with the support of prosecutors, tax authorities, regulatory agencies, and courts.
Preemption by Gazprom has been accomplished through a raft of acquisitions.
Gazprom has flooded the market in Turkey, withheld gas in Ukraine, threatened to do so in Belarus, and offered preferential market access to willing partners, such as Italy.
In the Caucasus, the Kremlin has prevented Iran from establishing infrastructure to compete as a supplier of gas to Europe.
To stop Iran’s gas, Russia effectively bought Armenia’s entire energy sector, while its support for Iran’s nuclear program helps maintain Iranian isolation, keeping away the Western money Iran would need to become a rival gas exporter.
Gazprom’s dominance is reinforced by activities coordinated with the Kremlin to assert its influence in markets like Spain and Italy.
In exchange for gas deals with rival suppliers, such as Algeria, Russia has offered vast concessions on arms and preferential debt terms.
In other cases, the Kremlin acts punitively, as when it cut off oil supplies to Lithuania following the sale of the Mazeikiu Nafta refinery to a Polish company, or to Ukraine after its people voted for the “wrong” party.
The prime example of disaggregation is the Nord Stream pipeline, which appeals to Germany while angering Poland and the Baltic countries.
The undersea pipeline will cost three times as much as a new pipeline along existing land routes, undermines the energy security of Germany’s eastern neighbors, and threatens the Baltic Sea’s fragile ecosystem.
But, by delivering exports directly to Germany, Russia will be able to cut off gas to Ukraine, Poland, and the Baltic states without directly affecting West European supplies – and Russia’s recent behavior indicates that this is a real threat.
But Gazprom is worried about its upstream capabilities, as is evident from the decision to divert gas from its Shtokman field to Europe rather than liquify it for new North American markets.
As long as Gazprom remains opaque, Europe cannot know whether its key supplier is spending enough to develop future reserves.
The Kremlin’s political battle to win control of Russia’s energy sector has resulted in a dramatic reduction in the growth rate of domestic oil and gas production.
That is a problem for Europe.
Gazprom cannot be a partner to Europe if it does not invest in its own infrastructure, yet plays a leading role in stripping Russian private businesses, invests $14 billion in non-core assets, such as news media, and is run from the Office of the Presidential Administration.
The lights must not go out across Europe.
Brussels must demand transparency, symmetry, and the rule of law from Moscow, with the goal being a revolutionary integration of European and Russian energy markets.
Simultaneously, through the diversification of supply sources, massive investments in liquified natural gas (LNG), and a strong push in favor of the Nabucco pipeline and inter-connectors between the Mediterranean rim countries, Europe can move closer toward energy security.
The very downstream access Gazprom wants in Europe is the EU’s trump card.
The EU should tell Gazprom that access to Europe’s downstream assets is conditional on the reciprocal openness of Russia’s energy sector.
The result would be a welcome place in the European energy market for a Russia that is both trusted and respected by its international partners.
The Geopolitical Consequences of the Financial Crisis
PRINCETON – Worried investors and policymakers are becoming obsessed with Great Depression analogies.
But the lesson of 1931 is only in part financial or economic.  The 1931 crisis was so big and so destructive because it was a financial drama that played out on a geo-political stage.
Two surprising conclusions are emerging in today’s discussions, but only one has been fully digested.
First, big public sector action is needed.  Second, such action is complicated because in a globalized world the need for assistance spans borders.
First, private sector solutions have been tried but have failed in a breathtakingly short space of time.
The most frequent consolation in this failure is that a really bad crisis is purgative.
Insolvent businesses close, bad loans are written off, and lenders can lend with new confidence again.
But in a climate of profound uncertainty, self-help is not enough.  Governments or central banks are needed, because only they are both big and quick enough.
Only they could quickly come to the assistance of the giant housing finance institutions US Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and then deal with AIG.
The second question is what kind of government can do the job?
Now there will be plenty of reasons why the Chinese pulled back.
The logic sounds like the American case of 1931.  Some of the arguments that are reverberating around Beijing are very reasonable: there is a great deal of uncertainty, and the SWFs might lose a lot of money.
CIC would have initially lost some money with Lehman.
Of course, the Western powers must be applauded for their efforts, with the support of Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, to prevent a slaughter of Libya’s civilian population.
The democratic world should never stand by idly while a tyrant uses military force to massacre civilians.
But, if despots are to be deterred from untrammeled repression, any intervention – whether military or in the form of economic and diplomatic sanctions – must meet the test of impartiality.
The current political upheaval in the Arab world could transform the Middle East and North Africa in the same way that the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 fundamentally changed Europe.
Indeed, 1989 was a watershed, producing the most profound global geopolitical changes in the most compressed timeframe in history.
But, in the decades since, the Arab world’s rulers, regimes, and practices seemed to have remained firmly entrenched.
In 1989, Francis Fukuyama claimed in a famous essay that the Cold War’s end marked the end of ideological evolution, “the end of history,” with the “universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government.�� Yet, two decades on, the global spread of democracy has been encountering increasingly strong headwinds.
Only a small minority of states in Asia, for example, are true democracies.
In fact, a new bipolar, Cold War-style ideological divide has emerged.
The rise of authoritarian capitalism – best symbolized by China, but also embraced by countries as disparate as Malaysia, Singapore, Kazakhstan, and Qatar – has created a new model that competes with (and challenges) liberal democracy.
The popular upsurge in the Arab world shows that democratic empowerment hinges on two key internal factors: the role of security forces and the technological sophistication of the state’s repressive capacity.
In recent weeks, security forces have shaped developments in different ways in three Arab states.
Yemen’s popular uprising has splintered the security establishment, with different military factions now in charge of different neighborhoods in the capital, Sana.
In Bahrain, by contrast, the monarchy has used the foreign Sunni mercenaries that dominate its police force to fire on demonstrators, who are predominantly Shia.
In Egypt, it was the military’s refusal to side with former President Hosni Mubarak that helped end his 30-year dictatorship.
Long used to wielding power, the military had become increasingly wary of Mubarak’s efforts to groom his son as his successor.
Yet today’s heady talk of freedom cannot obscure the reality that the people’s “revolution” has so far led only to a direct military takeover, with the decades-old emergency law still in force and the country’s political direction uncertain.
As for the second key internal factor, a state’s ability to police mobile and electronic communications and Internet access has become as important as jackboots and truncheons.
China, for example, is a model of despotic efficiency: its internal-security system extends from state-of-the-art surveillance and extralegal detention centers to an army of paid informants and neighborhood patrols that looks out for troublemakers.
In response to calls by some overseas Chinese for people to gather on Sundays at specific sites in Shanghai and Beijing to help launch a molihua (jasmine) revolution, China has revealed a new strategy: preemptively flood the protest-designated squares with police to leave no room for protesters.
More importantly, as the world’s leader in stringent, real-time censorship of electronic communications, China is strongly placed to block any Arab contagion from reaching its shores.
External factors are especially important in smaller, weaker countries. Nothing illustrates this better than Bahrain, where Saudi Arabia – which has contributed more than any other country to the spread of global jihad – sent forces under the Gulf Cooperation Council banner to crush peaceful protests.
Indeed, Saudi Arabia’s effort to prop up the Bahraini regime parallels the Soviet Union’s intervention in Afghanistan in 1979 to bolster a besieged allied regime – an invasion that led to the multibillion-dollar, CIA-scripted arming of Afghan rebels and the consequent rise of transnational Islamic terrorists.
Libya, too, is a weak, divided country.
Indeed, with the CIA conducting covert operations inside Libya and aiding the rebels there, the danger is that the West could be creating another jihadist haven.
After all, the broadening of the NATO-led mission from a limited, humanitarian goal to an all-out assault on Libya’s military signals to some Arabs that this war is really about ensuring that the region does not slip out of Western control.
The intervention has seemingly been driven by a geopolitical imperative to bottle up or eliminate Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi so that his regime cannot exploit the political vacuum in neighboring Egypt and Tunisia.
While it is now clear that much of the Arab world is in transition, the end point is not yet clear.
But Barack Obama’s administration apparently has concluded that Arab monarchs are likely to survive, whereas Arab presidents are more likely to fall, and that it is acceptable for the United States to continue to coddle tyrannical kings.
Unfortunately, this double standard sends a message that democratic empowerment in any society is possible only if it is in the interest of the great powers.
No one has a greater interest in broad acceptance of this noxious idea – that promotion of human freedom is nothing more than a geopolitical tool – than the world’s largest, oldest, and most powerful autocracy, China.
The Geopolitics of Football
In football, defeat is never definitive, but it is always passionate.
For football lovers, FIFA (the governing body of international football) should have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize long ago.
For others, exasperated by football and the emotions it stirs up, the sport is no longer a game, but a type of war that stokes the basest sort of nationalist emotions.
Is there a relationship between football (and sports in general) and a spirit of nationalism and militarism?
During the Middle Ages, sports were regularly forbidden in England because they came at the expense of military training.
After France’s defeat by Bismarck’s Germany in the Franco-Prussian War, Baron Pierre de Coubertin (who re-launched the Olympic Games a few decades later) recommended a renewed national emphasis on sport, which by this point was seen as a form of military preparation.
In a football match, the rituals – the flag waving, the national anthems, the collective chants –and the language that is employed (the match starts with a “breakout of hostilities,” one “bombs” the goal, blows up the defense, launches “missile”) reinforce the perception of war by other means.
And, in fact, real war has actually broken out over football.
In 1969, Honduras and Salvador clashed after a qualification game for the World Cup.
Football matches can, it seems, revive national rivalries and conjure the ghosts of past wars.
During the 2004 Asia Nations Cup final, which pitted China against Japan, Chinese supporters wore 1930’s-style Japanese military uniforms to express their hostility to the Japanese team.
Other Chinese fans brandished placards with the number “300,000” written on it, a reference to the number of Chinese murdered by the Japanese army in 1937.
But can one really say that football is responsible for the currently bad diplomatic relations between China and Japan?
Of course not.
Hostility on the football pitch merely reflects the existing tense relations between the two countries, which carry the weight of a painful history.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, the dramatic semi-final between France and Germany in Seville in 1982 produced no political ripples, either for diplomatic relations between the two countries or for relations between the two peoples.
Antagonism was confined to the stadium, and ended when the match did.
What football really provides is a residual area of confrontation that allows for the controlled expression of animosity, leaving the most important areas of interaction between countries unaffected.
France and Germany will soon have a common army – they already have a common currency – yet the survival of national teams channels, within a strictly limited framework, lingering rivalry between the two countries.
Football can also be the occasion of positive gestures.
The joint organization of the 2002 World Cup by Japan and South Korea helped accelerate bilateral reconciliation.
The performance of the South Korean players was even applauded in North Korea.
Sport, indeed, seems to be the best barometer of relations between the divided Korean people.
Moreover, football, more than long speeches or international resolutions, can help induce progress towards peaceful solutions for military conflicts.
After their qualification for this year’s World Cup, the Ivory Coast’s national team, including players from the north and south, addressed all of their fellow citizens, asking the warring factions to lay down their weapons and to put an end to the conflict that has shattered their country.
After Haiti’s President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was overthrown a few years ago, Brazil’s football team acted as an ambassador for the United Nations’ Brazilian-led peacekeeping forces.
And, when conflict stops, from Kosovo to Kabul, football is the first sign of a society returning to normal.
The former president of the FIFA, Joao Havelange, often dreamed of a football match between Israelis and Palestinians: the American vice-president Al Gore regarded such a match as a means to help Washington solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Perhaps one day it will take place.
Certainly the Iran-United States football game in 1998 offered a moment of fraternization between the two teams.
Another Iran-US match might be helpful at this difficult time.
It is because football allows for symbolically limited confrontations, with no major political risks, that it is useful.
Its impact on national and international public opinion is broad, but not deep.
As the sociologist Norbert Elias put it: “The spectators of a football match can enjoy the mythical excitement of battles taking place in the stadium, and they know that neither the players nor they will suffer any harm.”
As in real life, fans can be torn between their hopes for victory and their fear of defeat.
But in football, the elimination of an adversary is always temporary.
A return match is always possible.
As a Frenchman, I cannot wait for the next World Cup match between France and Germany.