The turning point was the April 2006 people’s movement, when hundreds of thousands took to the streets for nineteen successive days.
The king was compelled to hand power back to the political parties, while a peace agreement emerged that ended the conflict, bringing the Maoists into an interim parliament and government and promising elections to a Constituent Assembly.
The people’s movement also took the lid off social pressures often disregarded by Nepal’s elites.
Although established as a unitary Hindu kingdom, with politics directed from the Himalayan foothills, today around half the population live in the fertile southern plains and more than one-third are from over 50 indigenous, largely non-Hindu communities.
Others are also historically marginalized from the social and political life of the nation, notably the Dalits, sometimes known as “untouchables,” who are at the bottom of the Hindu caste system.
For these groups, the restoration of democracy was a step toward social transformation, enabling them to participate more equally in the life of the country.
Given that the elections to the Constituent Assembly needed to ensure their representation, a complex system of quotas was devised.
Along with the success of socially diverse candidates fielded by the Maoists, the Constituent Assembly that was elected in April represents an unprecedented array of marginalized groups.
Women, too, had been almost invisible in political life – and, indeed, in the peace process.
Now nearly one-third of the Constituent Assembly’s members are women – the highest proportion in South Asia and fourteenth place in the world for nationally elected bodies.
The challenges that face Prime Minister Prachanda, the incoming coalition government, and the Constituent Assembly, are immense, and trust is fragile.
The Nepali Congress Party, for example, has chosen to remain in opposition, dubious of the Maoists’ commitment to democratic politics.
Nowhere in the world is the transformation of an armed insurgent group into a peaceful political movement quick or easy.
The Maoists enter the government still with their own army – confined to cantonments, with their weapons stored under UN monitoring – and a Young Communist League that has persistently acted outside the law.
Commitments to resolve the future of the Maoist combatants, along with what the peace agreements call the “democratization” of the state army, must now be implemented.
But the biggest challenges go to the roots of the insurgency: poverty, injustice, and discrimination.
One cost of the conflict has been the retreat of local governance and arrested development in a desperately poor country where over 80% of the population lives in rural districts.
Moreover, as Nepal aspires to become a federal democratic republic, expectations are high among diverse groups for greater control of their lives and resources.
But what federalism will mean in practice, taking account of the geographic and ethnic peculiarities of Nepal, remains elusive and potentially divisive.
Reaching a national consensus will be a formidable task for the Constituent Assembly, and meanwhile the Nepali people cannot be expected to wait patiently until a new constitution is drafted to see real improvement in their daily lives.
But there is reason to be hopeful.
Nepal’s peace process has been truly indigenous: it has not been mediated or managed by any external party.
The UN has encouraged and facilitated the process – through quiet good offices during the last years of the conflict, human rights monitoring, assistance to the Constituent Assembly election, and monitoring arms and armies during the transition.
The Maoist and non-Maoist parties have asked the UN to maintain a political presence while the issue of the former combatants is resolved, and we stand ready to support peace-building, recovery, and long-term development.
But the world, too, must be generous and steady in assisting Nepal to sustain the still fragile success of a remarkable peace process.
The Horseman of the Jewish Apocalypse
TEL AVIV – The nuclear agreement reached by Iran and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (China, France, Russia, the United States, and the United Kingdom), plus Germany, is not about Iran’s capitulation, as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu wished.
And it is about as imperfect as any negotiated agreement between disputing parties can be.
Nonetheless, it creates a solid framework to prevent Iran from producing nuclear weapons for the next 10-15 years – and that is a very positive development.
Netanyahu, if he wished, could take a lot of the credit for this achievement.
Had he not fueled global hysteria over Iran’s nuclear ambitions, the crippling international sanctions regime that eventually pushed Iran to a deal might never have been implemented.
But Netanyahu has stubbornly insisted that the agreement is a strategic fiasco, citing its ambiguities in matters such as the mechanism of inspection, the number of centrifuges Iran will be allowed to maintain, and the conditions for re-imposing sanctions if Iran breaches the accord.
In pursuing this course, Netanyahu has not only missed the opportunity to claim a major diplomatic victory; he has also reinforced Israel’s international isolation.
Netanyahu is now doing all he can to persuade the US Congress to pass a “resolution of disapproval.”
This is highly unlikely to occur, especially in an election year, given that it would require 13 Democratic senators and 48 Democratic representatives to break with US President Barack Obama.
Indeed, Netanyahu’s effort is succeeding only in turning Israel into an increasingly divisive partisan issue in US politics.
That is a dangerous game: The US has broken with the international community to support Israel in the past; it is less willing to do so today.
Even if Netanyahu managed to secure such a Congressional resolution, doing so would not serve his interests.
Given that the resolution would affect only US sanctions, it might not nullify the agreement, with the lifting of sanctions by all other international powers proving sufficient motivation for Iran to uphold its end of the bargain.
Worse, Iran could then decide to gallop toward the bomb, now with the support of countries like China and Russia, within an increasingly fragmented international system.
Despite the obvious problems with Netanyahu’s position, dismissing it would be a mistake.
Contrary to popular belief, he is not just a cynical politician in search of an agenda to deflect attention away from growing domestic problems and the conflict with Palestine.
His obsessive focus on Iran – not to mention the seemingly irrational calculus that is driving him toward a politically suicidal confrontation with the US, his country’s most important benefactor – stems from deep-rooted convictions, a system of political thought, and his own perspective on Jewish history.
Netanyahu is an ideologue of Jewish catastrophe.
His view of Jewish history reflects that of his father, the historian Benzion Netanyahu, who went to America in the 1940s to challenge the Allies’ failure to rescue European Jewry from the Holocaust, and thus to mobilize support for Zionism.
In fact, Netanyahu remembered his father’s efforts in his address to the US Congress last March.
But Netanyahu goes a step further than remembering the past.
Zionism was supposed to enable the Jews to break with their history.
Netanyahu, however, has imbued the Israeli state’s existence with all of the Jewish people’s past anxieties, pains, and struggles.
It does not matter that Israel possesses, according to foreign sources, a nuclear arsenal, as well as a robust economy and a strong alliance with the world’s most powerful country; for Netanyahu, it is essentially an old Jewish ghetto, attempting to hold out against relentless threats.
In this Hobbesian worldview, the threats can stem from virtually any development – political, strategic, or otherwise – and amount to existential challenges to the entire Jewish nation.
The only way to avoid catastrophe is to remain constantly vigilant.
By this logic, risks and challenges cannot be approached with a view toward resolution; they must be held up as reminders for the Jewish people to keep up their guard.
Netanyahu would dismiss as political lunacy the notion that the nuclear agreement opened a 10-15-year window for creative statesmanship to reshape regional politics.
A regional system of peace and security based on an accord with Arab countries that includes nuclear non-proliferation is, he would argue, the agenda of naïve dreamers, not of a leader so aware of the lessons of Jewish history.
Palestine is no different from Iran, from this perspective.
The Palestinian conflict is unsolvable, too; at best, it can be managed.
With Hamas control in Gaza reinforcing the view of Palestine as a threat, the issue galvanizes the Israeli-Jewish nation.
If Israel is to reverse its shift toward international isolation, and help build a stable regional security environment, it must change its approach.
Paranoia and antagonism must give way to sober politics, with Israeli leaders discussing potential strategic compensation with the US, working with other powers to address Iran’s support for Hamas and Hezbollah, and considering a credible revival of peace negotiations with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.
Israel’s Labour Party, which is now debating whether to join Netanyahu’s government, should consider carefully whether it can bring about such a shift.
If it cannot, and no other force emerges to do the job, Netanyahu’s prophecies of doom risk becoming self-fulfilling.
Bibi Goes to Washington
NEW YORK – Why did he do it?
What possessed Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin “Bibi" Netanyahu to accept an invitation from the Republicans in the US Congress to come and attack President Barack Obama's policy on Iran without letting the White House know?
Netanyahu claims that his was “a fateful, even historic mission" to voice his concern for the fate of Israel and all Jews.
But we already knew about his concerns – and that many Jews, in the US and elsewhere, do not feel that he was speaking for them.
Did Netanyahu crave the applause of his Republican supporters?
Is he gambling on the chance of a Republican presidency in 2016?
If so, he got the applause; but, given the current polls, the latter motive would be quite a gamble.
Or was Netanyahu simply using the US Congress as a venue for his own campaign to keep his job?
Did he wish to impress voters back home with a starring role on a world stage?
This, too, would seem to be a gamble: many Israelis, however worried they might be about an Iranian nuclear bomb, have been highly critical of Netanyahu's provocation of Obama, and of many Jewish Democrats.
Two former Mossad directors joined a chorus of Israelis in arguing that he should no longer be prime minister.
Meir Dagan, who resigned as the Israeli intelligence chief in 2011, called Bibi's grandstanding in Washington “destructive to the future and security of Israel."
Whatever his motives, Netanyahu has achieved what no Israeli leader ever has: not only infuriating the US president (who was already quite angry with him), but also earning the public rebuke of people who would normally have supported any Israeli leader, whatever they might have thought in private.
If an Israeli prime minister cannot even count on the backing of a man like Abraham Foxman, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League, he is in trouble.
By forcing Americans – and not just Jews or Democrats – to choose between their loyalty to Israel and the president of their own country, Netanyahu has punched a large hole in Americans' normally bipartisan support for Israel.
This is not to say that US politicians have always agreed with Israeli policies.
But few have thought it worth their while to express their criticism in public.
The benefits of doing so rarely outweigh the costs: lost campaign contributions, accusations of anti-Semitism, charges of betraying a close ally (“the only democracy in the Middle East"), and so on.
The fact that Israel could always count on US backing, especially on such public occasions as congressional speeches by an Israeli leader, only confirmed the assumption of many people around the world that Israel and the US are joined like Siamese twins.
Some think that Israel is the cat's paw of the US; others believe it is the other way around.
In the spirit of that notorious nineteenth-century czarist forgery, The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, anti-Semites think “the Jews" run the US government, Wall Street, and the media.
Such beliefs, of course, have been around for much longer than the modern state of Israel.
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century European nationalists often regarded the US as the natural home for capitalists and “rootless cosmopolitans" without any loyalty to their native soil.
Only money ruled in America, it was thought, so that meant that the Jews ruled.
Though it was Stalin who used the phrase “rootless cosmopolitans" to describe unwanted Jews, anti-Semites believed that Jews were natural Bolsheviks and probably pulled the strings in the Soviet Union, too.
It was widely assumed than Jews, whether capitalist or communist, knew no allegiance except to their own people; after 1948, that increasingly came to mean the state of Israel.
By claiming to be the leader of all Jewish people, wherever they live, Netanyahu has only strengthened that notion.
In fact, the US was not always as pro-Israel as it is today.
The French were Israel's greatest supporters until President Charles de Gaulle turned away from the Jewish state after the Six-Day War in 1967.
America's subsequent patronage of Israel had less to do with evangelical passion for the Holy Land, or a spontaneous love for the Jewish people, than with the Cold War.
But over time, especially in conservative political discourse, criticism of Israel increasingly came to be regarded as not just anti-Semitic but also anti-American.
There is some truth to this view.
The old anti-Semitic myth about America being run by Jews has not completely disappeared – especially (but by no means only) in the Middle East.
But the almost automatic identification in Washington of US interests with Israel's has made it difficult to criticize either country without criticizing the other.
Now, by openly seeking to undermine the US president, Netanyahu is breaking that link.
He has made it easier for American Jews, even those who feel a deep devotion to Israel, to be critical of its leaders.
This will also make it less costly for American politicians to oppose Israeli policies with which they disagree.
Some might see this as a defeat for Israel.
In fact, the opposite may be true.
Bibi's ill-considered trip to Washington might be the best thing that could have happen to Israel.
It is in neither country's interest to be seen as the other's pawn.
And a tougher US stance toward its ally might force the Israelis to try harder to come to terms with the Palestinians.
This is not what Netanyahu intended.
But it might end up being his greatest achievement.
A Raisin in the Israeli Sun
WASHINGTON, DC – Decades of efforts to reduce the death toll from drunk driving in the United States produced the mantra, “Friends don’t let friends drive drunk.”
After Israel’s election last week, the country’s friends around the world should adopt a similar slogan: “Friends don’t let friends govern blind.”
Israel’s blindness is self-induced.
Its government cannot solve the conflict with the Palestinians on Israeli terms, so it has decided to behave as if the entire issue did not exist.
Astonishingly, when Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu addressed the United States Congress earlier this month, his 39-minute speech about Iran’s existential threat to Israel did not contain a single mention of the Palestinian people.
Campaigning at home, however, he talked only about the threat some Palestinians pose to Israeli security today, never of the opportunity that other Palestinians offer for peace tomorrow.
Israeli voters chose the politics of fear over the politics of possibility.
Whether to support the right or the center-left was a classic choice between guns and butter, security and prosperity.
The Zionist Union, the principal opponent of Netanyahu’s Likud party, focused mostly on domestic issues like housing, the high cost of living, and growing economic inequality.
Netanyahu emphasized the threat Israel faces from Iran, the Islamic State, and Hamas.
He even added a racist dimension to the fear mongering on Election Day, warning that, “Arab voters are coming out in droves to the polls.”
During the campaign, Netanyahu also renounced any possibility under his government of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
An interviewer with an Israeli news site asked, “Are you saying that if you are Prime Minister, a Palestinian state will not be created.”
Netanyahu answered: “Correct.”
Once secure in his victory, Netanyahu immediately retracted the statement.
He claimed that he meant only that a two-state solution was not achievable under current conditions, as long as the Palestinian Authority is in a coalition with Hamas and as long as vacated territories bring the “rise of militant Islam.”
But it is too late for clarifications.
Palestinians heard clearly and explicitly what they have long assumed: the Israeli government has no interest in reaching a peace deal.
It would prefer to keep building settlements and to hunker down behind security walls.
That is a tragedy, because it drives both sides into a cycle of action and reaction that ultimately will make impossible a negotiated two-state solution – the kind of solution in which each side gives up something it wants in order to gain something that both sides want more.
Israel now faces three scenarios, all of them bad.
One is increasing international isolation and the politicization of support for Israel in the US, traditionally its staunchest military and diplomatic ally.
Younger US voters, generations removed from the Holocaust, do not share most of their elders’ reflexive habit of support for Israel.
They do not see Israel the way Israel sees itself, as a nation under threat; instead, they see a government that has explicitly aligned itself with the Republican Party.
They will also begin to question why the US stands with Israel in the United Nations when even America’s closest allies in Europe and elsewhere have begun to peel away.
Though Netanyahu received many rounds of applause when he addressed Congress, more than 60 Democrats boycotted his speech.
Losing the support of Europeans and a significant number of Americans cannot be good for Israel’s security and prosperity.
The Palestinians will now pursue with renewed determination and vigor a path to statehood through unilateral recognition.
If they succeed, Israel will face a Palestinian state with borders to which it did not agree and a continuing conflict that will become a formal inter-state war, subject to international law.
If the Palestinians fail, they will most likely turn again to violence: a third intifada, bigger and with greater international support than the first two.
Israel will have no option but to repeat the horrors of recent Gaza wars on a much larger scale, filling the world’s media with images of dead children, destroyed schools and hospitals, and heavily armed Israeli troops taking on rock-throwing teenagers.
That is not an experience that Israel or its friends could possibly want.
Netanyahu thinks that he can build a fence and let the problem simply fester forever.
But one should heed the words of Langston Hughes’ famous poem, which became a refrain of the US civil rights movement.
In a slightly abridged version, it reads:
“What happens to a dream deferred?
Does it dry up
like a raisin in the sun?
Or fester like a sore—
And then run?
Maybe it just sags
like a heavy load.
Or does it explode?”
Successive Israeli governments have shown that they can meet and contain explosions of Palestinian frustration and rage.
But each time they do, Israel loses a little more of its soul.
Israel is a special and vibrant country, filled with talented, hard-working, and committed people who have much to contribute to the world.
But right now its leaders, by ignoring Palestinian dreams, are courting a nightmare.
Netanyahu’s Choice
Ramallah – As the summit between US President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu approaches, most of the discussion has focused on whether or not the newly elected Israeli leader will finally say that he backs a two-state solution.
This is the wrong approach.
Israelis should not determine the status of the Palestinian entity, nor should Palestinians have a say in what Israelis call their own state.
The only question that Obama should ask Netanyahu is, When will Israel quit the occupied Palestinian territories?
Attempts at obfuscation – whether by talking about an “economic peace,” or insisting that Arabs recognize the Jewishness of the state of Israel – should not be allowed to derail the goal of ending the inadmissible occupation.
During Obama’s first meeting with a Middle East leader, a simple and courageous Arab plan was outlined.
Empowered by Arab leaders, Jordan’s King Abdullah II officially presented the peace plan devised by the Arab League and the Organization of Islamic States.
Despite the Israeli wars on Lebanon and Gaza, Arabs offered  normal relations with Israel once it quits the lands that it occupied in 1967.
The plan also calls for a  “fair” and “agreed upon” resolution of the Palestinian refugee problem.
The fact that Israelis and Palestinians need to agree on a solution of the refugee issue neutralizes unwarranted Israeli fears about the demographic threat posed by the Palestinians’ right of return.
Last summer, when he was shown a poster with 57 flags representing the Arab and Islamic countries that will normalize relations with Israel, then candidate Obama told Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas that the Israelis would be “crazy” to reject that plan.
Obama’s impressive signals since taking office – telephoning Arab leaders before European allies, appointing special envoy George Mitchell and speaking on Al-Arabiyeh for his first interview – reflect a different approach from the staid and unimaginative past.
The US has repeatedly opposed the 1967 Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories and has called for its end.
It has consistently voiced disapproval of settlement activities.
Leaders of both major US parties have articulated a policy that calls for a viable, contiguous Palestinian state on the lands occupied in 1967.
The US has also opposed Israel’s unilateral annexation of East Jerusalem, and – along with every country on the planet – refused to recognize the application of Israeli law to residents of East Jerusalem.
Yet Israel's actions on the ground have gone counter to American and international positions.
The newly established Israeli government refuses even to pay lip service to the internationally accepted requirements for peace.
On the other hand, the freely elected Palestinian leadership faces international boycott until it accepts a solution that the Netanyahu government rejects.
Among the international community's demands of Israel has been a total freeze on all settlement activity, including expansion and natural growth.
Freezing settlement will certainly be a central focus of the robust diplomacy of Mitchell and his team.
Mitchell, who was deeply involved in crafting the settlements language of the Mitchell Report of 2001, understands the capacity of the settlements to destroy the prospect for a two-state solution.
Jerusalem is another on-the-ground issue that will be a litmus test for the Obama administration.
Demolition of Palestinian houses and Israeli provocations in East Jerusalem highlight the need to confront this issue without delay.
The focus of Pope Benedict XVI’s visit to the Middle East was Jerusalem’s importance to Christians, Muslims, and Jews, so that attempts to Judaize the Holy City must stop immediately.
A third imperative for Palestinians is to reunite the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Irrespective of the outcome of the internal Palestinian dialogue taking place in Cairo, there is a need to reconnect Palestinians.
There is no excuse why Palestinians living in either remaining sliver of Mandatory Palestine should be barred from traveling to the other part of the occupied Palestinian territories.
Israeli officials’ claims that barring the movement of people and goods is required for security reasons do not withstand scrutiny.
Under the leadership of US General Keith Dayton (Mitchell’s security deputy), the most vigorous security checks can be made to allow such travel.
With renewed peace talks, results must be stressed over endless process.
The last failed promise by President George W. Bush came at Annapolis in late 2007, when he vowed that an independent, viable, and contiguous Palestinian state would be created before the end of his term.
More than four decades after United Nations Security Council resolution 242, occupying land by force, illegal construction of exclusive Jewish settlements, and restrictions on movement continue unabated.
Time is no longer on the side of those who favor two states.
The Obama administration must seize the initiative and insist that Netanyahu unequivocally support Israeli withdrawal from the Occupied Territories – the sine qua non for a two-state solution.
Otherwise, tension looms in the Israeli-American relationship, and calls for one state with equal rights for all will begin to drown out older ideological visions, as settlement activity forecloses the prospect of two states.
Netanyahu the Palestinian
PHILADELPHIA – In January, Israeli voters will go to the polls for an election that promises to hand Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu a renewed mandate.
Few prospects are more loathsome to the Israeli left, US President Barack Obama’s administration, most European leaders, or many American Jews.
But no one regards the prospect of another Netanyahu government with more anguish than the Palestinians.
In the Arab-Israeli conflict’s long, tortured history, they have reviled no Israeli prime minister – with the possible exception of Ariel Sharon – more than Netanyahu.
The reason is simple: he is one of them.
Literally, of course, he is not.
But, unlike previous Israeli prime ministers (again, with the possible exception of Sharon), Netanyahu has emulated the Palestinian political strategy of sumud, or steadfastness.
The philosophy of sumud is rooted in Palestinians’ implacable belief in the righteousness of their cause and the justness of their methods.
It operates both passively and actively in Palestinian culture, demanding stubbornness and tolerating ruthlessness, violence, and duplicity.
At sumud’s core lies the unswerving, blinkered view that Israel is illegitimate and its duration limited.
As a result, Palestinian leaders have for decades mobilized their society to outlast Israel.
Indoctrination begins at a young age through family, education, and media, and later encourages more aggressive resistance, including terrorism.
In other words, Palestinians are playing a long game.
But plans for a functioning Palestinian state that do not depend on foreign aid have been conspicuously absent, save for the recent efforts of Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Salam Fayyad.
Netanyahu’s version of sumud is evident in his policies and rhetoric, which focus on Israel’s legitimacy, necessity, and permanence.
Indeed, his speeches frequently offer lessons in Jewish history, while casting the “Holy Land” as both a Jewish right and an Israeli national symbol.
Addressing the United Nations in September, Netanyahu highlighted his core message for all, especially Israelis: “Three thousand years ago, King David reigned over the Jewish state in our eternal capital, Jerusalem. I say that to all those who proclaim that the Jewish state has no roots in our region, and that it will soon disappear.”
Such rhetoric compliments a long-term strategy of strengthening Israeli control over core areas, especially Jerusalem and its suburbs.
Indeed, while settlement-building in the West Bank has slackened, it continues.
Moreover, aggressive counter-terrorism activities and the separation barrier have decisively reduced cross-border attacks, containing mounting pressure in Palestine as the conflict remains on the back burner.
And Netanyahu continues to oversee economic expansion and improved foreign relations, despite hostile rhetoric from Europe and elsewhere.
The Palestinians seem to recognize Netanyahu’s variety of sumud for what it is.
His steadfastness – and declining international interest in their struggle, as the world’s focus shifts to the Arab Spring’s Islamist winter – stymies any advance toward an agreement.
The US is, perhaps, equally frustrated.
Israeli prime ministers are supposed to come in two varieties: heavily accented Eastern European men and grizzled military officers who talk a good game before acquiescing to the latest American or international demands for concessions, talks, and aid.
While previous prime ministers like Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir were not averse to lecturing, they lacked strategic cunning.
Netanyahu’s unwillingness to compromise disconcerts, confuses, and often enrages Americans.
His relentless disquisitions on Israel’s strategic environment, security requirements, red lines, and Jewish history are offset only by conciliatory talk about reopening negotiations, which are immediately reject by the Palestinians, who, like him, fear showing weakness.
Furthermore, Netanyahu’s unsentimental assessment of the Middle East does not line up with that of the Obama administration – in thrall to its collapsing romance with moderate Islamists – and its devoted supporters among Jewish Americans.
These groups do not understand Netanyahu, who proclaims Jewish rights, defends his country’s interests, and hints at conciliation but gives up little – much like a traditional Arab leader.
Despite considerable Israeli disgust with Netanyahu’s party, allies, and policies, no credible rival exists.
Israelis grudgingly accept that the country and its geopolitical situation are relatively stable, especially in view of its immediate neighborhood – a burning Syria, a smoldering Egypt, and a volatile Lebanon.
Moreover, those variables that could upend Netanyahu’s re-election – the situation in Gaza and Lebanon, for example, or deteriorating conditions in Sinai and Jordan, any of which could drag Israel into unwanted military operations – now appear unlikely to influence the outcome.
As a result, Netanyahu’s position is strong.
The Palestinians initiated a zero-sum game that has given him the upper hand.
By using the Palestinians’ own strategy, he has cornered them.
After all, genuine peace efforts by the Palestinians – based on a two-state solution with no “right of return” for post-1948 refugees – would enrage Hamas and revive factional violence, adding another self-defeat to an already long list.
With such help from the Palestinians – for example, Hamas bitterly castigated Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas recently after he inadvertently implied giving up the right of return – Netanyahu may well rule Israel and Palestine for the foreseeable future.
Netanyahu’s Useless Demand
HAIFA – Ever since the Six Day War of June 1967, a small number of Israelis, not all on the left, supported the idea of two states as a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Most of their compatriots rejected it, as did the Palestinians.
Israelis justified their stance with this question: Just when did the Palestinians become a nation deserving of statehood?
The Palestinians were asking in return: Why should the Jews, a religious community dispersed around the world, have their own state?
A lot of water had to pass under the bridge before the idea of a two-state solution, whether as a moral or a practical matter, began to filter into the Israeli and Palestinian political and ideological environments.
People gradually became accustomed to the expression “Palestinian state,” and those who embraced it received support and gained prestige on the international scene.
After the Labor leaders Shimon Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, and Ehud Barak embraced the two-state concept, there came the first tentative movements in that direction from Likud members: Tzipi Livni, Ehud Olmert, and Ariel Sharon.
Now, from the very bastion of the right, came Benjamin Netanyahu.
We can congratulate ourselves: better late than never!
We are all aware that the road toward the realization of this dream is full of obstacles and difficulties, both on the Israeli and the Palestinian side.
I believe that some of the preconditions posed by the Israeli prime minister in his recent, widely reported speech are fully justified.
Others, however, are useless and only complicate further an already complex and problematic situation.
Netanyahu’s demand that the future Palestinian state be demilitarized is just, reasonable, and necessary.
One look at a map is enough to understand this.
Even Egypt, a great and sovereign nation, accepted demilitarization of Sinai as a part of its peace process with Israel.
Indeed, demilitarization of Sinai is one of the fundamental elements of the stability of Egypt’s peace with Israel.
Other great and independent countries, such as Japan, Germany, and Austria, have been subjected for decades to limitations on their acquisition of certain weapons and military equipment.
Similarly, the refusal of Palestinian refugees’ claim to a right of return to Israel proper is understandable, logical, and just.
What sense would it make to bring back millions of Palestinians into a state whose character and symbols are foreign to them – a state where the majority belongs to another ethnic group?
Are they to go back to homes and farms that no longer exist?
These refugees could much more properly establish themselves in the new state of Palestine, their mother country, among their compatriots, under a Palestinian flag and Palestinian authority, merely 30 kilometers from the homes and farms that they abandoned, or from which they were expelled, more than 60 years ago.
But the other condition demanded by Netanyahu, that the Palestinians recognize the right of the Jewish people to their own state, or the existence of the Jewish nation, is completely arbitrary.
In my opinion, it is superfluous to ask the Palestinians to recognize the nationhood of a people with thousands of years of history and a state that maintains diplomatic relations with 150 countries around the world.
A demand of this kind was not made of Egypt or Jordan when Israel signed peace agreements with those countries, and it constitutes an entirely useless obstacle on the road to peace with the Palestinians.
It will be more than sufficient to ask the Palestinians to recognize the legitimacy of the state of Israel, a state whose territorial boundaries and political identity are known to all.
On our part, we also will be recognizing not so much the Palestinian people, which one day may merge with the people of Jordan, as an independent and sovereign Palestinian state within the 1967 borders.
Framing the issue in this way makes sense for two reasons.
First, the question of Jewish nationality is, in fact, very complicated, even for Jews themselves, as many consider themselves Jewish only in a religious sense.
Second, the Palestinians’ refusal to recognize Israel as a Jewish state is motivated by, among other things, the presence of a Palestinian minority in Israel.
But relations between Israel’s Jewish majority and Arab minority is an internal, delicate question in which it is not wise to involve Palestinians outside of Israel.
For more than 60 years, the two groups have managed to live together in an acceptable manner, confronting with relative dignity the inferno of terrorism and the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza strip.
With the advent of peace, we all hope that this bond will become consolidated around a common Israeli citizenship.
There will be enough problems in negotiating the creation of a Palestinian state, so we should avoid adding other, gratuitous obstacles.
Let’s focus on resolving the most important of the problems – demilitarization, settlements, borders, and refugees – and allow the reality of peace to leave behind, or postpone until the distant future, the solution of problems that are essentially historical and theological.
Kewajiban Net-Zero
OXFORD – Dunia telah mencapai kesepakatan bersejarah tentang perubahan iklim.
Kesepakatan yang dihasilkan di Konferensi Perubahan Iklim PBB di Paris mengikat negara-negara untuk mengambil tindakan guna menjaga ambang batas kenaikan suhu “di bawah” 2ºC dibandingkan dengan tingkat pra-industri dan “mengupayakan” untuk menekan kenaikannya hingga 1.5ºC.
Kesepakatan ini juga mewajibkan negara-negara maju untuk memberikan dana bantuan sebesar $100 miliar per tahun kepada negara-negara berkembang.
Namun sayangnya, perundingan akhir menghilangkan satu angka yang paling bermakna bagi masa depan bumi: nol (zero).
Angka nol mencerminkan jumlah karbon dioksida (net amount) yang bisa dilepaskan jika kita ingin menstabilkan suhu bumi di tingkat berapapun.
Nol, nihil, zero, nada.
Sistem atmosfer-laut dalam sistem iklim bumi ibarat bak mandi yang terisi dengan karbon dioksida dan gas rumah kaca lainnya. Semakin besar jumlahnya, semakin tinggi dan panas suhu bumi.
Keran emisi harus dimatikan setelah bak mandi mencapai tingkat yang terkait dengan tingkat pemanasan tertentu – misalnya 2ºC, dimana setingkat lebih dari itu, hampir semua ilmuwan sepakat bahwa risiko-risiko akan semakin parah, titik balik tidak lagi mustahil, dan kemampuan peradaban manusia untuk beradaptasi tidak terjamin.
Jika tidak, bak mandi atmosfer akan terus terisi, menjadikan pemanasan bumi dengan suhu 3º, 4º, 5ºC dan seterusnya hingga emisi akhirnya berhenti – atau kita menjadi punah.
Semakin cepat kita mematikan keran, semakin rendah suhu yang menstabilkan iklim, semakin kecil risiko yang harus dihadapi, dan semakin sedikit biaya yang harus dikeluarkan untuk adaptasi pemanasan bumi.
Hanya sekitar setengah dari karbon dioksida yang dilepaskan tetap berada di atmosfer – sisanya dengan cepat berpindah ke lautan dan biosfer.
Namun, ketika lautan semakin tersaturasi dan kemampuan penyerapannya berkurang, jumlah yang terdistribusi akan berkurang.
Demikian juga, kenaikan suhu menyebabkan tanah melepaskan lebih banyak karbon dioksida hingga menyebabkan pemanasan yang lebih buruk.
Satu-satunya cara untuk mengeluarkan karbon dioksida setelah tersimpan dalam bak mandi itu ialah – secara harafiah – menciduknya dengan gayung.
Terdapat proses alami untuk “re-fossilize” karbon dioksida namun proses ini terlalu lamban untuk bisa berpengaruh besar.
Teknologi carbon capture and storage (CCS) menangkap karbon dioksida dari sumber emisi seperti batubara dan pembangkit listrik bertenaga gas dan disimpan di bawah tanah.
Meskipun CCS tidak melakukan apapun terhadap karbon dioksida yang sudah tersimpan di bak mandi, CCS secara teknis mampu mengurangi emisi dari batubara dan gas hingga mendekati angka nol.
Namun teknologi ini sangat mahal dan upaya pengembangannya bergerak secara perlahan.
Dari CCS skala besar, ini hanya langkah kecil untuk mengambil karbon dioksida di udara dan kemudian dipisahkan.
Akan tetapi beberapa teknologi “pembuangan CO2” masih pada tahap pengembangan yang masih dini.
Jika kita membiarkan kondisi terus seperti ini, perbaikan
Jadi kita sedang berlomba.
Bisakah kita mengubah keran ke emisi nihil (zero net emissions) sebelum bak mandi mencapai tingkat yang membawa kita melebihi ambang batas 2ºC yang ditetapkan di Paris?
Pada kenyatannya, batasan tersebut bahwa masih terlalu tinggi.
Sebagaimana diakui dalam kesepakatan Paris, banyak ilmuwan percaya bahwa pemanasan di atas 1.5ºC  akan berisiko dan adaptasi membutuhkan biaya sangat besar, khususnya bagi negara-negara berkembang dan kepulauan.
Kabar baiknya adalah jika kita entah bagaimana berhasil menghentikan semua emisi sekarang, suhu akan terus naik selama satu dekade atau lebih, sebelum akhirnya stabil.
Tetapi dengan keran emisi yang masih mengucur dengan deras, bak mandi semakin cepat terisi.
Kita akan melepaskan kurang dari setengah emisi karbon dioksida sejak dahulu hingga sekarang, sebelum kita melebihi ambang batas 2ºC.
Berdasarkan kondisi saat ini, kita akan mencapai titik tersebut pada tahun 2040-2050.
Ini sebabnya mengapa sebagian besar ilmuwan dan pemimpin bisnis dan investor menyerukan tujuan yang jelas agar emisi nihil (net-zero) harus diwujudkan sebelum pemanasan mencapai 2ºC.
Pada bulan Mei 2015, Kamar Dagang Internasional (International Chamber of Commerce) dan para Direktur Utama/CEO dari seluruh dunia menyerukan emisi nihil.
Di Paris, para investor terkemuka dan Gubernur Bank of England, Mark Carney, serta CEO Bloomberg, Michael Bloomberg, juga mendorong perwujudan emisi nihil, dengan menyebutkan risiko-risiko sistemik akibat perubahan iklim bagi sistem keuangan.
Ini merupakan tujuan yang mengirimkan pesan jelas bahwa industri-industri penghasil CO2 harus melakukan perubahan atau terpaksa bangkrut, dan pesan bahwa masa depan terletak pada teknologi dan usaha yang nihil emisi.
Walaupun tujuan net-zero dihapuskan oleh para negosiator di Paris, tujuan ini harus disahkan oleh masing-masing negara dalam rencana mereka, ditegaskan oleh G-20, dan pada akhirnya diabadikan dalam perjanjian PBB.
Demi bumi kita, pilihannya adalah nol atau gagal (zero or bust).
The Myth of Net-Zero Emissions
BERLIN – The emissions from burning coal, oil, and gas are heating up our planet at such a rapid rate that increasingly volatile and dangerous climate conditions seem almost inevitable.
Clearly, we have to reduce emissions fast, while developing alternative energy sources that allow us to leave fossil fuels in the ground.
This imperative is almost shockingly straightforward.
Yet climate change has been subject to so much political inertia, false information, and wishful thinking for the last few decades that we continue to see ineffective or impossible solutions, rather than an effort to address root causes.
Often these “solutions” are based on non-existent or risky new technologies.
This approach is highly expedient, for it threatens neither business as usual nor socioeconomic orthodoxy.
But climate models that depend on elusive technologies weaken the imperative to enact the deep structural changes that are needed to avoid climate catastrophe.
The latest such “solution” to emerge is “net-zero emissions,” which depends on so-called “carbon capture and storage.”
Though the technology still faces more than a few shortcomings, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Chairman Rajendar Pachauri issued a deeply problematic statement last month, saying that, “With CCS it is entirely possible for fossil fuels to continue to be used on a large scale.”
To be fair, the IPCC’s latest assessment report highlights the imperative of cutting CO2 emissions drastically to avoid exceeding the world’s small – and still risky – carbon budget.
But to shift from clear-cut goals like “zero emissions,” “full decarbonization,” and “100% renewable energy” to the far hazier objective of net-zero emissions is to adopt a dangerous stance.
Indeed, the net-zero idea implies that the world can continue to produce emissions, as long as there is a way to “offset” them.
So, instead of embarking immediately on a radical emissions-reduction trajectory, we can continue to emit massive amounts of CO2 – and even establish new coal plants – while claiming to be taking climate action by “supporting” the development of CCS technology.
It is apparently irrelevant that such technology might not work, is riddled with practical challenges, and carries the risk of future leakage, which would have major social and environmental consequences.
Bioenergy with Carbon Capture and Storage is the poster child for the new “overshoot approach” of net-zero emissions.
BECCS entails planting a huge amount of grass and trees, burning the biomass to generate electricity, capturing the CO2 that is emitted, and pumping it into geological reservoirs underground.
BECCS would have enormous development implications, provoking large-scale land grabs, most likely from relatively poor people.
This is not some farfetched scenario; rising demand for biofuels has spurred devastating land grabs in developing countries for many years.
It would take a lot more land to offset a substantial share of CO2 emissions.
Indeed, an estimated 218-990 million hectares would have to be converted to switchgrass to sequester one billion tons of carbon using BECCS.
That is 14-65 times the amount of land the United States uses to grow corn for ethanol.
Nitrous-oxide emissions from the vast amount of fertilizer that would be required to grow the switchgrass could be enough to exacerbate climate change.
Then there are the CO2 emissions from producing synthetic fertilizers; clearing trees, shrubs, and grass from hundreds of millions of hectares of land; destroying large reservoirs of soil carbon; and transporting and processing the switchgrass.
Even more problematic is the revelation that CCS and BECCS would most likely be used for “enhanced oil recovery,” with compressed CO2 pumped into old oil wells for storage, thereby creating a financial incentive to recover more oil.
The US Department of Energy estimates that such methods could make 67 billion barrels of oil – three times the volume of proven US oil reserves – economically recoverable.
Indeed, given the money at stake, enhanced oil recovery could actually be one of the motives behind the push for CCS.
In any case, no form of CCS advances the goal of a structural shift toward full decarbonization, which is what social movements, academics, ordinary citizens, and even some politicians are increasingly demanding.
They are prepared to accept the inconveniences and sacrifices that will arise during the transition; indeed, they view the challenge of creating a zero-carbon economy as an opportunity to renew and improve their societies and communities.
Dangerous, elusive, and pie-in-the-sky technologies have no place in such an effort.
A clear understanding of the climate crisis expands the range of potential solutions considerably.
For example, by banning new coal plants and shifting fossil-fuel subsidies toward the financing of renewable energy through feed-in tariffs, sustainable energy could be brought to billions of people worldwide, while reducing fossil-fuel dependency.
While such innovative and practical solutions are prevented from being scaled up, billions of dollars are pumped into subsidies that reinforce the status quo.
The only way to reform the system and make real progress toward mitigating climate change is to work to eliminate fossil fuels completely.
Vague goals based on nebulous technologies simply will not work.
Never Again to Genocide Trials
HEIDELBERG – Rarely does one read such hopeful news: in late June, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) acquitted former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadžić of genocide.
That might sound like a bad thing: Karadžić, who once warned Bosnia’s Muslims that war would lead them down the road to hell, surely deserves to be sentenced for the acts of which he was just acquitted – murder, siege, and slaughter almost beyond naming.
But for genocide? Better not.
In fact, we would be better off getting rid of genocide as a crime altogether.
The legal concept of genocide is so incoherent, so harmful to the purposes that international law serves, that it would be better if we had never invented it.
Karadžić’s acquittal – precisely because he is still on trial on other counts related to the same atrocities – is an opportunity to move toward the sensible goal of retiring it.
This was not just any acquittal.
The ICTY decided that, after a two-year trial, the prosecution had not presented enough evidence for&nbsp;any&nbsp;judge to find Karadžić guilty of genocide early in the Bosnian War (he faces a separate count for the July 1995 massacre at Srebrenica, and the prosecution is appealing the acquittal).
The court has been consistent: with just a few trials left, it has issued no convictions for genocide apart from Srebrenica.
The broader charge was always risky, but, for many advocates, it is an article of faith that genocide was Bosnia-wide.
Still, the problem with genocide is not narrow judging, but that the crime itself is doubly irredeemable: it is defective in its definition and troubling in its moral and political effects.
Genocide requires “special intent.”
A&nbsp;genocidaire&nbsp;must intend both to commit a defined crime and to destroy the victim’s group.
In domestic law, the motive behind a crime is usually irrelevant – and for good reason.
People have complex reasons for acting illegally.
War – a collective enterprise in which killing your enemies can be legal – increases that complexity.
Trying to prove genocidal intent has drawn prosecutors into thickets of interpretation – such as giving lessons on the history of Greater Serbia – that distract from trials’ forensic core and encourage their politicization, as defendants “hijack” proceedings with their own justificatory glosses.
But the alternative – relaxing evidentiary standards – would undermine values such as legality and reasonable doubt, which are essential to a fair trial.
Genocide’s stringent requirements mean that it is – and should be – difficult to convict a defendant.
That is consistent with our intuition that genocide is unique.
But, while granting supreme status to the “crime of crimes” may seem morally attractive, the gravitational effect of genocide distorts international law and politics.
Genocide makes other crimes seem less important.
When Goran Jelisić – a camp guard in Bosnia who called himself “the Serb Adolf” – was acquitted of genocide in 1999, one might have concluded from the prosecution’s stunned reaction that Jelisić had walked free.
In fact, he confessed to 31 other counts covering the same underlying acts, and was sentenced to 40 years in prison.
Likewise, reactions to the Karadžić decision show how inflated the perceived stakes are.
Some say that acquitting him denies his victims’ suffering – as if only genocide mattered.
But it is only because acknowledgement of suffering has become identified so dogmatically with one crime that anything else seems inadequate.
The problem extends beyond Bosnia.
Asking “Was it genocide?” does little to illuminate what was done to which Armenians by which Ottomans during World War I. Today, Turks willing to discuss or even apologize for the massacres refuse to confess to the “supreme crime,” but Armenians can accept no other label.
Any group whose suffering is not called “genocide” feels like a second-class victim.
This is morally perverse.
It is not more&nbsp;wrong to kill people because of their ethnicity than it is to kill them because of their political beliefs, gender, or for the sheer pleasure of watching them die.
Yet this is precisely what elevating genocide presupposes.
The political cost is high.
Genocide’s status eases the pressure to intervene in crises that are “only murderous.”
Yet crying genocide too liberally quickly cheapens its value, entangling efforts to respond to ongoing exterminations in debates about their precise legal nature.
Despite these problems, prosecuting genocide might be worthwhile if it were the only way to hold mass murderers accountable.
But it is not.
Buried beneath the headlines about Karadžić’s acquittal are those other charges: he will be tried for the same acts, but classified as crimes against humanity and war crimes.
If the prosecution produces enough evidence, Karadžić will be sentenced for the same shelling and sniping, the same killings and rape.
All that will be lost is the opportunity to label those acts “genocide.”
This is the real reason to drop “the crime of crimes”: its redundancy.
There is no act of genocide that is not also another crime.
Genocide is a crime of characterization, an interpretation.
Rather than parse killers’ motives, we better affirm our own values by denying that any reasons could ever justify such acts.
Genocide is a socially meaningful way to describe a species of annihilation; it is the legal category that we must question.
We need international crimes that are minimally characterized – commonsensical analogues of domestic crimes – with as little room for interpretation as possible.
In court, we need not know why men slaughter to condemn them for it.
So let us end genocide as we know it – by stopping genocides, but also by abandoning the crime of genocide.
Let us call its constituent evils by their ancient names.
That will do for Karadžić, when judgment comes: he is still on trial, and we can still name his crimes.
New Alliances for a New Century
In 1970, I traveled to Egypt as part of a delegation representing the United States at the funeral of President Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Back then, Egypt was closely aligned with the Soviet Union.
When we arrived in Cairo, it seemed that everywhere one looked there was evidence of the Soviet presence – Soviet tanks, missiles, and troops.
During the visit, we were scheduled to meet with Anwar Sadat.
No one in our delegation was sure what to expect, given the uneasy relations between our two countries at the time.
To our surprise, Sadat told us that he, in fact, had respect for the US.
It is important to note that since 2001, the US has probably done more things, with more nations, in more constructive ways, and in more parts of the world, than at any other time in its history.
In the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, President George W. Bush helped fashion and lead the largest coalition in history – 80-plus nations – to fight the global war on terror.
Furthermore, roughly 60 nations are currently cooperating in the Proliferation Security Initiative to prevent dangerous weapons and materials from being transported to terrorists or outlaw regimes.
There has been a rethinking of the structure and role of our traditional military alliances, including the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which is setting up a new NATO Response Force and has moved outside Europe for the first time with the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
The focus of attention today is on Iraq and Afghanistan.
But in future decades, priorities will change.
And much of what we may be called on to do in the future will likely be determined by choices made by others.
Consider Russia, a nation with vast natural resources, an educated population, and a rich heritage of scientific and cultural achievements.
Like Americans and others around the world, they are threatened by violent extremism.
Russia is a partner with the US on some security issues, and our overall relationship is the best it has been in decades.
But in other ways Russia has been unhelpful – using energy resources as a political weapon, for example, and in their resistance to positive political changes in neighboring countries.
The same holds true for China.
The Chinese people are educated and talented, and their country has great potential, with high economic growth rates and an industrious work force.
Nonetheless, some aspects of Chinese behavior remain unsettling and complicate our relationship.
Last year, a US Department of Defense report noted that China’s defense expenditures appear to be much higher than acknowledged by the Chinese government.
Coupled with a notable lack of transparency, this understandably concerns China’s neighbors.
In addition to the choices that these and other countries make, America’s own choices will be an important factor determining what kind of future it faces.
From time to time, US public sentiment has opposed playing an active role in the world and fulfilling our commitments to allies – and, indeed, to the cause of freedom.
In the early 1970’s, as US ambassador to NATO, I remember having to fly back from Europe to testify against legislation in our Congress that would have pulled US troops out of Western Europe and NATO, just as the Soviet Union was in the midst of a huge military buildup.
Today, nations that were members of the Soviet Union’s Warsaw Pact, as well as some of the former Soviet Republics – countries that we used to call “captive nations” – are valued members of NATO and represent some of our most stalwart allies in the War on Terror.
This did not happen by accident or by chance.
Looking forward, I am convinced that if we have the wisdom, courage, and strength to adjust long-standing strategic arrangements, embrace new partners, and, above all, persevere in the face of adversity and difficulty, we will see a similar victory in this “long war” against violence extremism and the other threats that may emerge in an uncertain new century.
New and True Europeans
The fiasco of the European Union’s summit in Brussels has brought into sharp relief differences in attitudes between most new member countries from East Central Europe and the “old” members.
Perhaps surprisingly for many, such differences were not played out according to the expected script, in which the new members would be ruthlessly pragmatic, and demanding as much EU money as they could get, while most Western countries would in the end tone down their national egoism in favor of the decades-old ideals of European integration.
In the end, it was the EU’s eastern flank—the supposedly money-hungry and immature democracies—that called most loudly for a compromise in the name of salvaging political integration, while most of the old European democracies ruthlessly fought for their own “national interests.”
In view of some big countries’ intense national egoism, the failure to agree on the EU’s 2007-2013 budget could have ominous political consequences for Europe.
Statements by new EU members’ leaders at the summit indicated that they were aware of such a possibility.
They were worried about the EU’s future—certainly more so than their Western counterparts.
Some warned that the rejection of the European Constitution in the French and the Dutch referendums, combined with the summit’s decision effectively to suspend the ratification process and its failure to agree on EU finances, could trigger a serious political crisis in the EU.
This is why most new members were ultimately willing to support Luxembourg’s proposed compromise, under which the budget would be only 1.06% of the EU’s overall GDP and Great Britain’s annual rebate would be frozen at €4.6 billion.
Indeed, just before the ultimate collapse of the talks, five new members, including the Czech Republic and Slovakia, agreed to an even more radical plan, under which the budget would be only 1% of the EU’s GDP.
Cynics may argue that the new member countries could afford to make such concessions because they would end up with hefty EU subsidies anyway.
The net contributors to the EU budget were the ones who stood to lose the most.
Viewed in strictly economic terms, it is not surprising that Great Britain would not give up its rebate, while France would reject attempts to cut farm subsidies.
But what is surprising is that it was the old, experienced European democracies that so blithely ignored the political dangers stemming from the potential revival of intense nationalism on the European continent, while it was the new, inexperienced democracies from Europe’s east that called for caution.
Perhaps this was because the eastern countries’ attitudes are more driven by recent historical memories and experiences.
In a mere 15 years, all of these countries have endured economic and political changes unprecedented in their scope and speed in the history of Europe.
For most of these countries, EU membership was not merely a ticket to economic prosperity, paid for by rich EU old-timers.
On the contrary, they knew that they would have to do most of the work themselves—albeit under EU guidance and with the help of EU know-how.
Perhaps this is one reason why many in East Central Europe believe that EU funds, while helpful, are less important than being part of a united Europe, with the expanded opportunities that its common rules imply.
Moreover, the EU offers the small countries sandwiched between Germany and Russia a degree of political stability and security that they never had in modern history.
The rest they can manage on their own.
In contrast, West European states do no longer seem so concerned with the political dimension of European integration.
They take it for granted and are more concerned with their domestic constituencies.
Perhaps understandably, most citizens of West European states—accustomed to the political stability and economic prosperity of the last several decades—do not want to give up the benefits that the European integration process has brought to them.
The French, for example, do not want to lose farm subsidies, just as they are not eager to give more money to the new members, whose reformed economies are taking away French jobs. British leeriness about giving up the EU rebate in the face of what is perceived as French egoism is equally understandable—despite the fact that this stance harms the enlargement process, which Great Britain otherwise supports.
Even so, East Central Europeans, who are still recovering from the terrible political calamities caused by Europe’s historical demons, find the intensity of their Western counterparts’ national egoism a bit frightening.
Europe’s history is full of catastrophes that were produced by the shortsightedness of national political elites.
How many times have European leaders thought they had things under control, only to unleash the demons again?
This is not to suggest, of course, that just because the EU cannot agree on a budget or a constitution Europe is approaching yet another historical calamity.
But caution is in order, and the political elites of big national states, in particular, should ponder whether they are not overplaying their hands once again.
Although the collapse of the common currency area owing to political squabbles seems unlikely at this point, it cannot be ruled out entirely.
Obviously, we also cannot completely rule out the possibility of a subsequent weakening or disintegration of Europe’s common political structures.
For the small, economically still-fragile states of East Central Europe, a Europe of national states, once again fighting ruthlessly for their own interests, is a nightmare.
But it should be a nightmare scenario for all European states.
Perhaps those in the West should listen more to their new partners.
By agreeing to significant compromises, the leaders of some new member states were, among other things, trying to show that rekindling strong national egoism in Europe is a dangerous, if not uncontrollable, game.
Getting Anxiety Right
NEW YORK – When researchers want to evaluate the efficacy of new anxiety treatments, the traditional approach is to study how rats or mice behave in uncomfortable or stressful situations.
Rodents shun brightly lit, open spaces, where, in the wild, they would become easy prey.
So their natural tendency in a test apparatus is to find areas that are poorly illuminated or close to walls.
The longer a medicated animal spends in areas in which it is unprotected, the more effective the drug is judged to be in treating anxiety.
But the drugs that have resulted from this approach are not actually very good at making people feel less anxious.
Neither patients nor their therapists consider the available options – including benzodiazepines like Valium and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors like Prozac or Zoloft – as adequate treatments for anxiety.
After decades of research, some of the big pharmaceutical companies are raising the white flag and cutting back on efforts to develop new anti-anxiety drugs.
But we cannot afford to give up on treatment for the so-called anxiety disorders, which encompass problems related to both fear and anxiety.
Feelings of fear occur when a possible source of harm is nearby or likely to present itself, while feelings of anxiety usually involve the possibility of harm in the future.
Worldwide, the lifetime prevalence of anxiety disorders is about 15%, and the cost to society is enormous.
In the late 1990s, it was estimated that the economic burden of anxiety totaled more than $40 billion.
The total cost is most likely significantly higher, because many anxiety disorders are never diagnosed.
Counter-intuitively, the reason that the most frequently prescribed anxiety medications don’t address the underlying problem is that they are working exactly as they should – according to the criteria used to design them.
Most treatments based on studies using mice or rats do make anxiety disorders easier to live with.
What they fail to do is actually make people less fearful or anxious.
The reason for this is simple.
The brain systems that control behavioral responses in threatening situations are similar in rodents and humans, and involve older areas deep in the brain that work nonconsciously (for example, the amygdala).
On the other hand, the systems that produce conscious experiences, including feelings of fear and anxiety, involve evolutionarily new regions of the neocortex that are especially well developed in the human brain and poorly developed in rodents.
Conscious feelings are also dependent on our unique linguistic capacities – our ability to conceptualize and name our inner experiences.
It is telling that the English language has more than three dozen words for gradations of fear and anxiety: worry, concern, apprehension, unease, disquietude, inquietude, angst, misgiving, nervousness, tension, and so forth.
Consequently, though animal studies are useful in predicting how a drug will affect nonconsciously controlled symptoms triggered by threatening stimuli, they are less effective when it comes to conscious feelings of fear or anxiety.
The drugs we have can help patients who, in order to avoid situations that inspire fear or anxiety, such as crowded subways or being judged by their peers or superiors, have stopped going to work.
Just as medicated rats are less behaviorally inhibited (more able to tolerate bright, open spaces), medicated anxiety sufferers are more likely to be able to return to their jobs.
But, because the treatments do not directly address conscious brain processes, the anxiety itself does not always go away.
If treatments are to become more effective, our approaches will need to become more nuanced.
We will need to treat the systems that operate nonconsciously differently from those that result in conscious experiences.
This doesn’t necessarily mean better drugs.
Nonconscious responses can also be treated with exposure therapy, in which repeated interaction with a threatening stimulus is orchestrated in order to dampen its psychological effects.
Findings about how conscious and nonconscious brain systems work may enable us to make exposure therapy more effective.
The basic idea is that the symptoms involving nonconscious processes should be targeted separately from those involving conscious processes.
I suggest the following sequence.
Start with nonconscious exposures (using subliminal stimulation to bypass conscious thoughts and feelings that can be aroused and interfere with the exposure process) to dampen the response of areas like the amygdala.
Once the nonconscious systems are under control, use conscious exposures to treat conscious symptoms.
Finally, employ more traditional psychotherapies: Verbal interactions with the therapist aimed at helping patients work on changing beliefs, reevaluate memories, encourage acceptance of one’s circumstances, acquire coping strategies, and so on.
There is also a place for drugs in this approach, but not as a long-term solution.
Rather, drugs can be used to make the exposure treatment more effective (the pharmaceutical d-cycloserine has shown some promise in this regard).
The effectiveness of an approach that recognizes that different brain systems control different symptoms has yet to be properly evaluated, but research suggests that it should work.
It would also be noninvasive and would require only a repurposing of frequently used procedures.
Given the magnitude of the problem, a stone so easily reached should not be left unturned.
How Data Can Save Children’s Lives
SEATTLE – In an age in which data are more plentiful and accessible than ever before, we are accustomed to basing our decisions on as much evidence as we can gather.
The more important the decision, the keener we are to ensure that our research is thorough and our information is accurate.
And yet, when it comes to what is arguably one of the most important decisions we face today, we have very little data.
As part of the Sustainable Development Goals, adopted by the United Nations last September, the international community has pledged to end preventable deaths of children under the age of five by 2030.
And yet, in the regions with the highest mortality rates, we lack the most basic information about why children die.