Moreover, global financial stability now depends upon greater cooperation at the international level, with tighter enforcement of rules at the national level.
It is also clear that emerging markets are searching for alternative growth models that are green and sustainable.
Their financial sectors will have to operate very differently from the current model, which is driven by consumption.
In a world in which both consumption and finance must grow more slowly to cope with global resource and environmental constraints, what role can finance play in reducing addictive consumption, funded by unsustainable leverage?
And, given that financial institutions will have to monitor and manage risk in a radically different manner, both for themselves and their customers, what is the role of distribution in a world where consumption, savings, and investment will accelerate in volatility?
Financial “production” is currently a top-down process.
Instruments are designed in such a way that their sales generate more profits for financial engineers than for end users.
But the rise of interactive social networking has made financial innovation more bottom-up.
Millions of bank customers using mobile phones can provide immediate feedback on which products and services they like or dislike.
In the future, client-service and transaction-management systems will receive more input from customers more frequently, so that product design is shaped interactively.
The current strategy in the financial sector drives excessive competition by increasing market share at rivals’ expense, often breaking trust with customers for the sake of short-term gains.
Yet the financial sector has, in previous eras, proven that it can operate as a public good by providing trustworthy, efficient services.
The winning financial supply chains of the future will instill confidence that they offer safe, stable, and efficient services to the most clients.
Innovation in the last century focused on processes, products, and services.
Today, the financial sector needs innovation of a higher order, involving business models, strategy, and management approaches that restore trust in finance.
Just as Steve Jobs of Apple transformed the computer industry through lifestyle products and highly reliable, user-friendly, and “cool” services, financial institutions will have to introduce new value chains that create confidence by adapting to the growing needs of new markets.
Given such profound changes, financial leaders should think about how to orchestrate a new financial supply chain – the “killer app” for our still new century.
2008 Revisited?
NEW YORK – The question I am asked most often nowadays is this: Are we back to 2008 and another global financial crisis and recession?
My answer is a straightforward no, but that the recent episode of global financial market turmoil is likely to be more serious than any period of volatility and risk-off behavior since 2009.
This is because there are now at least seven sources of global tail risk, as opposed to the single factors – the eurozone crisis, the Federal Reserve “taper tantrum,” a possible Greek exit from the eurozone, and a hard economic landing in China – that have fueled volatility in recent years.
First, worries about a hard landing in China and its likely impact on the stock market and the value of the renminbi have returned with a vengeance.
While China is more likely to have a bumpy landing than a hard one, investors’ concerns have yet to be laid to rest, owing to the ongoing growth slowdown and continued capital flight.
Second, emerging markets are in serious trouble.
They face global headwinds (China’s slowdown, the end of the commodity super cycle, the Fed’s exit from zero policy rates).
Many are running macro imbalances, such as twin current account and fiscal deficits, and confront rising inflation and slowing growth.
Most have not implemented structural reforms to boost sagging potential growth.
And currency weakness increases the real value of trillions of dollars of debt built up in the last decade.
Third, the Fed probably erred in exiting its zero-interest-rate policy in December.
Weaker growth, lower inflation (owing to a further decline in oil prices), and tighter financial conditions (via a stronger dollar, a corrected stock market, and wider credit spreads) now threaten US growth and inflation expectations.
Fourth, many simmering geopolitical risks are coming to a boil.
Perhaps the most immediate source of uncertainty is the prospect of a long-term cold war – punctuated by proxy conflicts – between the Middle East’s regional powers, particularly Sunni Saudi Arabia and Shia Iran.
Fifth, the decline in oil prices is triggering falls in US and global equities and spikes in credit spreads.
This may now signal weak global demand – rather than rising supply – as growth in China, emerging markets, and the US slows.
Weak oil prices also damage US energy producers, which comprise a large share of the US stock market, and impose credit losses and potential defaults on net energy exporting economies, their sovereigns, state-owned enterprises, and energy firms.
As regulations restrict market makers from providing liquidity and absorbing market volatility, every fundamental shock becomes more severe in terms of risk-asset price corrections.
Sixth, global banks are challenged by lower returns, owing to the new regulations put in place since 2008, the rise of financial technology that threatens to disrupt their already-challenged business models, the growing use of negative policy rates, rising credit losses on bad assets (energy, commodities, emerging markets, fragile European corporate borrowers), and the movement in Europe to “bail in” banks’ creditors, rather than bail them out with now-restricted state aid.
Finally, the European Union and the eurozone could be ground zero of global financial turmoil this year.
European banks are challenged.
The migration crisis could lead to the end of the Schengen Agreement, and (together with other domestic troubles) to the end of German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government.
Moreover, Britain’s exit from the EU is becoming more likely.
With the Greek government and its creditors once again on a collision course, the risk of Greece’s exit may return.
Populist parties of the right and the left are gaining strength throughout Europe.
Thus, Europe increasingly risks disintegration.
To top it all off, its neighborhood is unsafe, with wars raging not only in the Middle East, but also – despite repeated attempts by the EU to broker peace – in Ukraine, while Russia is becoming more aggressive on Europe’s borders, from the Baltics to the Balkans.
In the past, tail risks were more occasional, growth scares turned out to be just that, and the policy response was strong and effective, thereby keeping risk-off episodes brief and restoring asset prices to their previous highs (if not taking them even higher).
Today, there are seven sources of potential global tail risk, and the global economy is moving from an anemic expansion (positive growth that accelerates) to a slowdown (positive growth that decelerates), which will lead to further reduction in the price of risky assets (equities, commodities, credit) worldwide.
At the same time, the policies that stopped and reversed the doom loop between the real economy and risk assets are running out of steam.
The policy mix is suboptimal, owing to excessive reliance on monetary rather than fiscal policy.
Indeed, monetary policies are becoming increasingly unconventional, reflected in the move by several central banks to negative real policy rates; and such unconventional policies risk doing more harm than good as they hurt the profitability of banks and other financial firms.
Two dismal months for financial markets may give way in March to a relief rally for assets such as global equities, as some key central banks (the People’s Bank of China, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan) ease more, while others (the Fed and the Bank of England) will remain on hold for longer.
But repeated eruptions from some of the seven sources of global tail risk will make the rest of this year – unlike the previous seven – a bad one for risky assets and anemic for global growth.
The Global Financial System’s Weakened Defenses
ZURICH – Eighty-five years ago this month, Credit-Anstalt, by far the largest bank in Austria, collapsed.
By that July, banks in Egypt, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania, and Turkey had experienced runs.
A banking panic hit the United States in August, though the sources of that panic may have been domestic.
In September, banks in the United Kingdom experienced large withdrawals.
The parallels to the 2008 collapse of the US investment bank Lehman Brothers are strong – and crucial for understanding today’s financial risks.
For starters, neither the collapse of Credit-Anstalt nor that of Lehman Brothers caused all of the global financial tumult that ensued.
Those collapses and the subsequent problems were symptoms of the same disease: a weak banking system.
In Austria in 1931, the problem was rooted in the breakup of the Austro-Hungarian Empire after World War I, hyperinflation in the early 1920s, and banks’ excessive exposure to the industrial sector.
By the time Credit-Anstalt collapsed, the world had been in deep recession for two years, banking systems in a number of countries had become fragile, and tensions were easily transmitted across national borders, with the gold standard exacerbating financial vulnerability by constraining central banks’ ability to act.
Similarly, in 2008, the entire financial system was overextended, owing to a combination of weak internal risk management and inadequate government regulation and supervision.
Lehman Brothers was simply the weakest link in a long chain of brittle financial firms.
Could a crisis like those triggered by the Credit-Anstalt and the Lehman Brothers collapse happen today?
One is tempted to say no.
After all, the global economy and the financial system appear to be on the mend; risk-taking in the private sector has been reduced; and huge, though burdensome, regulatory improvements have been undertaken.
Taken together, these developments surely make for a stable financial system.
The problem with this reasoning is that financial crises tend to reveal fault lines that were not visible before.
Indeed, the financial sector manages the risks that it recognizes, not necessarily all the risks that it runs.
And it is easy to overestimate the crisis-preventing power of the new regulatory environment, which is analogous to a new highway: It is technically safer than a country road, but it also attracts more cars that are traveling at much higher speeds, so traffic accidents continue.
Unable to rule out a new crisis, how well are we equipped to cope with one?
The short answer is: not very.
In fact, if a financial crisis were to occur today, its consequences for the real economy might be even more severe than in the past.
Of course, because central banks now recognize that their responsibilities extend beyond stabilizing prices to include the prevention and management of financial tensions, they would undoubtedly be quick to respond to any shock with a battery of market operations.
But, in the event of a crisis, the tools available to central banks to prevent deflation and a collapse of the real economy are severely constrained, especially today.
In the early twentieth century, central banks could all devalue their currencies against gold, thereby raising the price level and escaping debt deflation.
And, indeed, nine countries, including the UK, did exactly that in 1931, with another eight countries, including the US, following suit over the next five years.
Today, however, currency depreciation is a zero-sum game.
Without the joint-depreciation option, central banks responded to the 2008 crisis with interest-rate cuts that were unprecedented in scope, size, and speed, as well as massive purchases of long-term securities (so-called quantitative easing, or QE).
And those efforts were effective.
But interest rates remain extremely low, and are even negative in some countries, and QE has been taken close to its limits, with public support for the policy waning.
As a result, these tools’ ability to cushion an economy against further shocks is severely constrained.
While forward guidance by central banks has also helped, it, too, is unlikely to be able to provide an effective buffer against a new shock.
None of this is to say that another global financial crisis is necessarily imminent.
On the contrary, economies worldwide are making progress in recovering from the 2008 disaster, and the US Federal Reserve’s tightening of policy last December signals that the global interest-rate cycle is moving into the next phase.
This is good news.
But the danger of another financial crisis should not be ruled out.
Indeed, given that the capacity of central banks to cope with a financial shock will remain woefully limited for years to come, it should be taken very seriously. The risks of complacency are simply too great.
What Role for Global Governance?
WASHINGTON, DC – Can global governance solve most of our economic problems?
Or does it too often promise more than it can deliver, and divert attention from more practical reforms that national governments should implement?
In a recent commentary, Harvard University economist Dani Rodrik thoughtfully argues the latter.
Is he right?
To be sure, national policy has a more direct effect – good or bad – on a country’s citizens.
But we cannot ignore the global effects of bad national policies, the most obvious examples noted by Rodrik being greenhouse-gas emissions and infectious diseases.
People in the “country of origin” may pay a price, but so will the rest of us.
“Globalization” has been a catchword for decades, and the need for global governance has admittedly been exaggerated in recent years, especially by those on the center left.
This has led to calls for new alternatives, such as “responsible nationalism” or “inter-governmental” – as opposed to supranational – decision-making in the European Union.
Such proposals make for a healthy debate.
For example, we should reevaluate the current system for deciding trade agreements, which have become more about regulatory and investment issues than about eliminating import tariffs or other import barriers.
It is no surprise that even some free-trade supporters object to agreements that allow trade groups to insert language granting multinational corporations undue market power at the expense of consumer protection.
Still, the push for stronger global governance in recent years has not happened in a vacuum.
Countries have undoubtedly become more economically and socially interdependent, owing to trade, travel, and telecommunications, not to mention multinational corporate structures and international financial flows.
Global intercourse is broader, faster, and more ubiquitous than ever before.
Globalization may occasionally hit speed bumps, such as the current slowdown in world trade; but the underlying technological changes driving interconnectivity will only continue to bring people and countries closer together.
Ultimately, this is for the best, because the major challenges we face today are global in nature.
Efforts to mitigate the effects of climate change will require consistent global coordination.
Even local initiatives, which are increasingly important for addressing the problem, must fit into a framework of converging global policies and obligations.
Otherwise, people will not feel as though they are making a difference or contributing to a shared goal, and others will not feel pressure to do anything at all.
Another global challenge is taxation, which requires international coordination to stanch rampant avoidance and evasion.
The problem is not just individual “tax havens”; there is also a need to capture corporate profits that companies’ move internationally with complex devices such as “transfer pricing” and “tax-base shifting” to minimize their tax bill.
Disparate tax rules among different countries have resulted in close to a zero-sum game for national governments, which are forced to pursue beggar-thy-neighbor policies to secure a bigger slice of a shrinking pie.
Under the current system, countries have strong incentives to offer ever-greater tax advantages to companies operating within their borders, even though they stand just as strong a chance of being undercut by another country as companies shift their declared profits from one jurisdiction to another.
In most cases, companies are not doing anything illegal by taking advantage of this fragmented system.
But if countries are serious about reducing inequality and funding pensions and health care for their citizens, they will have to cooperate in global-governance efforts to prioritize fair taxation.
Climate change and taxation are just two issues requiring global coordination, but the list goes on.
The monetary policies of large reserve-currency central banks such as the United States Federal Reserve can have far-reaching spillover effects, as can self-destructive exchange-rate policies or regulations on cross-border financial flows.
In most of these cases, the damage runs downstream from large countries to smaller countries; however, if enough small countries are affected, the aggregate damage can flow back to the larger economies themselves, as we’ve seen in the European debt crisis.
Given the scale of these challenges, we have no choice but to cooperate internationally and strengthen global and regional institutions and frameworks such as the International Monetary Fund, the EU, and the G20, which will meet in Hangzhou, China, next month.
But global governance is not an either/or proposition.
When national or local policies are sufficient to address a problem, then they should be pursued.
Indeed, the principle of subsidiarity – whereby decision-making should occur at the most local level possible – is crucial to flexible, functioning global governance.
The presence of global-governance frameworks should never become an excuse for national or local inaction.
Public policy is a multi-level and multi-channel effort with local, national, regional, and global dimensions.
Ideally, policy debates should acknowledge this reality.
We also must acknowledge the urgency of shoring up faith in global governance from another perspective.
Across the US, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East, a resurgence of identity politics and xenophobic nationalism threatens to reprise the great tragedies of the twentieth century.
Against this backdrop, stressing the existence and needs of a global community is necessary not only for economic reasons, but also to help ensure a peaceful world.
The False Economic Promise of Global Governance
CAMBRIDGE – Global governance is the mantra of our era’s elite.
The surge in cross-border flows of goods, services, capital, and information produced by technological innovation and market liberalization has made the world’s countries too interconnected, their argument goes, for any country to be able to solve its economic problems on its own.
We need global rules, global agreements, global institutions.
This claim is so widely accepted today that challenging it may seem like arguing that the sun revolves around the earth.
Yet what may be true for truly global problems such as climate change or health pandemics is not true when it comes to most economic issues.
Contrary to what we often hear, the world economy is not a global commons.
Global governance can do only limited good – and it occasionally does some damage.
What makes, say, climate change a problem that requires global cooperation is that the planet has a single climate system.
It makes no difference where greenhouse gases are emitted.
So national restrictions on carbon emissions provide no or little benefit at home.
By contrast, good economic policies – including openness – benefit the domestic economy first and foremost, and the price of bad economic policies is primarily paid domestically as well.
Individual countries’ economic fortunes are determined largely by what happens at home rather than abroad.
If economic openness is desirable, it is because such policies are in a country’s own self-interest – not because it helps others.
Openness and other good policies that contribute to economic stability worldwide rely on self-interest, not on global spirit.
Sometimes domestic economic advantage comes at the expense of other countries.
This is the case of so-called beggar-thy-neighbor policies.
The purest illustration occurs when a dominant supplier of a natural resource, such as oil, restricts supply on world markets to drive up world prices.
The exporter’s gain is the rest of the world’s loss.
A similar mechanism underpins “optimum tariffs,” whereby a large country manipulates its terms of trade by placing restrictions on its imports.
In such instances, there is a clear argument for global rules that limit or prohibit the use of such policies.
But the vast majority of the issues in world trade and finance that preoccupy policymakers are not of this kind.
Consider, for example, Europe’s agricultural subsidies and ban on genetically modified organisms, the abuse of antidumping rules in the United States, or inadequate protection of investors’ rights in developing countries.
These are essentially “beggar thyself” policies.
Their economic costs are borne primarily at home, even though they may produce adverse effects for others as well.
For example, economists generally agree that agricultural subsidies are inefficient and that the benefits to European farmers come at large costs to everyone else in Europe, in the form of high prices, high taxes, or both.
Such policies are deployed not to extract advantages from other countries, but because other competing domestic objectives – distributional, administrative, or related to public health – dominate economy-wide motives.
The same is true of poor banking regulations or macroeconomic policies that aggravate the business cycle and generate financial instability.
As the 2008 global financial crisis showed, the implications beyond a country’s own borders can be momentous.
But if US regulators fell asleep on the job, it was not because their economy benefited while everyone else paid the price.
The US economy was among those that suffered most.
Perhaps the biggest policy letdown of our day is the failure of governments in advanced democracies to address rising inequality.
This, too, has its roots in domestic politics – financial and business elites’ grip on the policymaking process and the narratives they have spun about the limits of redistributive policies.
To be sure, global tax havens are an example of beggar-thy-neighbor policies.
But powerful countries such as the US and European Union members could have done much on their own to limit tax evasion – and the race to the bottom in corporate taxation – if they so desired.
So the problems of our day have little to do with a lack of global cooperation.
They are domestic in nature and cannot be fixed by rule making through international institutions, which are easily overwhelmed by the same vested interests that undermine domestic policy.
Too often, global governance is another name for the pursuit of these interests’ global agenda, which is why it ends up mainly furthering globalization and harmonizing domestic economic policies.
An alternative agenda for global governance would focus on improving how democracies function at home, without prejudging what the policy outputs ought to be.
This would be a democracy-enhancing rather than globalization-enhancing model of global governance.
What I have in mind is the creation of global norms and procedural requirements designed to enhance the quality of domestic policymaking.
Global disciplines pertaining to transparency, broad representation, accountability, and use of scientific or economic evidence in domestic proceedings – without constraining the end result – are examples of such requirements.
Global institutions already use disciplines of this type to some extent.
For example, the World Trade Organization’s Agreement on Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the SPS Agreement) explicitly requires the use of scientific evidence when health concerns are at issue for imported goods.
Procedural rules of this kind can be used much more extensively and to greater effect to improve domestic decision-making.
Anti-dumping rules can also be improved by requiring that consumer and producer interests that would be adversely affected by import duties take part in domestic proceedings.
Subsidy rules can be improved by requiring economic cost-benefit analyses that incorporate potential consequences for both static and dynamic efficiency.
Problems rooted in failures of domestic deliberation can be solved only through improved democratic decision-making.
Global governance can make only a very limited contribution here – and only if it focuses on enhancing domestic decision-making rather than constraining it.
Otherwise, the goal of global governance embodies a yearning for technocratic solutions that override and undercut public deliberation.
The Global Growth Funk
NEW YORK – The International Monetary Fund and others have recently revised downward their forecasts for global growth – yet again.
Little wonder: The world economy has few bright spots – and many that are dimming rapidly.
Among advanced economies, the United States has just experienced two quarters of growth averaging 1%.
Further monetary easing has boosted a cyclical recovery in the eurozone, though potential growth in most countries remains well below 1%.
In Japan, “Abenomics” is running out of steam, with the economy slowing since mid-2015 and now close to recession.
In the United Kingdom, uncertainty surrounding the June referendum on continued European Union membership is leading firms to keep hiring and capital spending on hold.
And other advanced economies – such as Canada, Australia, Norway – face headwinds from low commodity prices.
Things are not much better in most emerging economies.
Among the five BRICS countries, two (Brazil and Russia) are in recession, one (South Africa) is barely growing, another (China) is experiencing a sharp structural slowdown, and India is doing well only because – in the words of its central bank governor, Raghuram Rajan – in the kingdom of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.
Many other emerging markets have slowed since 2013 as well, owing to weak external conditions, economic fragility (stemming from loose monetary, fiscal, and credit policies in the good years), and, often, a move away from market-oriented reforms and toward variants of state capitalism.
Worse, potential growth has also fallen in both advanced and emerging economies.
For starters, high levels of private and public debt are constraining spending – especially growth-enhancing capital spending, which fell (as a share of GDP) after the global financial crisis and has not recovered to pre-crisis levels.
That falloff in investment implies slower productivity growth, while aging populations in developed countries – and now in an increasing number of emerging markets (for example, China, Russia, and Korea) – reduce the labor input in production.
The rise in income and wealth inequality exacerbates the global saving glut (which is the counterpart of the global investment slump).
As income is redistributed from labor to capital, it flows from those who have a higher marginal propensity to spend (low- and middle-income households) to those who have a higher marginal propensity to save (high-income households and corporations).
Moreover, a protracted cyclical slump can lead to lower trend growth.
Economists call this “hysteresis”: Long-term unemployment erodes workers’ skills and human capital; and, because innovation is embedded in new capital goods, low investment leads to permanently lower productivity growth.
Finally, with so many factors dragging down potential growth, structural reforms are needed to boost potential growth.
But such reforms are occurring at suboptimal rates in both advanced and emerging economies, because all of the costs and dislocations are frontloaded, while the benefits occur over the medium and long term.
This gives opponents of reform a political advantage.
Meanwhile, actual growth remains below the diminished potential.
A painful deleveraging process implies that private and public spending need to fall, and that savings must rise, to reduce high deficits and debts.
This process started in the US after the housing bust, then spread to Europe, and is now ongoing in emerging markets that spent the last decade on a borrowing binge.
At the same time, the policy mix has not been ideal.
With most advanced economies pivoting too quickly to fiscal retrenchment, the burden of reviving growth was placed almost entirely on unconventional monetary policies, which have diminishing returns (if not counter-productive effects).
Asymmetric adjustment between debtor and creditor economies has also undermined growth.
The former, having overspent and under-saved, had to spend less and save more when markets forced them to do so, whereas the latter were not forced to spend more and save less.
This exacerbated the global savings glut and global investment slump.
Finally, hysteresis further weakened actual growth.
A cyclical slump reduced potential growth, and the reduction in potential growth prospects led to further cyclical weakness, as spending declines when expectations are revised downward.
There are no politically easy solutions to the global economy’s current quandary.
Unsustainably high debt should be reduced in a rapid and orderly fashion, to avoid a long and protracted (often a decade or longer) deleveraging process.
But orderly debt-reduction mechanisms are not available for sovereign countries and are politically difficult to implement within countries for households, firms, and financial institutions.
Likewise, structural and market-oriented reforms are necessary to boost potential growth.
But, given the timing of costs and benefits, such measures are especially unpopular if an economy is already in a slump.
It will be no less difficult to leave behind unconventional monetary policies, as the US Federal Reserve recently suggested by signaling that it will normalize policy interest rates more slowly than expected.
Meanwhile, fiscal policy – especially productive public investment that boosts both the demand and supply sides – remains hostage to high debts and misguided austerity, even in countries with the financial capacity to undertake a slower consolidation.
Thus, for the time being, we are likely to remain in what the IMF calls the “new mediocre,” Larry Summers calls “secular stagnation,” and the Chinese call the “new normal.”
But make no mistake: There is nothing normal or healthy about economic performance that is increasing inequality and, in many countries, leading to a populist backlash – both on the right and the left – against trade, globalization, migration, technological innovation, and market-oriented policies.
Global Imbalances without Tears
CAMBRIDGE – Doctors have long known that it is not just how much you eat, but what you eat, that contributes to or diminishes your health.
Likewise, economists have long noted that for countries gorging on capital inflows, there is a big difference between debt instruments and equity-like investments, including both stocks and foreign direct investment.
So, with policymakers and pundits railing against sustained oversized trade imbalances, we need to recognize that the real problems are rooted in excessive concentrations of debt.
If G-20 governments stood back and asked themselves how to channel a much larger share of the imbalances into equity-like instruments, the global financial system that emerged just might be a lot more robust than the crisis-prone system that we have now.
Unfortunately, we are very far from the idealized world in which financial markets efficiently share risk.
Of the roughly $200 trillion in global financial assets today, almost three-quarters are in some kind of debt instrument, including bank loans, corporate bonds, and government securities.
The derivatives market certainly helps spread risk more widely than this superficial calculation implies, but the basic point stands.
Certainly, there are some good economic reasons why lenders have such an insatiable appetite for debt.
Imperfect information and difficulties in monitoring firms pose significant obstacles to idealized risk-sharing instruments.
But policy-induced distortions also play an enormous role.
Many countries’ tax systems hugely favor debt over equity.
The housing boom in the United States might never have reached the proportions that it did if homeowners had been unable to treat interest payments on home loans as a tax deduction.
Corporations are allowed to deduct interest payments on bonds, but stock dividends are effectively taxed at the both the corporate and the individual level.
Central banks and finance ministries are also complicit, since debt gets bailed out far more aggressively than equity does.
But, contrary to populist rhetoric, it is not just rich, well-connected bondholders who get bailed out. Many small savers place their savings in so-called money-market funds that pay a premium over ordinary federally insured deposits.
Shouldn’t they expect to face risk?
Yet a critical moment in the crisis came when, shortly after the mid-September 2008 collapse of Lehman Brothers, a money-market fund “broke the buck” and couldn’t pay 100 cents on the dollar. Of course, it was bailed out along with all the other money-market funds.
I am not advocating a return to the early Middle Ages, when Church usury laws forbade interest on loans.
Back then, financial-market participants had to devise fantastic schemes and contortions to disguise interest payments.
Yet today the pendulum has arguably swung too far in the opposite direction.
Perhaps scholars who argue that Islamic financial systems’ prohibition on interest generates massive inefficiencies ought to be looking at these systems for positive ideas that Western policymakers might adopt.
Unfortunately, overcoming the deeply ingrained debt bias in rich-world financial systems will not be easy.
In the US, for example, no politician is anxious to say that home-mortgage deductions should be eliminated, or that dividend payments should be tax-free.
Likewise, developing countries should accelerate the pace of economic reform, and equity markets in too many emerging economies are like the Wild West, with unclear rules and lax enforcement.
Worse still, even as the G-20 talks about finding a “fix” for global imbalances, some of the policy changes that its members have adopted are arguably exacerbating them.
For example, we now have a super-size International Monetary Fund, whose lending capacity has been tripled, to roughly $750 billion.
Europe has similarly expanded its regional bailout facility.
These funds may prove to be an effective short-term salve, but, over the long run, they will likely fuel moral-hazard problems, and potentially plant the seeds of deeper crises in the future.
A better approach would be to create a mechanism for orchestrating orderly sovereign default, both to minimize damage when crises do occur, and to discourage lenders from assuming that taxpayers’ money will solve all major problems.
The IMF proposed exactly such a mechanism in 2001, and a similar idea has been discussed more recently for the eurozone.
Unfortunately, however, ideas for debt-restructuring mechanisms remain just that: purely theoretical constructs.
In the meantime, the IMF and the G-20 can help by finding better ways to assess the vulnerability of each country’s financial structure – no easy task, given governments’ immense cleverness when it comes to cooking their books.
Policymakers can also help find ways to reduce barriers to the development of stock markets, and to advance ideas for new kinds of state-contingent bonds, such as the GDP-linked bonds that Yale’s Robert Shiller has proposed. (Shiller bonds, in theory, pay more when a country’s economy is growing and less when it is in recession.)
Of course, even if the composition of international capital flows can be changed, there are still many good reasons to try to reduce global imbalances.
An asset diet rich in equities and direct investment and low in debt cannot substitute for other elements of fiscal and financial health.
But our current unwholesome asset diet is an important component of risk, one that has received far too little attention in the policy debate.
The State of Global Poverty
WASHINGTON, DC – The economic geography of the world is changing.
The eurozone faces the specter of another round of stagnation; Japan has slipped into recession; and the United States, despite relatively strong performance in the latter part of 2014, has raised concerns worldwide with its exit from quantitative easing.
Meanwhile, emerging economies have continued to perform well.
India and Indonesia are growing at more than 5% per year; Malaysia at 6%; and China by more than 7%.
The scale of the global change can be seen when purchasing power parity (PPP) – a measure of the total amount of goods and services that a dollar can buy in each country – is taken into account.
According to the figures for 2011, released last year, India is now the world’s third largest economy in terms of PPP-adjusted GDP, ahead of Germany and Japan.
The data also revealed that China would overtake the US as the world’s largest economy in PPP terms sometime in 2014 – a shift that, according to our estimates, occurred on October 10th.
Despite this progress, a large proportion of people in developing countries remain desperately poor.
Globally, the poverty line is defined as a daily income of $1.25, adjusted for PPP – a line that many criticize as shockingly low.
But what is truly shocking is that nearly one billion people – including more than 80% of the populations of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Madagascar, Liberia, and Burundi – live below it.
One reason global poverty has been so intractable is that it remains largely out of sight for those who are not living it, safely somebody else’s problem.
The fact that most participants in discussions about global poverty – the readers of this commentary included – know few, if any, people who live below the poverty line is an indication of the extent of the world’s economic segregation.
If poverty were communicable, its incidence would be far lower by now.
Fortunately, a chorus of voices, not just from civil-society groups, but also from international organizations, has given rise to a global movement to end poverty.
There is now a growing consensus that global poverty is not just a problem of the poor.
Though moral outrage is important, it is not enough when it comes to crafting policy.
Policymakers need data and, equally important, the ability to analyze it.
The first task is to distinguish between what is feasible and what is not.
For example, some have proposed including the provision of employment for all adults in the Millennium Development Goals’ successor framework, which is to be unveiled this year.
This is an impossible target.
All economies of any reasonable size will have some unemployment.
In fact, a limited amount of unemployment can help to promote development.
To declare “employment” a right is to divest the word “right” of its meaning.
Next, there must be recognition that economies are complex and interconnected.
Consider, for example, a government policy in which subsidies, funded with newly printed money, are handed out to residents of 1,000 villages.
This will not necessarily be a boon for the economy as a whole.
Injecting money might improve the living standards in the villages receiving the funds, but doing so may well drive up the cost of food throughout the country, causing residents of non-subsidized villages to fall into poverty.
The macroeconomic impact of micro-interventions is an important reason why poverty has persisted, despite well-meaning interventions to combat it.
Another reason poverty endures is persistent – and, in many places, widening – inequality.
The current level of global inequality is unconscionable.
In 2013, the World Bank, where I am Chief Economist, helped bring the term “shared prosperity” into everyday discourse by declaring, for the first time, that every society should make progress toward this goal its mission.
To be sure, there will always be a certain amount of inequality in the world; in fact, as with unemployment, a limited amount is desirable as a driver of competition and growth.
But the deep and pervasive inequality that exists today can only be condemned.
According to some back-of-the-envelope calculations, the wealth of the world’s 50 richest people totals $1.5 trillion, equivalent to 175% of Indonesia’s GDP, or a little more than Japan’s foreign-exchange reserves.
If one assumes that this wealth yields 8% per year, the annual income of the world’s 50 wealthiest people is close to the total income of the poorest one billion – in other words, those living below the poverty line.
This is a collective failure.
As 2015 begins, we must consider policies and interventions to curb such extreme inequality.
We must do this not only out of a sense of justice, but also because, in a world afflicted with such extreme disparities, its poorest residents lose their voice, even when they have the right to vote.
Extreme inequality is, ultimately, an assault on democracy.
This was clearly never the best approach. But, with a hegemonic United States willing and able to hold international institutions together, cooperation remained viable.
Today, the unpredictable statements of US presidential candidate Donald Trump and the more isolationist vision that he is encouraging among his supporters has the rest of the world nervous about the changing nature of America’s role in the world.
And America’s allies in Europe are not exactly at their most stable, owing to a combination of deep-rooted economic challenges, the United Kingdom’s looming exit from the European Union, and surging support for populist political forces in many countries.
Moreover, the US and its allies are not only unwilling to underpin global cooperation, they lack the capacity even to try.
The International Monetary Fund’s recent World Economic Outlook reports that the US and its allies will account for just 39% of global output in 2020, down sharply from 64% today, with the US share falling from 22% to 15%.
For the international institutions, this means that communication, compromise, and consensus are more important than ever – and not just among countries.
Given strong anti-establishment and even nationalist sentiment in many countries, international institutions must also be more open with – and responsive to – the global public that they are supposed to serve.
All of this demands a more meritocratic and unbiased approach to filling the top positions at the international institutions.
To assess the candidates fairly and effectively, five key criteria should be used.
First, candidates should have a proven ability not just to define a mission, but also to take on the more challenging task of mobilizing a broad coalition of stakeholders to achieve it.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for example, had little trouble identifying critical issues, from specific humanitarian crises in countries like Haiti, Myanmar, and Pakistan to broader challenges like climate change and global poverty. But his success in spurring countries to work together to address those issues is dubious.
Second, leaders must be able to persuade countries to fund their organizations.
Former African Development Bank President Donald P. Kaberuka convinced countries to double their contributions during his tenure; during the same cycle, the World Bank’s resources were increased by just one-third.
But it is not just a matter of getting more money.
Organizations need to focus on expanding their core resources, which are not tied to any specific task, rather than drawing more discretionary or earmarked resources.
Otherwise, they risk becoming hired hands for a few pet projects, rather than critical platforms for broad cooperation.
Unfortunately, in recent years, discretionary funding has largely taken over, and now accounts for more than 90% of resources in several agencies.
The International Organization for Migration, the importance of which has been underscored by the ongoing refugee crisis, relies entirely on discretionary funding.
To change this, international organizations need leaders who are convincing salespeople, which means that they must be widely perceived as genuine and trustworthy.
The third criterion for effective leadership of an international institution is strong, results-oriented management.
Successful candidates should already have experience leading an organization that performed well, achieving the results they set out to achieve.
There should be evidence that the candidate can translate a vision into a plan, with clear benchmarks against which progress can be measured.
The current slates of candidates is wanting in this regard.
This can have far-reaching consequences.
World Bank President Jim Yong Kim has faced substantial criticism for his handling of his flagship initiative: an internal restructuring.
That process has dragged on for four years, and many staff members claim that it is undermining the efficiency of lending operations.
While it is difficult to assess these claims reliably, a leaked internal survey of the organization’s employees indicates, at the very least, that the management culture needs improvement.
This is closely related to the fourth criterion: hiring (and retaining) the right staff.
No leader can do everything alone, so choosing a high-quality team is crucial.
If those working at the organization are unhappy, recruiting the most talented and motivated people will be nearly impossible.
Beyond creating an open, challenging, and supportive culture – reflected in internal surveys that are shared publicly (not leaked) – the leaders of international organizations must resist pressure from member countries to hire particular senior officials, who are not necessarily the highest-performing candidates.
Moreover, they must be willing and able to identify and remove inherited senior managers who are not up to standard.
The key words must be meritocracy and morale.
The final criterion for effective leadership of an international organization concerns accountability.
In the last couple of decades, heads of the IMF, the World Bank, and the UNHCR Refugee Agency have left office under a cloud of suspicion.
WASHINGTON, DC – The world economy has just been through a severe recession marked by financial turmoil, large-scale destruction of wealth, and declines in industrial production and global trade. According to the International Labor Organization, continued labor-market deterioration in 2009 may lead to an estimated increase in global unemployment of 39-61 million workers relative to 2007.
By the end of this year, the worldwide ranks of the unemployed may range from 219-241 million – the highest number on record.
Meanwhile, global growth in real wages, which slowed dramatically in 2008, is expected to have dropped even further in 2009, despite signs of a possible economic recovery.
President Yoweri Museveni, who is widely credited for integrating Uganda into world markets, has said that globalization is “the same old order with new means of control, new means of oppression, new means of marginalization” by rich countries seeking to secure access to developing country markets.
To ensure a durable exit from the crisis, and to build foundations for sustained and broad-based growth in a globalized world, developing countries in 2010 and beyond must draw the right lessons from history.
In the current crisis, China, India, and certain other emerging-market countries are coping fairly well.
These countries all had strong external balance sheets and ample room for fiscal maneuver before the crisis, which allowed them to apply countercyclical policies to combat external shocks.
They have also nurtured industries in line with their comparative advantage, which has helped them weather the storm.
Indeed, comparative advantage – determined by the relative abundance of labor, natural resources, and capital endowments – is the foundation for competitiveness, which in turn underpins dynamic growth and strong fiscal and external positions.
By contrast, if a country attempts to defy its comparative advantage, such as by adopting an import-substitution strategy to pursue the development of capital-intensive or high-tech industries in a capital-scarce economy, the government may resort to distortional subsidies and protections that dampen economic performance.
In turn, this risks weakening both the government’s fiscal position and the economy’s external account.
Without the ability to take timely countercyclical measures, such countries fare poorly when crises hit.
To pursue its comparative advantage and prosper in a globalized world, a country needs a price system that reflects the relative abundance of its factor endowments.
Firms in such a context will have incentives to enter industries that can use their relatively abundant labor to replace relatively scarce capital, or vice versa, thereby reducing costs and enhancing competitiveness.
Examples include the development of garments in Bangladesh, software outsourcing in India, and light manufacturing in China.
But such a relative price system is feasible only in a market economy.
This is why China – which appears to be faring well in the crisis, meeting its 8% growth target in 2009 – became an economic powerhouse only after instituting market-oriented reforms in the 1980s.
Indeed, all 13 economies with an average annual growth rate of 7% or more for 25 years or longer, identified in the
Pursuing its comparative advantage strengthens a country’s resilience to crisis and allows for the rapid accumulation of human and physical capital.
Developing countries with such characteristics are able to turn factor endowments from relatively labor- or resource- abundant to relatively capital-abundant in the span of a generation.
In today’s competitive global marketplace, countries need to upgrade and diversify their industries continuously according to their changing endowments.
A pioneering firm’s success or failure in upgrading and/or diversifying will influence whether other firms follow or not.
Government compensation for such pioneering firms can speed the process.
Industrial progress also requires coordination of related investments among firms.
In Ecuador, a country that is now a successful exporter of cut flowers, farmers would not grow flowers decades ago because there was no modern cooling facility near the airport, and private firms would not invest in such facilities without a supply of flowers for export.
In such chicken-and-egg situations, in which the market alone fails to overcome externalities and essential investments go lacking, the government can play a vital facilitating role.
This may be one of the reasons why the
The world is now so far down the path of integration that turning back is no longer a viable option.
We must internalize lessons from the past and focus on establishing well-functioning markets that enable developing countries fully to tap their economies’ comparative advantage.
As part of this process, a facilitating role for the state is desirable in developing and developed economies alike, although the appropriate role may be different depending on a country’s stage of development.
Ultimately, in today’s complex and interlinked world, even the most competitive economies need a helping hand as they climb the global ladder.
Globalization and Anti-Americanism
Anti-American sentiments are rising around the world.
American Democrats say that President Bush's policies have squandered America's attractiveness. Republicans reply that America is bound to be resented because of its size and its association with globalization.
Anti-Americanism, they say, will persist because some people see America as a cultural threat.
I believe that such views lack historical perspective.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, globalization is not homogenizing and Americanizing the cultures of the world.
Although the United States is at the forefront of the current information revolution, which is creating many similarities in social and cultural habits (such as television viewing or Internet use) that are attributed to Americanization, correlation is not causation.
To see why, imagine a country that introduced computers and communications at a rapid rate in a world in which America did not exist.
You would still expect major social and cultural changes from such modernization.
Of course, because the US exists and is at the forefront of the information revolution, there is a degree of Americanization, but that is likely to diminish over the course of the twenty-first century as technology spreads and local cultures modernize in their own ways.
Historical proof that globalization does not necessarily mean homogenization can be seen in Japan, a country that deliberately isolated itself from earlier waves of globalization.
In the middle of the nineteenth century, Japan became the first Asian country to embrace globalization, and to borrow successfully from the world without losing its uniqueness.
During the Meiji Restoration, Japan searched broadly for tools and innovations that would allow it to become a major power rather than a victim of Western imperialism.
It sent young people to the West for education.
Its delegations scoured the world for ideas in science, technology, and industry.
In the political realm, Meiji reformers were well aware of Anglo-American ideas and institutions, but deliberately turned to German models because they were deemed more suitable to a country with an emperor.
The lesson that Japan teaches the rest of the world is not simply that an Asian country can compete, but that after a century and a half of globalization, it is possible to adapt while preserving a unique culture.
More fundamentally, the image of a homogenizing America reflects a mistakenly static view of culture.
Efforts to portray local cultures as unchanging often reflect reactionary political strategies rather than descriptions of reality.
As the Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa has put it, those who argue in favor of cultural identity and against globalization, betray a stagnant attitude towards culture that is not borne out by historical fact.
Do we know of any cultures that have remained unchanged through time?
To find any of them one has to travel to the small, primitive, magico-religious communities made up of people… who due to their primitive condition, become progressively more vulnerable to exploitation and extermination.
Vibrant cultures are constantly changing and borrowing from other cultures - and that borrowing is not always from the US.
For example, many more countries turned to Canada than to America as an example for framing constitutions in the aftermath of the Cold War.
Globalization is also a two-edged sword.
In some areas, there is not only a backlash against American cultural imports, but an effort to change American culture itself.
Capital punishment may now be supported by a majority of Americans, but the death penalty is regarded as an egregious violation of human rights across Europe - indeed, across much of the world.
American environmental attitudes toward climate change or genetic modification of food bring similar criticism.
More subtly, America's openness to immigration both enriches and changes American culture.
Finally, globalization and the information revolution may reinforce rather than reduce cultural diversity.
Some French commentators express fear that in a world of Internet global marketing, there will no longer be room for a culture that cherishes hundreds of different types of cheese.
But on the contrary, the Internet allows dispersed customers to come together in a way that encourages niche markets, including hundreds of Web sites dedicated only to cheese.
The Internet also allows people to establish a more diverse set of political communities.
The use of the Welsh language in Britain and Gaelic in Ireland is greater today than fifty years ago.
Britain, Belgium, and Spain, among others in Europe, have devolved more power to local regions.
The global information age may strengthen rather than weaken local cultures.
Economic and social globalization does produce superficial similarities in T-shirt logos and soft drink brands, but an underlying cultural diversity will remain.
American culture is now prominent, and it contributes to America's attractiveness - its "soft power" - in many, but not all, areas.
At the same time, immigrants, ideas, and events outside America's borders are changing American culture within the borders of the US.
As globalization spreads technical capabilities, and information technology allows broader participation in global communications, American economic and cultural preponderance may diminish.
A little less dominance may mean a little less anxiety about Americanization, fewer complaints about American arrogance, and less intensity in the anti-American backlash.
The US may have less control in the future, but it may find itself living in a world somewhat more congenial to its basic values of democracy, free markets, individual liberties, and human rights.
The Cacophony of the World
PARIS – In his masterpiece Diplomacy, Henry Kissinger describes, probably too idyllically, the international balance-of-power system that, following the Congress of Vienna in 1814-1815, produced what came to be called the “Concert of Europe.”
As Kissinger describes it, after the Napoleonic Wars, “There was not only a physical equilibrium, but a moral one.
Power and justice were in substantial harmony.”
Of course, the concert ended in cacophony with the outbreak of World War I in the summer of 1914.
Today, after the brutality of the first half of the twentieth century, the temporary bipolarity of the Cold War, and America’s brief post-1989 hyperpower status, the world is once again searching for a new international order.
Can something like the Concert of Europe be globalized?
Unfortunately, global cacophony seems more probable.
One obvious reason is the absence of a recognized and accepted international referee.
The United States, which best embodies ultimate power, is less willing – and less able – to exercise it.
And the United Nations, which best embodies the principles of international order, is as divided and impotent as ever.
But, beyond the absence of a referee, another issue looms: the wave of globalization that followed the end of the Cold War has, paradoxically, accelerated fragmentation, affecting democratic and non-democratic countries alike.
From the collapse of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia’s violent self-destruction, and Czechoslovakia’s peaceful divorce to today’s centrifugal pressures in Europe, the West, and the major emerging countries, fragmentation has been fundamental to international relations in recent decades.
The information revolution has created a more global, interdependent, and transparent world than ever.
But this has led, in turn, to an anxious, balkanizing quest for identity.
This effort to recover uniqueness is largely the cause of the international system’s growing fragmentation.
In the Concert of Europe, the number of actors was limited, and they were mostly states, whether national or imperial.
Essential values were widely shared, and most actors favored protecting the existing order.
In today’s world, by contrast, the nature of the actors involved is no longer so clear.
Transnational forces, states, and non-state actors are all involved, and their goals are complex and sometimes contradictory, with no universal commitment to preserving the status quo.
The US may be intent on creating a transatlantic trade-and-investment pact with Europe, which would make a political statement to the world that the West writ large constitutes the universal normative reference point.
But does such a West exist?
In our era of fragmentation, there is a more powerful and dynamic American West, a globally more problematic European West (itself fragmented between a prosperous north and an economically lagging south), and even a British West and, in Japan, an Asian West.
The concept of the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) may have been an astute branding tool.
But, aside from its members’ high growth rates, has it had any real significance?
Indeed, China is clearly in a category of its own, as a source of perceived (or real) risk to its regional environment.
If the BRICs’ growth slows (as has begun to happen), the concept’s artificiality will become widely apparent.
What unites emerging powers today is more their denial of international responsibilities than their joint diplomatic efforts.
Fragmentation also affects societies internally.
Deep partisan divisions – whether over the role of government or social/cultural issues – are leading to near-paralysis in democratic societies like the US.
In non-democratic societies, they can lead to revolution and violent power struggles.
This has been the case in much of the Arab world since late 2010.
Even power itself is more fragmented than ever.
Indeed, Moises Naim proclaims its demise in his latest book, The End of Power: From Boardrooms to Battlefields and Churches to States, Why Being in Charge Isn’t What It Used To Be.
While Naim’s conclusion may be premature, he is right about one thing: “Power no longer buys as much as it did in the past.”
It is “easier to get, harder to use – and easier to lose.”
Some analysts maintain, reassuringly, that rapprochement between Asia and the West is possible, given symbiosis between Western democracy and authoritarian Confucianism.
This is Kishore Mahbubani’s argument in his book The Great Convergence.
But the harmony stemming from the encounter between different cultures and systems is nowhere near –&#160;and will not be as long as the rule of law has not taken hold in the emerging world and a culture of modesty has not made headway within the plural West.
The cacophony of the world has replaced the concert of Europe.
And this may very well be the case for the foreseeable future.
Global Solutions for Globalization’s Problems
OXFORD – The last few decades of globalization and innovation have resulted in the most rapid progress that the world has ever known.
Poverty has been reduced.
Life expectancy has increased.
Wealth has been created at a scale that our ancestors could not have imagined.
But the news is not all good.
In fact, the achievements brought about by globalization are now under threat.
The world has simultaneously benefited from globalization and failed to manage the inherent complications resulting from the increased integration of our societies, our economies, and the infrastructure of modern life.
As a result, we have become dangerously exposed to systemic risks that transcend borders.
These threats spill across national boundaries and cross the traditional divides between industries and organizations.
An integrated financial system propagates economic crises.
International air travel spreads pandemics.
Interconnected computers provide rich hunting grounds for cybercriminals.
Middle Eastern jihadis use the Internet to recruit young Europeans.
Living standards rise – and greenhouse-gas emissions follow, accelerating climate change.
As a byproduct of globalization, crises that once burned locally and then quickly flamed out now risk sparking international conflagrations.
A pandemic, flood, or cyber attack in the City of London or Wall Street could send the entire world into a financial tailspin.
If the progress that globalization has delivered is to be sustained, countries must accept shared responsibility for managing the risks that it has engendered.
National governments – whether powerful, like the United States and China, or weak, like Iraq and Liberia – are unable to address these cascading and complex challenges on their own.
Only a small fraction of the risks arising from globalization require a truly global response.
But, by definition, these risks transcend the nation-state; thus, coordinated action is required to address them effectively.
The nature of the response needs to be tailored to the threat.
In the case of pandemics, the key is to support countries where outbreaks occur and help those most at risk of infection.
Widespread dangers, such as climate change or a new financial crisis, can require the cooperation of dozens of countries and a broad range of institutions.
In nearly every case, an international effort is needed.
An important characteristic of the risks of a globalized world is that they often become more serious over time.
As a result, the speed at which they are identified, along with the effectiveness of the response, can determine whether an isolated event becomes a global threat.
One need only look at the rise of the Islamic State, the outbreak of Ebola, the fight against climate change, or the financial contagion of 2008 to see what happens when a danger remains unidentified for too long or a coordinated response is missing or mismanaged.
And yet, just as the need for robust regional and international institutions is at its greatest, support for them is waning.
A growing number of citizens in Europe, North America, and the Middle East blame globalization for unemployment, rising inequality, pandemics, and terrorism.
Because of these risks, they regard increased integration, openness, and innovation as more of a threat than an opportunity.
This creates a vicious circle.
The concerns of the electorate are reflected in rapidly growing support for political parties that advocate increased protectionism, reductions in immigration, and greater national control over the marketplace.
As a result, governments across Europe, North America, Asia, and Oceania are becoming more parochial in their concerns, starving international agencies and regional organizations of the funding, credibility, and leadership capabilities needed to mount a proper response to the challenges of globalization.
In the short term, countries may be able to duck their global responsibilities, but the threat posed by events beyond their borders cannot be kept at bay forever.
Unaddressed, the endemic dangers of a globalized world will continue to grow.
In confronting dangers such as the Islamic State, Ebola, financial crisis, climate change, or rising inequality, short-term political expediency must be overcome – or the entire world will come to regret it.
When Globalization Goes Digital
WASHINGTON, DC – American voters are angry.
But while the ill effects of globalization top their list of grievances, nobody is well served when complex economic issues are reduced to bumper-sticker slogans – as they have been thus far in the presidential campaign.
It is unfair to dismiss concerns about globalization as unfounded.
America deserves to have an honest debate about its effects.
In order to yield constructive solutions, however, all sides will need to concede some inconvenient truths – and to recognize that globalization is not the same phenomenon it was 20 years ago.
Protectionists fail to see how the United States’ eroding industrial base is compatible with the principle that globalization boosts growth.
But the evidence supporting that principle is too substantial to ignore.
Recent research by the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) echoes the findings of other academics: global flows of goods, foreign direct investment, and data have increased global GDP by roughly 10% compared to what it would have been had those flows never occurred.
The extra value provided by globalization amounted to $7.8 trillion in 2014 alone.
And yet, the shuttered factories dotting America’s Midwestern “Rust Belt” are real.
Even as globalization generates aggregate growth, it produces winners and losers.
Exposing local industries to international competition spurs efficiency and innovation, but the resulting creative destruction exacts a substantial toll on families and communities.
Economists and policymakers alike are guilty of glossing over these distributional consequences.
Countries that engage in free trade will find new channels for growth in the long run, the thinking goes, and workers who lose their jobs in one industry will find employment in another.
In the real world, however, this process is messy and protracted.
Workers in a shrinking industry may need entirely new skills to find jobs in other sectors, and they may have to pack up their families and pull up deep roots to pursue these opportunities.
It has taken a popular backlash against free trade for policymakers and the media to acknowledge the extent of this disruption.