For such is our natural horror of death…” Likewise, Schopenhauer believed that “as soon as the terrors of life reach a point at which they outweigh the terrors of death, a man will put an end to his life.
But the terrors of death offer considerable resistance…”
Opponents of capital punishment frequently proclaim that the state has no moral right to take anyone’s life, including that of the most reprehensible murderer.
Yet that is absolutely the wrong conclusion for anyone who believes that capital punishment deters.
To see why, suppose that for each murderer executed (instead of, say, receiving life imprisonment), the number of murders is reduced by three, which is a much lower number than Ehrlich’s and some other estimates of the deterrent effect.
This implies that for each murderer not executed, three innocent victims would die.
In fact, the government would indirectly be “taking” many lives if it did not use capital punishment.
Saving three innocent lives for every person executed seems like a very attractive trade-off, and even two lives saved per execution seems like a persuasive benefit-cost ratio for capital punishment.
Admittedly, however, the argument in favor of capital punishment becomes less clear-cut as the number of lives saved per execution falls.
But, even if only one life were saved per execution, the tradeoff might still be desirable if the life saved is much better than the life taken, which would usually be the case.
Many people object to comparing the quality of the life spared and the life taken.
Yet I do not see how to avoid such a comparison.
Consider a career criminal who robs and kills a victim who led a decent life and left several children and a spouse behind.
Suppose it would be possible to save the life of an innocent victim by executing such a criminal.
To me it is obvious that saving such a victim’s life must count for more than taking the criminal’s life.
Obviously, not all cases are so unambiguous, but a comparison of the qualities of individual lives must be part of any reasonable social policy.
This helps explain why capital punishment should be used only for murders, and not for lesser crimes.
When the tradeoff is between taking lives and, say, reducing property theft, the case for milder punishments is far stronger.
Although severe assaults, including some gruesome rapes, may approach some murders in severity, and might conceivably call for capital punishment, I do not support its use in these cases.
A powerful argument for reserving capital punishment for murders is “marginal deterrence.”
If assault were punished with execution, perpetrators would have an incentive to kill their victims to avoid discovery (which is a major reason why the severity of punishments more generally should be matched to the severity of crimes).
One complication is that capital punishment may make a murderer fight harder to avoid being captured, which could lead to more deaths.
But, while marginal deterrence is important, I believe the resistance of murderers to being captured, possibly at the expense of their own lives, is really indirect evidence that criminals do fear capital punishment.
Of course, I worry about the risk of executing the innocent.
My support for capital punishment would weaken greatly if the rate of killing innocent people were as large as that claimed by many.
However, I believe that the appeal process in the US offers enormous protection, not so much against wrongful conviction as against wrongful execution, so that there are very few, if any, documented cases of innocent people being killed.
And this process has been strengthened enormously with the development of DNA identification.
Again, the debate about capital punishment is essentially a debate about deterrence (which may be reduced by lengthy appeals).
I can understand that some people are skeptical about the evidence, although I believe they are wrong about both that and the common sense of the issue.
It is very disturbing to take someone’s life, even a murderer’s life, but sometimes highly unpleasant actions are necessary to prevent even worse behavior that takes the lives of innocent victims.
The Morality of Non-Proliferation
Nearly all the world’s nations are meeting in New York to review the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The NPT was negotiated in the 1960’s after five countries (the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, and China) developed nuclear weapons.
India, Pakistan, and Israel refused to join the treaty and, over time, constructed their own atomic bombs.
Now North Korea and Iran stand accused of violating their treaty commitments by pursuing nuclear weapons.
Aside from the legal issues, is there a moral case for non-proliferation?
In a world of sovereign states, is it hypocritical for some to have nuclear weapons and deny them to others?
If no one had the bomb today, it would be best if it were not invented.
But history depends on the paths that were taken in the past.
Suppose it were 1939, and states were debating whether the US should invent the bomb.
They might have argued that all should get it or none.
But if they knew that Hitler’s Germany would get it, they might have approved Franklin Roosevelt’s decision to develop it before the Nazis.
Besides, turning back the clock is impossible.
Even if all countries agree to disarm, some might cheat.
The successful cheaters would most likely be authoritarian states with little transparency.
After all, North Korea says that it has developed nuclear weapons despite having signed the NPT.
Libya was also a party to the NPT while it pursued a covert nuclear program.
If one regards impartiality and attention to consequences as essential to morality, one could imagine countries accepting the morality of unequal possession of nuclear weapons if certain conditions were met.
For example, the purposes should be limited to self- defense.
States possessing weapons should take special steps to reduce the prospect of their use.
The weapons should be used to help preserve the independence of all states, rather than for imperial aggrandizement, and steps should be taken to reduce arsenals as political conditions permit.
Today’s NPT comes close to reflecting such conditions.
Of course, the NPT does not rest solely on moral arguments, but primarily on self-interest and prudence.
Most states adhere because they believe that their security would be diminished if more states obtained nuclear weapons.
The treaty helps them to reduce fears of cheating by neighbors because it provides for inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The credibility of American security guarantees for its allies is one of the reasons that the bomb did not spread to 25 countries within a decade, as President John F. Kennedy once expected.
Non-proliferation is not hypocritical if it is based on an impartial and realistic estimation of risks.
But if a state like North Korea or Iran decides to accept such risks, should that be purely its own choice?
Perhaps, if the risks were borne solely by its own people, but they are not.
Third parties are justified in rejecting the risks that would be imposed upon them.
The history of proliferation shows that political chain reactions often occur – witness China, India, and Pakistan – and there are real fears that North Korea and Iran might trigger such chains in Northeast Asia and the Middle East.
Some people argue that nuclear proliferation will actually reduce risks. Call it the “porcupine theory.”
In such a prickly world, no country would dare aggression.
But this assumes perfect rationality.
In the real world, accidents occur, so more proliferation means a greater chance of eventual inadvertent use, weaker capacity in managing nuclear crises, and greater difficulty in establishing controls and reducing the role of nuclear weapons in world politics.
In addition, the more states possess nuclear weapons, the greater the prospects that terrorists will gain access to them.
Of course, transnational terrorists usually have no “return address” that allows the threat of mutual deterrence to work, but North Korea or Iran has no moral right to impose this risk upon others.
Three European Union countries – Britain, France, and Germany – are trying to persuade Iran to give up its nuclear enrichment program, which would give it bomb material to use after a quick withdrawal from the treaty.
Iran claims a right to enrichment under Article 4 of the NPT, but that article has to be read in light of the other articles and of Iran’s past deception vis-à-vis the IAEA.
In East Asia, North Korea withdrew from the NPT after using it to disguise its weapons program, and China, America, Japan, Russia, and South Korea are trying to persuade Kim Jong Il’s regime to reverse course.
It seems right for these states to use pressure to dissuade Iran and North Korea from imposing new risks on the world.
But the existing nuclear weapons states also must be mindful of the moral conditions that underlie the NPT bargain.
The obligation under Article 6 to reduce arsenals cannot be interpreted to require prompt disarmament unless that would enhance stability.
Such conditions do not yet exist in a world where undemocratic states cheat on legal obligations.
But the nuclear weapons states should continue to reduce the role of nuclear weapons, and refrain from new programs that suggest the prospect of their use.
Given the dangers that increased risks imply for everyone, there is a strong moral case for a policy of stopping further proliferation rather than arguing that Iran or North Korea have a right to do whatever they wish as sovereign states.
But it is also important to remember that obligations of non-proliferation bind nuclear weapons states as well.
Why Pay More?
PRINCETON – When Radosław Sikorski, Poland’s foreign minister, went to Ukraine for talks last month, his Ukrainian counterparts reportedly laughed at him because he was wearing a Japanese quartz watch that cost only $165.
A Ukrainian newspaper reported on the preferences of Ukrainian ministers, several of whom have watches that cost more than $30,000.
Even a Communist member of Ukraine’s parliament, the Rada, was shown wearing a watch that retails for more than $6,000.
The laughter should have gone in the opposite direction.
Wouldn’t you laugh (maybe in private, to avoid being impolite) at someone who pays more than 200 times as much as you do, and ends up with an inferior product?
That is what the Ukrainians have done.
They could have bought an accurate, lightweight, maintenance-free quartz watch that can run for five years, keeping virtually perfect time, without ever being moved or wound.
Instead, they paid far more for clunkier watches that can lose minutes every month, and that will stop if you forget to wind them for a day or two (if they have an automatic mechanism, they will stop if you don’t move them).
In addition, the quartz watches also have integrated alarm, stopwatch, and timer functions that the other watches either lack, or that serve only as a design-spoiling, hard-to-read effort to keep up with the competition.
Why would any wise shopper accept such a bad bargain?
Out of nostalgia, perhaps?
A full-page ad for Patek Philippe has Thierry Stern, the president of the company, saying that he listens to the chime of every watch with a minute repeater that his company makes, as his father and grandfather did before him.
That’s all very nice, but since the days of Stern’s grandfather, we have made progress in time-keeping.
Why reject the improvements that human ingenuity has provided to us?
I have an old fountain pen that belonged to my grandmother; it’s a nice memento of her, but I wouldn’t dream of using it to write this column.
Thorstein Veblen knew the answer.
In his classic The Theory of the Leisure Class, published in 1899, he argued that once the basis of social status became wealth itself – rather than, say, wisdom, knowledge, moral integrity, or skill in battle – the rich needed to find ways of spending money that had no other objective than the display of wealth itself.
He termed this “conspicuous consumption.”
Veblen wrote as a social scientist, refraining from rendering moral judgments, though he left readers in little doubt about his attitude toward such expenditure in a time when many lived in poverty.
Wearing a ridiculously expensive watch to proclaim that one has achieved an elevated social standing seems especially immoral for a public official in a country where a significant portion of the population still lives in real poverty.
These officials are wearing on their wrists the equivalent of four or five years of an average Ukrainian’s salary.
That tells Ukrainian taxpayers either that they are paying their public servants too much, or that their public servants have other ways of getting money to buy watches that they would not be able to afford otherwise.
The Chinese government knows what those “other ways” might be.
As the International Herald Tribune reports, one aspect of the Chinese government’s campaign against corruption is a clampdown on expensive gifts.
As a result, according to Jon Cox, an analyst at Kepler Capital Markets, “it’s no longer acceptable to have a big chunky watch on your wrist.”
The Chinese market for expensive watches is in steep decline.
Ukrainians, take note.
Wearing a watch that costs 200 times more than one that does a better job of keeping time says something else, even when it is worn by people who are not governing a relatively poor country.
Andrew Carnegie, the richest man of Veblen’s era, was blunt in his moral judgments.
“The man who dies rich,” he is often quoted as saying, “dies disgraced.”
We can adapt that judgment to the man or woman who wears a $30,000 watch or buys similar luxury goods, like a $12,000 handbag.
But to mock someone for having a sensible watch at a modest price puts pressure on others to join the quest for ever-greater extravagance.
That pressure should be turned in the opposite direction, and we should celebrate those, like Sikorski, with modest tastes and higher priorities than conspicuous consumption.
The Moral Vulnerability of Markets
LONDON &#45;&#45; Today, there seems to be no coherent alternative to capitalism, yet anti-market feelings are alive and well, expressed for example in the moralistic backlash against globalization.
Because no social system can survive for long without a moral basis, the issues posed by anti-globalization campaigners are urgent – all the more so in the midst of the current economic crisis.
It is hard to deny some moral value to the market.
After all, we attach moral value to processes as well as outcomes, as in the phrase “the end does not justify the means.”
It is morally better to have our goods supplied by free labor than by slaves, and to choose our goods rather than have them chosen for us by the state.
The fact that the market system is more efficient at creating wealth and satisfying wants than any other system is an additional bonus.
Moral criticisms of the market focus on its tendency to favor a morally deficient character type, to privilege disagreeable motives, and to promote undesirable outcomes.
Capitalism is also held to lack a principle of justice.
Consider character.
It has often been claimed that capitalism rewards the qualities of self-restraint, hard-work, inventiveness, thrift, and prudence.
On the other hand, it crowds out virtues that have no economic utility, like heroism, honor, generosity, and pity.
(Heroism survives, in part, in the romanticized idea of the “heroic entrepreneur.”)
The problem is not just the moral inadequacy of the economic virtues, but their disappearance.  Hard work and inventiveness are still rewarded, but self-restraint, thrift, and prudence surely started to vanish with the first credit card.
In the affluent West, everyone borrows to consume as much as possible.
America and Britain are drowning in debt.
Adam Smith wrote that “consumption is the sole end and purpose of production.”
But consumption is not an ethical aim.
It is not positively good to have five cars rather than one.
You need to consume in order to live, and to consume more than you strictly need in order to live well.
This is the ethical justification for economic development.
From the ethical point of view, consumption is a means to goodness, and the market system is the most efficient engine for lifting people out of poverty: it is doing so at a prodigious rate in China and India.
But this does not tell us at what point consumption tips us into a bad life.
If people want more pornography or more drugs, the market allows them to consume these goods to the point of self-destruction.
It oversupplies some goods that are morally harmful, and undersupplies goods that are morally beneficial.
For quality of life, we have to rely on morals, not markets.
No doubt it is unfair to blame the market for bad moral choices.
People can decide when to stop consuming or what they want to consume.
But the market system relies on a particular motive for action – Keynes called it “love of money” – which tends to undermine traditional moral teaching.
The paradox of capitalism is that it converts avarice, greed, and envy into virtues.
We are told that capitalism discovers wants that people did not realize they had and thus moves humanity forward.
But it is truer to say that the market economy is sustained by the stimulation of greed and envy through advertising.
In a world of ubiquitous advertising, there is no natural limit to the hunger for goods and services.
The final moral issue is capitalism’s lack of a principle of justice.
In a perfectly competitive market, with full information, models of the market show that all the factors of production receive rewards equal to their marginal products, i.e., all are paid what they are worth.
The full competition and information requirements ensure that all contracts are uncoerced (there is no monopoly power) and all expectations are fulfilled, i.e., people get what they want.
Justice in distribution is supposedly secured by justice in exchange.
But no actually existing capitalist market system spontaneously generates justice in exchange.
There is always some monopoly power, insiders have more information than outsiders, ignorance and uncertainty are pervasive, and expectations are frequently disappointed.
Justice in exchange has to be supplied from outside the market.
Moreover, the endowments that people bring with them to the market include not just their own innate qualities, but their starting positions, which are radically unequal.
That is why the liberal theory of justice demands at a minimum equality of opportunity: the attempt – as far as is compatible with personal liberty – to eliminate all those differences in life chances arising from unequal starting points.
As a result, we rely on the state to provide social goods like education, housing, and health care.
Finally, the claim that everyone is – under ideal conditions – paid what they are worth is an economic, not a moral, valuation.
It does not conform to our moral intuition that a CEO should not be paid 500 times the average wage of his workers, or to our belief that if someone’s market-clearing wage is too low to support life, he should not be allowed to starve to death.
As our societies have become richer, we have come to believe that everyone is entitled to a minimum standard, whether in work or sickness or unemployment, which allows for a continuing level of comfort and flourishing.
The market system does not guarantee this.
While the market today has no serious challenger, it is morally vulnerable.
It has become dangerously dependent on economic success, so that any large-scale economic failure will expose the shallowness of its moral claims.
The solution is not to abolish markets, but to re-moralize wants.
The simplest way of doing this is to restrict advertising. This would prune the role of greed and envy in the operation of markets, and create room for the flourishing of other motives.
The Muslim Civil War
Is the Sunni-Shia divide in the Middle East now deeper than the antagonism between Israel and the Arabs?
You might think so given the response of some Arab governments to Hezbollah’s decision to attack Israel.
Even as Israeli bombs fell on Beirut and Tyre, Saudi Arabia, perhaps the most conservative Arab Muslim state of all, openly condemned the actions of the Shia Hezbollah in instigating conflict with Israel.
Never before in the history of the Arab-Israeli conflict has a state that considers itself a leader of the Arab Muslim peoples backed Israel so openly.
Moreover, Saudi Arabia’s breach with Hezbollah is not a one-time occurrence.
Egypt and Jordan have also roundly condemned Hezbollah and its leader, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, for their adventurism.  
What is behind this stunning development?
Are we seeing a fundamental shift in relations between Arab nationalism and Islamic sectarianism?
Is Saudi Arabia’s Sunni government more concerned and frightened by Shia Islam than it is committed to Arab unity and the Palestinian cause?
Arab denunciations of Hezbollah suggest that the Muslim sectarian divide, already evident in the daily violence in Iraq, is deepening and intensifying across the Middle East.
President George W. Bush’s desire to shatter the Arab world’s frozen societies was meant to pit the forces of modernization against the traditional elements in Arab and Islamic societies.
Instead, he appears to have unleashed the region’s most atavistic forces.
Opening this Pandora’s Box may have ushered in a new and even uglier era of generalized violence, perhaps what can only be called a “Muslim Civil War.”
The Shia-Sunni divide has existed from the dawn of Islam, but the geographical and ethnic isolation of non-Arab Shiite Iran, together with Sunni Arab countries’ dominance of their Shia minorities, mostly kept this rivalry in the background.
These tensions further receded in the tide of the “Islamization” created by the Iranian revolution, for in its wake Arabs’ sectarian identity as Sunni was pushed further into the background as a generalized “Islamic” assertiveness appeared.
That all changed when Al Qaeda, a Sunni terrorist force that draws heavily on Saudi Wahabbi ideology and personnel, launched its attacks on America in September 2001.
A specifically Sunni brand of militant Islam was now on the march.
When the United States initiated wars on both the Sunni Taliban in Afghanistan and the Sunni Iraqi regime, this new radical Sunni strain became even more emboldened.
The region’s newly assertive Sunni Arabs perceive Israel and the West as being only one threat, the other comprising the so-called “Shia crescent” – the arc of land extending from Lebanon to Iran through Syria and Iraq that is inhabited by the allegedly heretical Shia.
Saudi Arabia’s rulers, as custodians of the Muslim faith’s holiest places in Mecca and Medina, perhaps feel this threat most keenly.
In Sunni eyes, the Shia not only dominate the oil-rich areas of Iran, Iraq, and the eastern region of Saudi Arabia, but are – through the actions of Hezbollah – attempting to usurp the role of “protector” of the central dream of all Arabs, the Palestinian cause.
It is because the Saudi royal family derives its legitimacy from a strict form of Sunni Islam and doubts the loyalty of its Shia population that the Kingdom has turned on Hezbollah.
Ironically, it is America, Saudi Arabia’s longtime protector, which made Shia empowerment possible by overthrowing Saddam Hussein and bringing Shiite parties to power in Iraq.
The Bush administration seems to recognize what it has done; as the Shia arc rises in the east of the Arab Muslim world, the US is attempting to strengthen its protection of the Sunni arc – Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia – in the region’s west.
Israel, the once implacable enemy of the Arab cause, now seems to be slotted into this defensive structure.
But such a defensive posture is bound to be unstable, due to pan-Arab feelings.  Today, ordinary Saudi citizens are glued to Al Jazeera and other Arab satellite TV networks to follow events in Gaza and south Lebanon.
They see Arab (not Shiite) blood being shed, with only Hezbollah fighting back.
In their eyes, Hezbollah has become a heroic model of resistance.
This is causing the Saudi state to deepen the Sunni-Shia schism.
Following the Kingdom’s official denunciation of Hezbollah, the Saudi state called on its official Wahhabi clerics to issue fatwas condemning Hezbollah as Shiite deviants and heretics.
Such condemnations can only sharpen sectarian divisions within Saudi Arabia and the region.
As these antagonisms deepen, will the Sunni regimes come to believe that they need their own Hezbollah to fight in their corner?
If that is what they conclude, they need not look far, for many such fighters have already have been trained – by Al Qaeda. 
Lives versus Profits
NEW YORK – The United States Supreme Court recently began deliberations in a case that highlights a deeply problematic issue concerning intellectual-property rights.
The Court must answer the following question: Can human genes – your genes – be patented?
Put another way, should someone essentially be permitted to own the right, say, to test whether you have a set of genes that imply a higher than 50% probability of developing breast cancer?
To those outside the arcane world of intellectual-property rights, the answer seems obvious: No.
You own your genes.
A company might own, at most, the intellectual property underlying its genetic test; and, because the research and development needed to develop the test may have cost a considerable amount, the firm might rightly charge for administering it.
But a Utah-based company, Myriad Genetics, claims more than that.
It claims to own the rights to any test for the presence of the two critical genes associated with breast cancer – and has ruthlessly enforced that right, though their test is inferior to one that Yale University was willing to provide at much lower cost.
The consequences have been tragic: Thorough, affordable testing that identifies high-risk patients saves lives.
Blocking such testing costs lives.
Myriad is a true example of an American corporation for which profit trumps all other values, including the value of human life itself.
This a particularly poignant case.
Normally, economists talk about trade-offs: weaker intellectual-property rights, it is argued, would undermine incentives to innovate.
The irony here is that Myriad’s discovery would have been made in any case, owing to a publicly funded, international effort to decode the entire human genome that was a singular achievement of modern science.
The social benefits of Myriad’s slightly earlier discovery have been dwarfed by the costs that its callous pursuit of profit has imposed.
More broadly, there is increasing recognition that the patent system, as currently designed, not only imposes untold social costs, but also fails to maximize innovation – as Myriad’s gene patents demonstrate.
After all, Myriad did not invent the technologies used to analyze the genes.
If these technologies had been patented, Myriad might not have made its discoveries.
And its tight control of the use of its patents has inhibited the development by others of better and more accurate tests for the presence of the gene.
The point is a simple one: All research is based on prior research.
A poorly designed patent system – like the one we have now – can inhibit follow-on research.
That is why we do not allow patents for basic insights in mathematics.
And it is why research shows that patenting genes actually reduces the production of new knowledge about genes: the most important input in the production of new knowledge is prior knowledge, to which patents inhibit access.
Fortunately, what motivates most significant advances in knowledge is not profit, but the pursuit of knowledge itself.
This has been true of all of the transformative discoveries and innovations – DNA, transistors, lasers, the Internet, and so on.
A separate US legal case has underscored one of the main dangers of patent-driven monopoly power: corruption.
With prices far in excess of the cost of production, there are, for example, huge profits to be gained by persuading pharmacies, hospitals, or doctors to shift sales to your products.
The US Attorney for the Southern District of New York recently accused the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Novartis of doing exactly this by providing illegal kickbacks, honoraria, and other benefits to doctors – exactly what it promised not to do when it settled a similar case three years earlier.
Indeed, Public Citizen, a US consumer advocacy group, has calculated that, in the US alone, the pharmaceutical industry has paid out billions of dollars as a result of court judgments and financial settlements between pharmaceutical manufacturers and federal and state governments.
Sadly, the US and other advanced countries have been pressing for stronger intellectual-property regimes around the world.
Such regimes would limit poor countries’ access to the knowledge that they need for their development – and would deny life-saving generic drugs to the hundreds of millions of people who cannot afford the drug companies’ monopoly prices.
The issue is coming to a head in ongoing World Trade Organization negotiations.
The WTO’s intellectual-property agreement, called TRIPS, originally foresaw the extension of “flexibilities” to the 48 least-developed countries, where average annual per capita income is below $800.
The original agreement seems remarkably clear: the WTO shall extend these “flexibilities” upon the request of the least-developed countries.
While these countries have now made such a request, the US and Europe appear hesitant to oblige.
Intellectual-property rights are rules that we create – and that are supposedto improve social well-being.
But unbalanced intellectual-property regimes result in inefficiencies – including monopoly profits and a failure to maximize the use of knowledge – that impede the pace of innovation.
And, as the Myriad case shows, they can even result in unnecessary loss of life.
America’s intellectual-property regime – and the regime that the US has helped to foist upon the rest of the world through the TRIPS agreement – is unbalanced.
We should all hope that, with its decision in the Myriad case, the Supreme Court will contribute to the creation of a more sensible and humane framework.
The Mystery of the Karmapa Lama
NEW DELHI – The seizure by police of large sums of Chinese currency from the Indian monastery of the Karmapa Lama – one of the most-important figures in Tibetan Buddhism – has revived old suspicions about his continuing links with China and forced him to deny that he is an “agent of Beijing.”
The Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama, and the Karmapa Lama are the three highest figures in Tibetan Buddhism, representing parallel institutions that have intermittently been at odds with each other throughout their history.
And China, seeking to tighten its grip on Tibet, has worked to control the traditional process of finding the reincarnation of any senior lama that passes away.
Thus, in 1992, China helped select the seven-year-old Ogyen Trinley Dorje as the 17th Karmapa Lama, installing him at Tibet’s Tsurphu monastery – the Karmapas’ ancestral abode, which was almost destroyed during the Cultural Revolution.
He became the first reincarnated “living Buddha” to be recognized and ratified by Communist China.
But then, in 1999, Dorje staged a stunning escape to India via Nepal, attracting the world’s attention, but also deep suspicion because of the apparent ease with which he and his entourage managed to flee.
The Dalai Lama has hosted him at the Gyuto monastery in Dharamsala, India, ever since.
Earlier, in 1995, China installed its own Panchen Lama after its security services abducted the Tibetans’ six-year-old appointee, who has simply disappeared, along with his family.
Now, China is waiting for the current Dalai Lama – who is over 75 and has had bouts of ill health in recent years – to pass away, so that it can anoint his successor, too.
But the Dalai Lama, the charismatic face of the Tibetan movement, has made it clear that his successor will come from the “free world,” thereby excluding Chinese-ruled Tibet.
This has set the stage for the emergence of two rival Dalai Lamas, one chosen by China and the other by the Tibetan exile movement.
In fact, the Chinese-appointed Karmapa Lama has a doppelgänger Karmapa, who has set up shop in New Delhi.
With both the Karmapas in India, the Indian government has sought to maintain peace by barring the contenders from the sacred Rumtek monastery in the Indian Himalayan state of Sikkim.
Against this background, the discovery of 1.1 million renminbi and large sums of other foreign currency has ignited a fresh controversy over Dorje.
While his supporters have staged protests against the police raid and interrogation of their leader, Indian officials have expressed apprehension that China may be funding Ogyen Trinley Dorje as part of a plan to influence the Karmapa’s Kagyu sect, which controls important monasteries along the militarized Indo-Tibetan border.
According to Xu Zhitao, an official at the Chinese Communist Party central committee’s United Front Work Department, the allegation that “the Karmapa [may be] a Chinese agent or spy shows that India is keeping its mistrustful attitude toward China.”
But such an attitude seems warranted: Xu’s Tibet division is tasked with overseeing monastic institutions, inculcating “patriotic” norms among monks and nuns – through reeducation when necessary – and infiltrating the Tibetan resistance movement and Tibetan Buddhist monasteries on both sides of the Indo-Tibetan frontier.
Communities in the Himalayan region have historically been closely integrated.
But, with Tibet locked behind an iron curtain since the 1951 Chinese annexation, the economies and cultures of the entire Himalayan region have weakened.
Tibetan Buddhism, however, still serves as the common link, with the Karmapa’s Kagyu sect a powerful force on the Indian side.
The cash haul has reopened the question that arose in 1999: Was China behind Dorje’s flight to India, or is he a genuine defector who simply got fed up with living in a gilded Chinese cage?
China had several possible motives for staging his “escape,” including a desire to strengthen his claim to the title at a time when the rival contender (backed by important interests in India, Bhutan, and Taiwan) appeared to be gaining ground.
Had Dorje remained in Tibet, he could have lost out to his rival, because the 280-year-old Rumtek monastery, the Kagyu school’s holiest institution, is where the sect’s all-powerful “black hat,” the symbolic crown of the Karmapa – believed to be woven from the hair of female deities – is located.
China would also have drawn comfort from the fact that, within the murky world of intra-Tibetan politics, its anointed Karmapa, oddly, had the Dalai Lama’s backing.
Historically, the Dalai Lamas and Karmapa Lamas vied with each other for influence until the Dalai Lama’s Gelug school gained ascendancy over the Kagyu order.
According to Tibetan tradition, however, the Dalai Lama has no role in selecting or endorsing a Karmapa.
The Dalai Lama in this case gave his approval for purely political reasons.
The previous Karmapa Lama died in 1981, and the controversy over his successor that has raged ever since also epitomizes a struggle for control of the $1.5 billion in assets held by the Kagyu order, the richest in Tibetan Buddhism.
With control of the Rumtek monastery embroiled in rival lawsuits, the New Delhi-based Karmapa has, not surprisingly, greeted the recent cash seizure as “exposing” his Chinese-appointed rival.
Significantly, in contrast to its increasingly vituperative attacks on the Dalai Lama, China has not denounced (or derecognized) its Karmapa, although his flight to India signaled its failure to retain the loyalty of a supposed puppet.
The Mandarin-speaking Ogyen Trinley Dorje, now 25, occasionally criticizes the Chinese government, including for its efforts “to create this ethnic conflict” in Tibet.
Nevertheless, China has refrained from attacking him, making clear that it wants him to return eventually.
And the ongoing Karmapa saga, with its shadowy politics and intrigue, could turn out to be only the opening act – a foretaste of what may come when two dueling Dalai Lamas emerge after the incumbent passes from the scene.
The Myth of Chinese Meritocracy
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – Political scandals sometimes perform a valuable function in cleansing governments.
They destroy the political careers of individuals of dubious character.
More importantly, they can debunk political myths central to the legitimacy of some regimes.
That appears to be the case with the Bo Xilai affair in China.
One enduring political myth that went down with Bo, the former Communist Party boss of Chongqing municipality, is the notion that the Party’s rule is based on meritocracy.
In many ways, Bo personified the Chinese concept of “meritocracy” – well-educated, intelligent, sophisticated, and charming (mainly to Western executives).
But, after his fall, a very different picture emerged.
Aside from his alleged involvement in assorted crimes, Bo was said to be a ruthless apparatchik, endowed with an outsize ego but no real talent.
His record as a local administrator was mediocre.
Bo’s rise to power owed much to his pedigree (his father was a vice premier), his political patrons, and his manipulation of the rules of the game.
For example, visitors to Chongqing marvel at the soaring skyscrapers and modern infrastructure built during Bo’s tenure there. But do they know that Bo’s administration borrowed the equivalent of more than 50% of local GDP to finance the construction binge, and that a large portion of the debt will go unpaid?
Unfortunately, Bo’s case is not the exception in China, but the rule.
Contrary to the prevailing perception in the West (especially among business leaders), the current Chinese government is riddled with clever apparatchiks like Bo who have acquired their positions through cheating, corruption, patronage, and manipulation.
One of the most obvious signs of systemic cheating is that many Chinese officials use fake or dubiously acquired academic credentials to burnish their resumes.
Because educational attainment is considered a measure of merit, officials scramble to obtain advanced degrees in order to gain an advantage in the competition for power.
The overwhelming majority of these officials end up receiving doctorates (a master’s degree won’t do anymore in this political arms race) granted through part-time programs or in the Communist Party’s training schools.
Of the 250 members of provincial Communist Party standing committees, an elite group including party chiefs and governors, 60 claim to have earned PhDs.
Tellingly, only ten of them completed their doctoral studies before becoming government officials.
The rest received their doctorates (mostly in economics, management, law, and industrial engineering) through part-time programs while performing their duties as busy government officials.
One managed to complete his degree in a mere 21 months, an improbable feat, given that course work alone, without the dissertation, normally requires at least two years in most countries’ doctoral programs.
If so many senior Chinese officials openly flaunt fraudulent or dubious academic degrees without consequences, one can imagine how widespread other forms of corruption must be.
Another common measure used to judge a Chinese official’s “merit” is his ability to deliver economic growth.
On the surface, this may appear to be an objective yardstick.
In reality, GDP growth is as malleable as an official’s academic credentials.
Inflating local growth numbers is so endemic that reported provincial GDP growth data, when added up, are always higher than the national growth data, a mathematical impossibility.
And, even when they do not doctor the numbers, local officials can game the system in another way.
Because of their relatively short tenure in one position before promotion (less than three years, on average, for local mayors), Chinese officials are under enormous pressure to demonstrate their ability to produce economic results quickly.
One sure way of doing so is to use financial leverage, typically by selling land or using land as collateral to borrow large sums of money from often-obliging state-owned banks, to finance massive infrastructure projects, as Bo did in Chongqing.
The result is promotion for such officials, because they have delivered quick GDP growth.
But the economic and social costs are very high.
Local governments are saddled with a mountain of debt and wasted investments, banks accumulate risky loans, and farmers lose their land.
Worse, as competition for promotion within the Chinese bureaucracy has escalated, even fake academic credentials and GDP growth records have become insufficient to advance one’s career.
What increasingly determines an official’s prospects for promotion is his guanxi, or connections.
Based on surveys of local officials, patronage, not merit, has become the most critical factor in the appointment process.
For those without guanxi, the only recourse is to purchase appointments and promotions through bribes.
In the Chinese parlance, the practice is called maiguan, literally “buying office.”
The official Chinese press is full of corruption scandals of this type.
Given such systemic debasement of merit, few Chinese citizens believe that they are governed by the best and the brightest.
But astonishingly, the myth of a Chinese meritocracy remains very much alive among Westerners who have encountered impressively credentialed officials like Bo.
The time has come to bury it.
The Myth of Decoupling
PALO ALTO, CALIF. &#45;&#45; The fact that America’s economy is slowing is bad news for Europeans, regardless of claims that Europe’s economy has successfully decoupled itself from the United States.
Decoupling is an idea that is based on bad economics – and on some Europeans’ reluctance to accept the fact that Europe’s short but sweet economic expansion is also coming to an end.
True, the US market has become less important for European exports, while Asia’s trade significance for Europe has grown.
So what?
Trade is just one among the many linkages between the US and European economies that matter.
In today’s inter-connected global economy, uncertainty about the US economic outlook increases one day, and Dutch consumer confidence, for example, takes a tumble the next.
The links between Europe and America are, frankly, much more complex than the advocates of decoupling appreciate.
The US Federal Reserve, for example, is aggressively cutting interest rates to forestall a possible recession.
As a consequence, the euro is rising not only against the US dollar, but also against Asian currencies, whose central banks intervene in foreign exchange markets to fix their currencies’ value against the dollar.
This damages European exports to both the US and Asia.
Reduced European dependence on the US export market can hardly protect Europe from the effects of the US economic slowdown if the euro appreciates as much against the key Asian currencies as it has against the dollar.
The decoupling argument also assumes that recession in America has no effect on Asia.
This is nonsense.
Asian income certainly will decline if Asians export less to the US – and this, in turn, will reduce Asian imports from Europe.
Thus, the US slowdown affects European exports in two ways.
It has an indirect effect on European exports to Asia, which can be sizeable because the US market is so important for Asian exports.
And it has a direct impact on European exports to the US.
Even in the case where the direct effect is small – the decoupling assumption – the US slowdown still can have a substantial net impact on European exports because of its indirect effect on Asian imports from Europe.
So Europeans should not be tempted to think that they are somehow “decoupled” from America’s foibles and woes.
Until recently, many Europeans thought they were insulated from the current US housing and mortgage crisis.
But in what has been a truly malignant “export” from America to Europe, the US created “garbage debt” in the form of sub-prime mortgages, and Europeans – hungry for extra yield, and as reckless as Americans – bought it.
Many European banks’ balance sheets are now as contaminated as those of American banks, and no one is sure who is holding – or hiding – the junk, and how to value it.
This is why European banks are now reluctant to lend to each other. They could be lending to an institution that is in serious financial trouble.
It is hard to imagine that higher interest rates and reduced credit availability will not lead to distress for Europe’s overall economy.
Yet this is exactly the stance of the European Central Bank, which is treating the euro zone as if its financial sector was somehow decoupled from the rest of the economy – and running a different monetary policy for each sector at the same time.
By pumping in whatever liquidity the financial sector needs to alleviate the credit crunch, the ECB is effectively maintaining a deflationary bias for the financial sector, whereas it has announced an inflationary bias for the rest of the economy.
A monetary policy at war with itself cannot long endure.
The ECB’s inflationary bias will most likely be dropped, as the effect of the financial crisis and the US slowdown sends Europe’s economy into a spin that even the ever-optimistic ECB will be unable to deny.
That outcome should moderate Europe’s inflation concerns.
Until then, decoupling arguments, whether applied to relations between Europe and America or Europe’s financial sector and the rest of the economy, should be seen as having a single purpose – to deny the very real threats to the continued expansion of the European economy.
The very existence of decoupling arguments is a warning that they should be concerned about the continuing robustness of Europe’s economy.
Special interests would not be peddling such dubious pabulum if they felt confident about the economy’s future.
The Myth of “Eurabia”
LONDON – There is a powerful narrative today about how many young European Muslims are susceptible to terrorism, how Islam leads to radicalization, and how Muslims, because of their creed, choose to live in ghettos and therefore create swamps that breed terrorists.
This narrative’s most extreme form is the idea of “Eurabia,” an incendiary term that purportedly describes a phenomenon by which Muslim hordes are now contaminating Europe’s very DNA.
From this narrative, fear of homegrown terrorism resonates the most, as does the impetus to deal with Muslims as a foreign foe. So, too, does the idea that accommodating religious differences is dangerous.
A false dichotomy is created in which Muslims must choose between a Western and European identity or a supposedly separate Islamic identity.
But the relationship between European Muslims’ faith and identification with European nations seldom conforms to the “Eurabia” stereotype.
A wide-ranging global Gallup study that culminated in the book Who Speaks for Islam: What a Billion Muslims Really Think , by John L. Esposito and Dalia Mogahed, includes detailed and sophisticated analysis of European Muslims’ attitudes.
The results suggest that religious and national identities are complementary, not competing, concepts.
Muslims living in Paris, London, and Berlin are more religious than the general public, but they are just as likely as anyone else to identify with their nation and its democratic institutions, and just as likely to reject violence.
The prevailing narrative often regards mosques and Islamic associations as spaces for radicalization, but I contend that some young people are actively turning away from these peaceful institutions.
This may be because mosques and Islamic associations find it difficult to compete with the promises of solace available through the Internet, where voices can address political issues, feed off injustices around the world, and launch calls to arms that can ultimately be murderous.
The Internet is where some young Muslims succumb to the alluring narrative of Islam constructed by those behind the terror attacks of our age.
We also know that the Internet’s devastating impact on handfuls of young people is not confined to the Muslim community, as evidenced by the tragic events in Bridgend in the United Kingdom, where 17 young people, seemingly connected through the Internet, committed suicide.
For some young Muslims, the paramount sub-culture is virtual, and it operates on the fringes of Muslim communities, whether in Europe or in the Islamic world.
The story it presents is of a world beset by real injustices, for which the only solution is violent action that will supposedly lead to the victory of a monolithic Muslim world.
Never mind the inconvenient truth that the acts may be theologically impermissible; the ends justify the means, and there really is no alternative.
Such a narrative is appealing because it feeds into the alienation that many young Muslims feel.
Some may look to unpopular and unjust foreign adventures in Iraq as examples of the futility of lawful political action.
Others feel suffocated by the prevailing toxic discourse that casts European Muslims as foreign, alien, and suspect.
Laws enacted to single out and “persecute” Muslims, and statements that affirm the Islamophobia of our media, buttress the absurd notion that what we are really witnessing is a “war on Islam.”
In Muslim communities everywhere, there is a need to challenge this narrative by making known Islam’s theological repudiation of violence.
We must redouble our efforts to reach out in local communities and demonstrate the realities of our faith.
Thus, one should pay tribute to the resilience of Dutch Muslims as they resist the provocations of the right-wing politician Geert Wilders, who is bent on releasing a film that can only inflame public prejudice against Islam.
Muslims in The Netherlands are responding by opening up their mosques and reaching out to neighbors.
There is a collective responsibility to treat such problems not as Muslim issues, but as problems whose solutions will enhance the values on which European society is based.
Addressing the sense of injustice, siege, and alienation faced by young Muslims is not a victory for the extremists. Rather, it is a victory for European liberal values because it demonstrates that every individual and every minority is of equal worth.
Indeed, we should view neither homegrown terrorism nor the presence of Muslims as new to Europe.
Islam’s interaction with European society sparked a flowering of knowledge, and large numbers of Muslims have inhabited the Balkans and eastern and central Europe for hundreds of years.
They helped rebuild the economies of war-torn Europe in the 1950’s, arriving as immigrants and then making Europe their home.
In almost every field of life, Muslims have been an integral part of the European tapestry.
All Europeans, including those who are Muslim, are right to worry about the issue of homegrown terrorism.
Our right to security and life is paramount, as is the need to inhabit a space free of prejudice and suspicion.
The 7/7 bombings in 2005 in my home city of London brought this into sharp relief.
The victims were of all faiths and races, including Muslims, as were the heroes who helped London get back on its feet so quickly.
Londoners’ collective message after 7/7 was decisive, and it must be Europe’s message as well: we will not allow such atrocities to divide us.
The Myth of Rising Protectionism
CAMBRIDGE – There was a dog that didn’t bark during the financial crisis: protectionism.
Despite much hue and cry about it, governments have in fact imposed remarkably few trade barriers on imports.
Indeed, the world economy remains as open as it was before the crisis struck.
Protectionism normally thrives in times of economic peril.
Confronted by economic decline and rising unemployment, governments are much more likely to pay attention to domestic pressure groups than to upholding their international obligations.
As John Maynard Keynes recognized, trade restrictions can protect or generate employment during economic recessions.
But what may be desirable under extreme conditions for a single country can be highly detrimental to the world economy.
When everyone raises trade barriers, the volume of trade collapses. No one wins.
That is why the disastrous free-for-all in trade policy during the 1930’s greatly aggravated the Great Depression.
Many complain that something similar, if less grand in scope, is taking place today.
An outfit called the Global Trade Alert (GTA) has been at the forefront, raising alarm bells about what it calls “a protectionist juggernaut.”
The GTA’s latest report identifies no fewer than 192 separate protectionist actions since November 2008, with China as the most common target. This number has been widely quoted in the financial press.
Taken at face value, it seems to suggest that governments have all but abandoned their commitments to the World Trade Organization and the multilateral trade regime.
But look more closely at those numbers and you will find much less cause for alarm. Few of those 192 measures are in fact more than a nuisance.
The most common among them are the indirect (and often unintended) consequences of the bailouts that governments mounted as a consequence of the crisis. The most frequently affected sector is the financial industry.
Moreover, we do not even know whether these numbers are unusually high when compared to pre-crisis trends.
The GTA report tells us how many measures have been imposed since November 2008, but says nothing about the analogous numbers prior to that date.
In the absence of a benchmark for comparative assessment, we do not really know whether 192 “protectionist” measures is a big or small number.
What about the recent tariffs imposed by the United States on Chinese tires?
President Barack Obama’s decision to introduce steep duties (set at 35% in the first year) in response to a US International Trade Commission ruling (sought by US labor unions) has been widely criticized as stoking the protectionist fires.
But it is easy to overstate the significance of this case, too.
The tariff is fully consistent with a special arrangement negotiated at the time of China’s accession to the WTO, which allows the US to impose temporary protection when its markets are “disrupted” by Chinese exports.
The tariffs that Obama imposed were considerably below what the USITC had recommended.
And, in any case, the measure affects less than 0.3% of China’s exports to the US.
The reality is that the international trade regime has passed its greatest test since the Great Depression with flying colors.
Trade economists who complain about minor instances of protectionism sound like a child whining about a damaged toy in the wake of an earthquake that killed thousands.
Three things explain this remarkable resilience: ideas, politics, and institutions.
Economists have been extraordinarily successful in conveying their message to policymakers – even if ordinary people still regard imports with considerable suspicion.
Nothing reflects this better than how “protection” and “protectionists” have become terms of derision.
After all, governments are generally expected to provide protection to its citizens.
But if you say that you favor protection from imports , you are painted into a corner with Reed Smoot and Willis C. Hawley, authors of the infamous 1930 US tariff bill.
But economists’ ideas would not have gone very far without significant changes in the underlying configuration of political interests in favor of open trade. For every worker and firm affected adversely by import competition, there is one or more worker and firm expecting to reap the benefits of access to markets abroad.
The welfare state is the flip side of the open economy.
If the world has not fallen off the protectionist precipice during the crisis, as it did during the 1930’s, much of the credit must go the social programs that conservatives and market fundamentalists would like to see scrapped.
The battle against trade protection has been won – so far.
But, before we relax, let’s remember that we still have not addressed the central challenge the world economy will face as the crisis eases: the inevitable clash between China’s need to produce an ever-growing quantity of manufactured goods and America’s need to maintain a smaller current-account deficit.
Unfortunately, there is little to suggest that policymakers are yet ready to confront this genuine threat.
The Myth of “Superstar Cities”
In a much-talked-about recent paper entitled “Superstar Cities,” economists Joseph Gyourko, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai argue that such high-status cities – not only London, Paris, and New York, but also cities like Philadelphia and San Diego – may show an “ever-widening gap in housing values” when compared with other cities.
The authors seem to be saying, in effect, that a housing boom in these areas can go on forever.
Any claim like that will inevitably attract attention.
As a well-known skeptic about booming housing prices, I have been asked on several recent occasions to participate in debates with one or another of the authors.
Many people view the superstar city theory as confirming their hunch that, despite the current slowdown in home prices elsewhere (particularly in the United States), investors can expect to make huge long-term gains by buying homes in these cities, even though the homes there are already expensive.
But, as I have said in my debates with the authors, if one reads their paper carefully and thinks about the issues, one would see that there is no reason at all to draw such a conclusion.
Why should home values in glamour cities increase forever?
Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai justify their claim by arguing that these cities really are unique.
They have only limited land, and if one assumes ever-increasing GDP and rising income inequality, there will always be more and more wealthy people to bid up prices in these scarce areas.
They show convincing evidence for these basic facts.
Rich people increasingly populate the most expensive cities.
Real GDP has been increasing at around 3% a year in advanced countries, and even faster recently in many emerging countries.
And, of course, we aren’t getting any more land in these cities.
But what do these arguments really mean for the outlook for investments in homes in superstar cities?
Let us consider the fixity of land.
While there is only so much land in any one of the existing superstar cities, in every case, there are vast amounts of land where a new city could be started. And new cities are started, taking away from the “uniqueness” of existing cities.
The best-known examples of such grand new cities are planned capitals, typically built near countries’ geographic center.
These include Brasilia (1950’s), Canberra (1910’s), Islamabad (1960’s), New Delhi (1910’s), and Washington DC (1790’s). In each of these cases, a planner built the whole city infrastructure to make it a cohesive, attractive place.
The obvious success of these cities, as both government and economic centers, attests to the fact that urban land derives value from the presence of a well-planned city there.
Where land today is cheap, it will have great value in the future if only someone takes the dramatic step of planning and creating a whole city there.
True, the establishment of such cities is a relatively rare event.
Private developers have trouble getting a large plot free of restrictions.
But they tend to be ingenious at developing glamorous new areas from little towns within an hour’s commute from major cities.
It happens in so many places and so regularly that we take it for granted and rarely even notice it.
Indeed, since the industrial revolution, the development of such new urban areas is a central theme in the history of the world.
New cities are constantly ripening like so many cherries on a tree, drawing people away from older, original cities.
And the new cities have a way of looking brighter and fresher than the old urban areas, which are often seen as jumbled and decaying.
How much might we expect a home in a famous city to outperform other real estate as a long-term investment?
The answer: not much at all.
Prices in the cities that Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai identify as superstars generally appreciated by no more than one or two percent a year more than in the average city from 1950 to 2000, and even that difference is probably largely due to an increase in the size and quality of homes.
According to the Coldwell Banker Home Price Comparison Index, which compares the price of a standard 2,200 square-foot four-bedroom house across cities, the most expensive city in the US is Beverly Hills (the legendary home of movie stars).
The standard home there is 4.25 times as expensive as one in an average city in the US.
Assuming that quadrupling of relative value occurred over a hundred years, the excess return on investment amounts to only 1.5% per year – hardly the kind of performance that real estate enthusiasts are expecting.
Finally, as Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai themselves note, even these small long-term differences in home price across cities have tended to be offset by lower rent-price ratios in the superstar cities.
For an investor, the rate of return is the sum of the rate of appreciation and the rent-price ratio, so the low rent-price ratio reduces the advantage of faster appreciation.
Most of the popular attention that the “superstar cities” theory has received merely reflects the psychology of the housing boom that we have been seeing, as well as a wishful thinking bias.
People want to believe that the boom will continue, and that their investments in their favorite city are thus special and exciting.
But there is no generally applicable reason to make aggressive investments in superstar cities.
On the contrary, there are many reasons to worry about investing in such places.
The Myth of the “Ownership Society”
&quot;No,&quot; said former Fox News journalist Tony Snow, newly appointed as one of George W. Bush’s closest aides, his Press Secretary, when asked recently about his retirement savings.
“As a matter of fact, I was even too dopey to get in on a 401(k).
So there is actually no Fox pension.
The only media pension I have is through AFTRA.”
A 401(k) is a heavily tax-favored account in which workers can save money for their retirement.
Typically, employers – including Fox News – match workers’ 401(k) contributions, so setting up a 401(k) is an irresistible financial deal, a true no-brainer.
Yet Tony Snow didn’t.
Only the union he was forced to join, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, has been doing any formal saving and earmarking of his retirement assets.
Snow’s case, I think, holds very important lessons, and not just for the United States.
To the extent that the Bush administration has a coherent philosophy for domestic policy, it is the idea of the “ownership society” – the belief that intermediary institutions, whether governments, unions, or the benefits departments of companies, should get out of the business of providing social insurance.
Instead, individuals should rely on their own assets to provide them with financial security in retirement or in case of serious illness.
Give people the incentives to plan for their future, ownership-society advocates argue, and they will.
In the future, Snow will have to stand up at the podium in the White House briefing room and advocate the various components of Bush’s ownership-society proposals.
He will have to praise Health Security Accounts – and argue that people won’t stop going to the doctor for preventive care even if their HSA-tied insurance plan doesn’t pick up any of the bills.
He will have to praise privatization of Social Security – and argue that individuals will make prudent and wise investment decisions with this baseline tranche of their potential retirement resources.
And he will have to praise the decline of unions and the shedding of benefits by firms – and argue that individuals will make better choices than union experts or firms’ benefit departments.
The assembled reporters will look at him, and they will recall that when he was offered an unbelievably good financial deal, he was too “dopey” to take advantage of it.
And they might reasonably conclude that his failure to channel some of his Fox News salary into a 401(k) account is a very powerful argument against the words coming out of his mouth.
This is not to say that the issues are simple or that there are easy answers.
America has many people who do not set up 401(k) accounts, despite enormous incentives to do so.
It also has people who do set up 401(k) accounts and then invest them badly – for example, Enron workers whose 401(k) money was overwhelmingly invested in company stock lost not only their jobs when the company went bankrupt, but also their pension assets.
There are also well-known examples of highly corrupt union pension funds, such as the one bilked for years by the leadership of the Teamsters.
Finally, there is the example of politicians like George W. Bush, who enacted a government program that promises comprehensive drug benefits to the elderly and mammoth profits to pharmaceutical companies.
His administration may preach the virtues of individual responsibility, but its program makes no provision for how and where the government is going to secure the resources needed to finance its promises.
In short, there are psychological and moral failures at all levels – individuals, firms, unions, insurance companies, and governments.
Difficult problems of institutional design compound the difficulty of reforming social-welfare programs.
America must also deal with the potential for corruption, both illegal in the case of the diversion of Teamsters’ pension resources and legal in the campaign contributions provided by the pharmaceutical lobby to complaisant members of Congress.
These problems are not America’s alone, for they are inherent to all efforts to privatize social welfare.
As Americans and others look at this Gordian knot of public policy problems, we should learn one thing from the example of Tony Snow: the vision of an “ownership society” espoused by Bush is simply not plausible.
If it were, his new press secretary would not be describing himself as “dopey.”
The Myth of the Shia Crescent
AMMAN – Recently, Israel’s Vice Prime Minister Shaul Mofaz offered an unequivocal veto on a key issue in the Middle East peace process.
Any return of the Golan Heights to Syria would result in an “Iranian foothold” on Israel’s border and would thus not only be politically naïve but irrational.
Mofaz’s statement is symptomatic of a perception that is now deeply entrenched, not only in the Middle East, but in the United States as well.
That notion is of a hegemonic Iran that is attempting to dominate the region through an array of Shiite proxies.
This Iranian fifth column is believed to stretch from Beirut via Damascus, Gaza to Baghdad and finally from Iran to Saudi-Arabia to Yemen.  Recent armed clashes between Hezbollah and the Lebanese government are, it is said, just another sign of Iran’s hegemonic reach.
Ironically, this perception brings Israel some rather unlikely partners.
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt claims that Shiites are “always loyal to Iran,&quot; while King Abdullah of Jordan has coined the axiom about a rising “Shiite crescent.”
This “rise of the Shiites” and the resulting “Sunni/Shia divide” is alleged to be creating an ever widening chasm in the region.
Although this perception may convince at first glance, it is ultimately based on generalizations that reveal more about its advocates than the actual reality on the ground.
Take Iraq, where the looming “Shia crescent” is often blamed for much of the chaos.