PARIS – Climate change is already wreaking havoc throughout the developing world.
Vietnam, for example, has reported that natural disasters, some of them exacerbated by climate change, have caused annual losses equivalent to 2% of its GDP.
In agriculture-dependent countries like Ethiopia, longer droughts and more frequent flooding are threatening livelihoods and food supplies.
As the international community gears up for the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in December, identifying and streamlining sources of financing for the fight against climate change must be a top priority.
Development banks like the French Development Agency (AFD), where I am CEO, are well placed to contribute.
For starters, development banks can finance projects that benefit both development and the environment.
Global warming is now a vital factor to consider when planning any development project.
For example, the effects of climate change can pose critical risks to infrastructure – agricultural irrigation, public transportation, or nearly anything else.
Meanwhile, rising incomes – a goal of any development effort – nearly always means increased consumption of natural resources and energy, resulting in more emissions and further warming.
Such interlocking relationships between global warming and development explain why the French government requires that at least 50% of the funding provided by the AFD be directed toward development projects that also have a positive impact on the environment.
Examples include wind farms in Ethiopia, better forest management in Madagascar, nationwide climate plans in Indonesia and Vietnam, and clean urban transport in Colombia.
Development banks can also play an important role in designing financial tools that allow private investors to contribute to the fight against climate change.
But today’s funding challenge is no longer just about quantity.
Though potential sources for climate-friendly development financing now include pension funds, insurance companies, foundations, and sovereign wealth funds, what is often missing are mechanisms to ensure that investments are channeled into well-targeted and effective projects.
One solution is “green” (or “climate”) bonds.
These instruments have all the characteristics of conventional bonds, but they are backed by investments that contribute to sustainable development or the fight against climate change.
Until recently, only a few organizations or governments, including the World Bank, the American state of Massachusetts, and the French region of Île de France, issued green bonds, and generally the amounts involved were modest.
But in the past two years, other players have entered the market, and volumes have skyrocketed.
In 2014, emissions of green bonds exceeded the total in all previous years combined.
Indeed, demand is outstripping supply.
The latest bond offers were all oversubscribed – and the trend is likely to continue.
The insurance industry has committed to double its green investments, to $84 billion, by the end of 2015.
And in September, three major pension funds from North America and Europe announced plans to increase their holdings in low-carbon investments by more than $31 billion by 2020.
As the market for these bonds expands, they must be better labeled and certified.
Today, harmonized standards do not exist.
The quality of the assets backing the bonds depends solely on issuers’ goodwill and technical skills.
Specific guidelines and rating methods need to be developed.
In this context, the recent decision by a coalition of institutional investors to measure and disclose the carbon footprint of at least $500 billion in investments is a step forward.
In September, the AFD issued €1 billion ($1.2 billion) in climate bonds, with one goal being to contribute to the development of concrete quality standards.
With the help of a major agency that rates corporate social responsibility, we were able to provide investors with solid information – and an accountability process – about the portfolio’s direct impact on greenhouse-gas emissions.
Indeed, the projects financed by these bonds were required to meet stringent criteria, including a prior analysis of their carbon footprint, proof of a clear and significant impact on climate change, and a design that is aligned with the broader strategies being pursued by local actors and countries.
Climate bonds have the potential to empower countries and institutions as they move toward meeting enforceable commitments to reduce CO2 emissions.
However, if they are to be effective, they will require clear guidelines and a reliable framework for assessment.
As leaders from countries and institutions from around the world prepare to meet in Paris in December, getting the financing right should be a top priority.
What’s Wrong with Evidence-Based Medicine?
SEATTLE – Every health-care system balances coverage, quality, and cost – often focusing on one or two at the expense of the others.
European systems, for example, tend to focus on coverage and ensure universal access to care; in the United States, by contrast, quality appears to be paramount.
But, whatever one’s view is about the proper priorities, it is clear that the US has room for improvement in all three areas.
Fortunately, efforts are underway to address each of them.
And efforts in the US have implications for other countries as well.
The US Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the landmark legislation now widely known as “Obamacare”) aims to widen coverage, while so-called accountable care organizations, such as Kaiser Permanente, try to contain costs by aligning the interests of providers and payers.
However, efforts to raise quality through the application of evidence-based medicine (EBM) risk ignoring what we know about human cognition and expertise, and may undermine the vital role played by a physician’s expert judgment.
There are at least three reasons to be wary.
For starters, EBM is grounded in a fundamental distrust of physicians’ intuition – that is, the rendering of pattern-based judgments that rely on years of experience.
To be sure, there are good reasons to be skeptical of intuition, given the countless cases in which it has proved to be wrong.
But it does not follow that all cases of intuition are flawed or that skilled intuition has no function in healthcare.
Physicians develop expertise over many years, and when they have ample opportunities for feedback about their judgments, their intuitions are valuable, particularly in more complex cases.
An experienced physician will evaluate a patient’s vital signs and test results in the context of the patient’s life – for example, whether he is an octogenarian with diabetes and a smoker’s cough, or a three-week premature baby.
With heuristics, intuition, and experience, an experienced physician can best understand a complicated case and develop a plan.
In fact, an experienced doctor’s conclusions may be more accurate than those provided by EBM.
That is because EBM, though based on data from randomized trials and rigorous experiments, is designed for situations that approximate the conditions of patients in those tests.
The problem is that when the context changes, the trial results become less reliable.
In such cases, the physician must determine how close his or her patient’s situation matches that in the relevant studies.
If the disease is not as advanced as in the trials, the doctor will have to decide whether to embark on the recommended protocol.
And clinicians may be unsure about which constraints are inviolate.
Ultimately, the final judgment is informed by personal experience and pattern recognition, an approach that EBM supporters discount or even disparage.
A second problem with EBM is that it offers little guidance when a medical condition is evolving.
For example, acute asthma may be the focus of care at one moment, but might shift to the patient’s diabetes later.
EBM guidelines focus on asthma treatment or diabetes, but not both, or even how they may interact and change over time.
Finally, and perhaps most critically, one must ask how clinicians are to make decisions when there are gaps in the EBM knowledge base.
Doctors often spot trends and develop hypotheses that involve guesswork, and that are validated by trials only later.
Should doctors therefore ignore observed patterns until the data are in?
Indeed, one might wonder how such trials are initiated at all if clinicians do not tentatively explore a problem in the first place.
To insist that all treatment decisions be based on existing best practices stifles this exploration and prevents potential medical breakthroughs.
Advocates of EBM respond that it is the job of researchers to generate the data that are turned into best practices; the clinician’s role is to implement the results.
But this approach runs counter to medical history, in which advances come only after practitioners notice anomalies, discover flaws in current “best practices,” or improve on existing approaches.
Many medical advances, from ulcer therapies to joint replacement, have evolved through clinician curiosity, not as a result of trials.
Moreover, important sources of EBM have themselves proved to be misleading.
The Framingham Heart Study, considered the gold standard in its field, was shown to be flawed, owing to its focus on white males.
For example, a key symptom of a heart attack identified by the study (the feeling of “an elephant sitting on my chest”) is found in only 5% of women.
As one emergency medicine physician ruefully admitted to us, “I think about all the women I sent home to their deaths because I was following best practices.”
As we consider a likely future in which physicians adhering to EBM are paid more, we must consider the cognitive limitations and the human cost of unquestioning compliance with so-called “best practices.”
A more effective approach must be to combine EBM with the expertise and intuition of experienced caregivers, and to take the benefits of both.
Diagnosis as Public Policy
When we think about medical diagnosis, we usually think in terms of science.
The conventional (and accurate) wisdom is that diseases are named and classified on the basis of scientific research.
For example, the roughly decennial revisions of the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Diseases (ICD) partly reflect advances in scientific understanding of diseases and injuries.
The cataloging and naming of diseases is a condition of scientific research, as well as its product.
Indeed, how are doctors to explain and control disease without a common language for the phenomena that they observe?
The ICD comprehends the entire spectrum of human disease and injury, and its updates reflect the best new knowledge as well as set the stage for the next wave of medical advances.
But the formal classification of diseases has another aspect, one that concerns a variety of important social functions.
It provides a set of disease names and numeric codes for assigning and tracking health-care expenditures and services.
Governments, insurance companies, and patients use these names and codes in accounting and budgeting.
The ICD code also frames eligibility for related social goods like hospital care, medical retirement, claims for disability compensation, hospice care, and home health care, to name a few.
From the doctor’s perspective, diagnostic classifications like the ICD provide the official language to be used in medical records, discussions with patients and their families, and in billing for services.
For patients, diagnostic classifications provide the framework for understanding their own and others’ disease processes.
Finally, diagnostic classification provides politicians the language for building or dismantling health programs.
Clearly, the public and social character of diagnostic classifications of disease extends to private organizations.
Consider organizations that regulate medical licenses or administer medical emergency relief funds.
(In the non-medical area, think of business organizations that regulate trade or educational commissions that accredit schools).
Government is hardly alone in creating the formal rules, principles, and guidelines that structure and regulate public life.
Public policy is defined by the public’s interest in the policy, not who made it.
At least in democratic societies, such policies should be accountable to the public, and the classification of diseases, since it serves many of the functions of public policy should be no different.
It turns out that psychiatry, in particular, has exhibited leadership and innovation in recognizing the public-policy aspects of diagnostic classification.
Both the ICD classification of mental disorders, and its American counterpart, the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) efforts have taken pains to make diagnostic classification accountable as examples of public policy.
Both organizations have included diverse representation on their working committees, invited input from “outsiders” to the professions and collaborated with related institutions and organizations in preparing their classification revisions.
In my view, the classification of mental disorders, as a form of public policy making, poses exceptional challenges.
A primary challenge is posed by the nature of mental illness itself.
Mental illness invades the mind and the self, the same domains where political beliefs and social interests reside.
The history of world psychiatry is peppered with diagnoses of mental illness based on political dissent.
Public policy concerning mental illness must, therefore, consider carefully the potential for imposing unjustified social and political values on people in the guise of the classification of disease.
On the other hand, psychiatric public policy must also take into consideration the feeble social and political status of the severely mentally ill.
Public policy concerning the mentally ill should empower, not marginalize.
The latter point, however, is where the current puzzles reside for psychiatric diagnosis as public policy.
As the WHO begins to plan the ICD eleventh edition and the American Psychiatric Association begins to plan the fifth edition of the DSM, one wonders how to ensure additional moral, social, and political accountability in what traditionally have been viewed as the instruments and products of science.
Should patients and their families be directly involved in the development of classifications?
If so, how?
If not, how can the needs of scientific credibility and public accountability be met?
While psychiatry may be leading the debate about these problems, other medical specialties cannot be far behind.
As scientific progress broadens the range of options regarding health, the trappings of social, political, and moral choice will increasingly infiltrate medical diagnoses.
Debates about reproductive freedom and “cosmetic” enhancements – such as the use of growth hormone to “treat” short stature – already occupy the news.
How will the associated conditions be classified?
By whose authority and with what accountability?
What social values will be advanced?
Classifying disease should reflect the best collaborations between science and politics.
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi was sent to Washington last week to apply the final touches to the preparations.
China also resumed high-level bilateral military exchanges, which it suspended a year ago to protest US arms sales to Taiwan. Robert Gates, the US
Secretary of Defense, was warmly welcomed by Hu and other Chinese leaders days before the Washington summit.
He even toured the People’s Liberation Army’s missile corps.
Obviously, China wants to cultivate a pleasant atmosphere for Hu’s state visit.
Most of the meeting’s agenda will be the same as at previous Sino-US summits.
President Barack Obama will likely raise issues such as the bilateral trade imbalance, the Chinese government’s manipulation of the renminbi’s exchange rate, prevention of nuclear proliferation, recent tension on the Korean peninsula, international cooperation on climate change, and China’s poor human rights record.
Hu’s reactions to Obama will also be familiar.
China will blame the trade imbalance on America’s ban on high-tech exports to China, deny engaging in currency manipulation, call on the US and its allies in East Asia to negotiate with North Korea without preconditions, insist on China’s entitlement as a developing country to an exemption from emissions caps on CO2, and refute criticism of its human rights record.
While neither side is likely to change its current position significantly, a new subject will probably arise at the meeting: China’s growing military power, and its influence on the Asian and Pacific region.
Just as China has replaced Japan as the world’s second largest economy, so its military might has grown rapidly in recent years.
As a result, the US, as the world’s strongest military power, wants to put bilateral military relations on the upcoming meeting’s agenda, along with bilateral economic relations and international political affairs.
Gates raised this issue during his recent talks with his Chinese counterpart, Liang Guanglie, proposing a mechanism for “strategic dialogue” between US and Chinese military forces, aimed at avoiding potential conflicts that might be caused by mutual misunderstanding and mistrust.
But Liang did not commit to such a formal arrangement.
Obama will surely raise the issue again at the upcoming summit.
But China’s attitude towards Sino-US military dialogue remains uncertain.
Despite its resistance to a strategic military dialogue with the US, it seems to crave America’s attention to its growing military might.
A few days before Gates’s visit, official Chinese media published a photo of the J-20 Black Eagle, a fifth generation stealth, twin-engine fighter aircraft made in China.
The media also reported the development of the Dong Feng 21D ballistic missile, described as an “aircraft carrier killer.”
From America’s point of view, China’s rapidly growing military power and lack of transparency have become grave concerns.
In recent years, China has become increasingly assertive in its territorial disputes with Japan and other countries around the South China Sea.
Indeed, Chinese leaders claim the South China Sea and the Yellow Sea as “core” national interests and openly express displeasure at the presence of US naval forces in these waters.
China’s behavior clearly shows its determination to become a regional power – indeed, the only military power in the region.
Given the strength and depth of America’s alliances within the Asia-Pacific region, tension between US and Chinese military forces has risen.
China believes that it has a legitimate right to increase its military power, given its need to protect its expanding economic interests, which include secure sea routes for the transport of energy and other goods.
The suspicions of China’s neighbors, and their moves to establish closer military relations with the US, have made the Chinese government increasingly anxious and frustrated.
At the same time, growing nationalist sentiment has put huge pressure on the government to be more aggressive and confrontational.
Putting strategic military dialogue on the US-Sino agenda benefits both sides.
For China, it is a symbol of recognition and respect as a regional military power.
And, on a practical level, frequent and regular high-level military exchanges between the US and China would greatly increase mutual confidence and trust at a time when their divergent interests might otherwise lead to conflict.
History shows that a rising military power will inevitably clash with an existing military power if they do not have regular, effective dialogue.
In that case, China’s claim to a peaceful rise would ring hollow.
China, the Asia-Pacific region, and the world would suffer greatly as a result.
Did America Really Kill the Trade Talks?
It is appalling that the world has decided to blame the United States for the crushing end to five years of global trade talks last month (the so-called “Doha round”).
I am the first to admit that the US under President George W. Bush has not covered itself with multilateral glory in recent years.
But accuse America of sabotaging the trade talks?
Give me a break.
Has anybody noticed that for more than a decade now, US imports have been averaging several hundred billion (thousand million) dollars more than exports?
Do people seriously believe that the US has accomplished its majestic trade deficit by shutting its doors to foreign goods?
On the contrary, through its low tariffs and general lack of import restrictions, the US has turned itself into an international shopping theme park.
Americans buy more foreign-made refrigerators, cars, clothing, computers – you name it – than anyone else.
Happily for world exporters, the same binge mentality that makes a whopping two-thirds of Americans either overweight or obese seems to extend to all their purchasing habits.
Since the start of this decade, neither recession nor hurricanes nor sky-high oil prices have seemed to dent their appetites.
The simple fact is that even if US trade negotiator Susan Schwab had refused to make a single “concession,” and if Europe, Japan, and the big emerging markets had kept their best offers on the table, the US would still remain more open than all but a few small countries.
True, in the endgame of the talks, the US caved in to its wealthy and powerful agribusiness lobby.
But that was only after five years of intransigence by Europe’s even more powerful farm lobbies.
And this is not to mention emerging market politicians’ failure to grasp that unilaterally reducing their excessive import restrictions would be a good idea even if rich countries sat on their hands.
What does last month’s trade fiasco mean?
Old hands know that global trade deals often rise out of the ashes of failed talks.
Unfortunately, such an outcome seems improbable now, especially since the US is unlikely to rejoin the talks anytime soon.
The opposition Democratic Party seems poised to take up growing wage inequality as a central issue in this year’s mid-term US congressional elections and in the 2008 presidential election.
To be sure, we economists have found that globalization appears to have played a far lesser role in growing wage inequality than have technological advances.
Even so, the explosion of exports coming out of low-wage regions like China and India is at least a piece of the puzzle.
The last thing that Bush’s Republicans want is to appear indifferent to the plight of the middle classes.
So, unfortunately, even if Europe came to its senses and emerging markets showed greater enthusiasm for liberal trade, we may not see a big global deal until the next decade.
How bad would that be?
After all, many Asian countries have achieved impressive export-led growth under the current system.
And bilateral or regional trade deals can chip away at some of the barriers in the current global system.
For example, a fundamental problem is that the nature of global trade is constantly evolving, and existing agreements have only limited capacity to adapt.
Services like education, banking, accounting, and insurance account for an ever larger share of global output (now roughly two-thirds), and further expansion requires significant changes in existing agreements.
Even if Asia has succeeded by relentlessly exporting manufactures, today’s poorest countries, especially in Africa, can realistically export only agriculture and textiles.
But these are precisely the range of goods that remain most protected under existing agreements.
Bilateral deals can help, but they can also lead to higher trade barriers for everyone else.
The current state of affairs is all the more depressing because global economic growth in the past four years has been the fastest since the early 1970’s.
Rapidly expanding global trade, combined with an ever-freer and faster exchange of people and ideas, has been a cornerstone of this growth, particularly of the strong productivity gains that underlie it.
Absent further trade agreements, there is a big risk that the pace of globalization will slow, with profound consequences for global poverty and welfare.
Outside Africa, the people who will suffer the most are those in countries like Brazil, India, China, and Mexico, whose leaders rightly took on rich-country farm subsidies, but wrongly failed to recognize the profound costs of the developing world’s own import restrictions.
So for now, the world must hope that Americans continue gorging on foreign imports.
Wallis Simpson, the controversial US-born Duchess of Windsor, once famously quipped, “You can never be too rich or too thin.”
Fortunately for everyone, America’s motto nowadays is “You can never be too rich or too large.”
When Americans finally decide to go on an import diet, as they will someday, the world’s hypocrisy over the failed global trade talks will become apparent to all.
Did Development Fail in Kenya?
Nairobi &#45;&#45; A month ago, Kenya fell prey to a sudden burst of post-electoral violence that has left over 1000 dead and hundreds of thousands displaced.
The intensity and scale of the violence have stunned the world.
Of course, Kenya had lived through tense electoral periods before, and few people who know Africa were blind to the many difficulties the country continued to face.
But things seemed to be going well recently.
This year’s campaign was exceptionally peaceful, and millions of citizens voted on December 27 – at times walking and queuing for hours to cast their ballot.
Perhaps more fundamentally, Kenya was unanimously seen as the “good student” of development, sometimes referred to as a symbol of an African renaissance.
The “Kenya vision 2030 framework,” a set of ambitious macroeconomic, legal, and constitutional reforms, was being implemented in close partnership with the World Bank.
Cherished by the donor community, Kenya received almost $1 billion of official development assistance in 2006 – up by 250% since 2002.
Its booming horticulture and tourist industries were hailed as models for other African states in their efforts to integrate into world trade.
The country’s economic expansion, which averaged 5.5% in the last four years and fuelled the progress of neighboring economies, appeared to prove that vigorous growth is possible in Africa even without mineral or fossil resources.
Today, this economic miracle is up in the air.
All is not lost, and there are strong reasons to believe that Kenyans will surmount the current political crisis and put the country back on its promising track.
Nevertheless, as we sit on the brink of the abyss, it is worth re-examining our assumptions that since poverty breeds conflict, socio-economic development must foster political stability and reduce recourse to violence.
The first lesson we should draw from this month of civil strife is that development, however well-managed, cannot solve everything.
Some tensions are deeply ingrained in societies, and peace requires more than any development agency can deliver.
Parallel to the growth agenda, there is a specific role for bilateral and multilateral diplomacy to play in support of improved governance.
In fact, development itself generates a number of strains on societies that lie at the very roots of conflict.
Fast-paced changes of identity caused by urbanization, the empowerment of women or exposure to foreign media tend to weaken traditional norms and social networks.
And, at least initially, economic growth tends to increase inequalities within a country, as some communities or individuals benefit from rising income and others don’t.
By displacing traditional centers of power, development can nurture collective resentment.
Ethnic manipulation is a small step away, which many political leaders are disposed to take.
None of this, however, disproves the link between development and peace, or inverts the correlation.
At both the micro and the macro level, development projects and economic growth can do much to alleviate some of the structural causes of political violence.
But development professionals, whose first duty is to “do no harm,” should be more conscious of the complex strains brought upon developing societies.
In Kenya too, this sensitivity has not sufficiently infused our organizations and projects.
Ultimately, the enhanced economic activity that development generates is the only way to reduce inequalities, particularly in a context of rapid demographic growth: it is easier to work on a fairer distribution of a growing pie than of a shrinking one.
Moreover, fast-paced but ill-distributed economic growth can be accompanied by programs that focus on those who are left behind, thereby mitigating grievances.
It is no coincidence that much of Kenya’s ongoing violence is occurring in the slums of its large cities.
Had more attention been given to the country’s most glaring inequalities in access to water, shelter, or jobs, this population might not have chosen violence as an instrument of change.
Let us draw the right lessons from Kenya: socio-economic progress remains our best tool to prevent conflict in the long run.
But the relationship between growth and political stability is subtler and less linear than we like to believe.
Development is no miracle solution to violence, and may create its own set of grievances – particularly when done without regard to the abrupt changes it brings to societies.
Kenya isn’t an illustration of development failing, but of development at work: complex, powerful, and yet fragile.
Did Humans Invent Modernity?
Fossil remains and genetic data suggest that modern humans come from Africa, and in the last decade anthropologists, archaeologists, linguists, and other scientists have tended to identify our species' biological origin with the origin of modern intelligence.
The idea is quite simple.
The process that produced our species in Africa granted it a number of advantages - syntactical language, advanced cognition, symbolic thinking - that favored its spread throughout the world and determined its eventual evolutionary success.
Moreover, anatomically modern populations shared a number of these innovations with Neanderthals, which many anthropologists and geneticists consider a different species, or a human type inherently incapable of reaching our cognitive level.
But these innovations do not seem to have been widespread.
After all, it took 7,000 years for agriculture to arrive in England from the Near East, and nobody would argue that the cognitive abilities of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers from England were inferior to those of early agriculturalists.
This suggests that the trajectory of we "moderns" in our transformations since the end of the Ice Age has varied enormously in material culture.
Future archaeologists would do well not to seek an explanation of this variation in terms of visible differences in our skeletal biology!
"Modern" behavior may have appeared in different regions and among different groups of humans, much as would happen later in history with the inventions of agriculture, writing, and transport.
More fundamentally, behavior is certainly a significant component in determining a species' adaptation, geographic range, and mate-recognition system - all of which contribute to the maintenance of species boundaries.
This is a liberating, as well as a humbling, prospect.
If the fact that we are the only human species left on earth is the result of an historical accident rather than Darwinian competition, we can open our minds and accept that we share some of our "culture" with both our living and no longer living relatives.
Our modernity is probably a part of their legacy as well.
Digital Globalization and the Developing World
BERKELEY – Globalization is entering a new era, defined not only by cross-border flows of goods and capital, but also, and increasingly, by flows of data and information.
This shift would seem to favor the advanced economies, whose industries are at the frontier in employing digital technologies in their products and operations.
Will developing countries be left behind?
For decades, vying for the world’s low-cost manufacturing business seemed to be the most promising way for low-income countries to climb the development ladder.
Global trade in goods rose from 13.8% of world GDP in 1985 ($2 trillion) to 26.6% of GDP ($16 trillion) in 2007.
Propelled by demand and outsourcing from advanced economies, emerging markets won a growing share of the soaring trade in goods; by 2014, they accounted for more than half of global trade flows.
Since the Great Recession, however, growth in global merchandise trade has stalled, mainly owing to anemic demand in the world’s major economies and plummeting commodity prices.
But deeper structural changes are also playing a role.
Many companies are simplifying and shortening their supply chains.
For a range of goods, automation means that production location and outsourcing decisions no longer depend primarily on labor costs.
Quality of talent, infrastructure, energy costs, and speed to market are assuming greater weight in such decisions.
In the near future, 3D printing could further reduce the need to ship goods across long distances.
If trade in global goods has indeed peaked relative to global GDP, it will be harder for poor countries in Africa, Latin America, and Asia to develop by becoming the world’s next workshops.
But globalization itself is not in retreat.
While global goods trade has stalled and cross-border financial flows have fallen sharply since 2007, flows of digital information have surged: Cross-border bandwidth use has grown 45-fold over the past decade, circulating ideas, intellectual content, and innovation around the world.
New research from the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) finds that cross-border flows of goods, services, finance, people, and data during this period increased world GDP by roughly 10% – roughly an additional $7.8 trillion in 2014 alone.
Data flows accounted for an estimated $2.8 trillion of this gain, exerting a larger impact than global goods trade – a remarkable finding, given that the world’s trade networks developed over centuries while cross-border data flows were nascent just 15 years ago.
Digitization disrupts everything: the nature of goods changing hands; the universe of potential suppliers and customers; the method of delivery, and the capital and scale required to operate globally.
It expands opportunities for more types of firms, individuals, and countries to participate in the global economy.
It also gives countries and companies everywhere an opportunity to redefine their comparative and competitive advantage.
For example, while the United States may have been at a disadvantage in a world where low labor costs were paramount in global manufacturing value chains, digital globalization plays directly to its strengths in technology and innovation.
On its face, this shift to digital globalization would seem to work against developing countries that have large pools of low-cost labor but inadequate infrastructure and education systems.
Advanced economies dominate MGI’s latest Connectedness Index, which ranks countries on both inflows and outflows of goods, services, finance, people, and data relative to their size and share in each type of global flow.
These flows are disproportionately concentrated among a small set of countries, including the US, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Singapore, with huge gaps between the leaders and laggards.
China is the only emerging economy to have made it to the top ten on the index.
Yet digital flows offer developing countries new ways of engaging with the global economy.
The near-zero marginal costs of digital communications and transactions create new possibilities for conducting cross-border business on a massive scale.
Alibaba, Amazon, eBay, Flipkart, and Rakuten are turning millions of small enterprises around the world into “micro-multinational” exporters.
Companies based in developing countries can overcome local market constraints and connect with customers, suppliers, financing, and talent worldwide.
Twelve percent of global goods trade is already conducted in ecommerce channels.
Moreover, a country need not develop its own Silicon Valley to benefit.
Countries on the periphery of the network of global data flows can benefit more than countries in the center.
Digital connections promote productivity growth; indeed, they can help developing economies move to the productivity frontier by exposing their business sectors to ideas, research, technologies, and best management and operational practices, and by building new channels to serve large global markets.
But the Internet cannot deliver such improvements in efficiency and transparency unless countries build the digital infrastructure needed to connect the world’s huge offline population.
The number of Internet users worldwide now exceeds 3.2 billion, but at the end of 2015, 57% of the world’s population, or four billion people, remained offline, and many who are online use only basic cell phones.
In many developing countries, connectivity is too slow, unreliable, or expensive to allow entrepreneurs and individuals to take full advantage of the new global business and educational opportunities.
Education systems will also need to keep up with demand for language fluency and digital skills.
While 40% of the world’s population are connected to the Internet, 20% are still unable to read and write.
According to another recent MGI study, there are also large gender gaps in access to digital technologies around the world, and this lack of access impedes women’s economic and social empowerment.
Lagging countries that fail to promote gender equality, invest in education, and adopt broader governance and regulatory reforms risk falling even further behind in reaping the significant benefits of globalization.
Twenty-first-century globalization, driven by digitization and rapid changes in competitive advantage, can disrupt local industries, companies, and communities and cause job loss, even as it spurs greater productivity, boosts overall employment, and generates economy-wide gains.
Governments must consider these trade-offs carefully, and develop ways to support those who are harmed by global flows, giving them paths to new roles and livelihoods. To date, few governments have done so.
Ironically, the political backlash against globalization is gaining momentum in many places even as digitization increases the opportunities and economic benefits that globalization has to offer.
Dignity or Decline?
TOKYO – Kokka no Hinkaku, The Dignity of a State, is the title of a recent book by the Japanese mathematician Masahiko Fujiwara that has sold three million copies.
Talk about the book in Japan is so fervid that the term “dignity” (hinkaku) has become a buzzword.
That Japan’s dignity is now a central issue should surprise no one.
For this is a moment when Japan must chart its course – either decline or dignity – as a “state” (kokka) in relation to its giant neighbor, China.
The issue of relations with China crystallized in September, when the Japanese Coast Guard arrested the captain of a Chinese trawler after his ship hit two Japanese patrol boats near the Senkaku Islands, which are part of Japan and within its territorial waters.
Tension between Japan and China – which claims the islands – immediately soared.
For many years, Japanese governments have taken a “let-sleeping-dogs-lie” approach to territorial disputes over the islands, ignoring repeated provocations by China (and Taiwan).
But that ended with the election of September 2009, which ushered in the pro-China administration of Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama.
Hatoyama was naïve enough to declare publicly his intention of turning the East China Sea into a Chinese-led “Sea of Fraternity.”
He also earned the distrust of the United States, Japan’s most important ally, by advocating the relocation outside Japan of a US air base on Okinawa.
Diplomatic realism was not restored after Hatoyama’s fall from power earlier this year. Instead, his successor, Naoto Kan, continues to believe that Japan can somehow opt out of history and a turbulent region.
Speaking at the United Nations plenary meeting this September, Kan said that his government seeks to achieve a “society in which human suffering is reduced a minimum.”
National security is treated as a low-grade issue.
Meanwhile, China is following its own definition of “dignity,” which looks to almost everyone in Asia – other than Kan’s government – as a right to dominate.
Indeed, China no longer even tries to hide its desire for hegemony in the Pacific.
China appears to have seen the standoff over the Senkaku Islands as a test of wills – a test Kan’s government failed abysmally.
In retaliation for Japan’s refusal to release the trawler captain, China hinted that it might recall its ambassador from Tokyo, suspended bilateral ministerial-level exchanges, and canceled a tour to Japan for about 10,000 Chinese.
More ominously, the Chinese arrested four employees of Fujita, a Japanese construction company, on suspicion of espionage.
The four were in China for a project commissioned by the Japanese government to dispose of chemical weapons abandoned by the Japanese military after World War II.
Chinese officials also suggested the possibility of banning exports to Japan of rare-earth elements – raw materials crucial for many Japanese manufacturing processes – and appear to have done so informally.
Inexperienced and diplomatically inept, Kan’s administration buckled, releasing the trawler captain early. His government then sought to pin the blame on the local prosecutor who had formally arrested the captain.
This display of weak-kneed diplomacy appalled many Japanese, and popular support for Kan’s administration has plummeted.
The de facto export ban on rare-earth elements – often referred to as “industrial vitamins” – struck a terrible blow to Japanese companies, which rely on China for 97% of their supply.
Among a variety of rare-earth elements, neodymium and dysprosium are widely used as a magnetic material for motors in environmentally friendly vehicles and home appliances, while erbium is used as a dopant in optical fibers and cerium as an abrasive for polishing liquid crystal display (LCD) glass.
The “rare-earth threat” is not confined to Japan, as China accounts for over 90% of the world’s production, roughly 120,000 tons.
But this shouldn’t be a threat at all, because the world has ample reserves of these elements.
Indeed, rare-earth elements are “rare” only in the sense that they are distributed in small quantities and must be extracted from ores, a time-consuming process.
Rare-earth mines are found throughout the world.
China dominates the global market simply because it has fairly abundant rare-earth ores close to the surface.
Of course, China also has abundant cheap labor to process ore.
Rare-earth ores in southern China – all except for those in Inner Mongolia – contain radioactive substances that pose significant threats to human health and the environment.
Other countries might worry about the health risk to workers in rare-earth processing, but that does not appear to be true of China.
In the face of aggressive price cutting by Chinese rare-earth producers, many mines in the US and elsewhere in the world were shut down over the years.
Even before the trawler incident, China was trying to regulate rare-earths, defining them as a strategic resource.
Chinese officials say that concern over the overexploitation and illicit export of rare earths prompted them to regulate the industry more closely.
But this regulation, when combined with China’s aggressive pricing, suggests a desire to assert monopoly control, and the de facto ban of rare-earth exports to Japan looks like an effort to test the benefits of this looming monopoly.
China’s move, however, put the rest of the world on alert.
Many countries are now planning to develop their own or alternative sources of rare-earth elements, and to accelerate efforts to develop technologies that are free of them.
But China has another motive for tightening the noose on rare-earth exports: it wants to force high-tech firms to operate in China, so that local companies can absorb their technologies.
A senior official of a Chinese company has said that, even though rare-earth exports have been restricted, Japanese companies can secure their supply by launching operations in China.
If there is a response to such blackmail that could preserve Japan’s dignity, the Kan government is unlikely to find it.
Belindia Has Spoken
SANTIAGO – Forty years ago, the Brazilian economist Edmar Bacha named his country Belindia: a combination of prosperous and modern Belgium and poor and backward India.
In last Sunday’s presidential election, according to many observers, the Indian part of Brazil voted for the incumbent, President Dilma Rousseff, and the Belgian part voted for the social democrat Aécio Neves.
India is larger, so Rousseff won.
This is fast becoming the standard account of Brazil’s election, the most acrimonious and hotly contested in recent memory.
And it is easy to see why.
In Brazil’s underdeveloped Nordeste, Dilma (in Brazil, politicians, like footballers, go by their first name) swept the vote.
In the relatively rich South, which accounts for 70% of Brazil’s economic output, Aécio won handily.
Similar divisions appear when voters are classified according to dependence on government handouts (high in the Northeast) or years of schooling (high in the South).
Yet there is more to this election than this broad-brush picture suggests.
In 1974, when Bacha coined his term, it went without saying that the prosperous and modern Brazil was just a tiny sliver of the total.
In 2014, Neves, the candidate of “Belgian” Brazil, won more than 48% of the vote.
That reveals how much the country has changed in the last four decades, and how large and influential its middle class has become.
It was precisely that middle class, fed up with allegations of corruption and a sluggish economy, that turned against the ruling Workers’ Party (PT) and voted for change.
But it is also striking that despite the weak economy – growth will barely average 1.5% during Rousseff’s first term, and the economy is now in a technical recession, having contracted in two consecutive quarters – Dilma and the PT managed to retain the support of Brazil’s tens of millions of poor and excluded citizens.
This is partly because the recession has not made a big dent in employment, which means that many households have yet to feel the impact.
Dilma was also helped by the commodity super-cycle, which filled Brazil’s coffers and made it possible to run ambitious cash-transfer programs that helped pull countless families out of poverty.
These policies were actually launched by former President Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Neves’s Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (PSDB), but are associated in the popular imagination with Dilma’s political mentor and predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, also of the PT.
By claiming (with no evidence) that Aécio would cut these popular programs, Dilma dealt the PSDB a sharp electoral blow.
Using commodity revenues to obtain political support is not a strategy unique to Brazil.
In Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Venezuela, populists have tried the same trick.
So have the vastly different governments of the conservative Sebastián Piñera and the socialist Michelle Bachelet in Chile.
And the similarities do not end there.
Now that the commodity boom is ending, all of these countries face the challenge of building a new economic engine to sustain growth and create jobs.
Without the commodity windfall, they must develop new sectors that can produce new goods and services, requiring new sets of skills and new types of infrastructure.
This is a tall order, especially for Brazil.
The structural deficiencies of its economy have long been understood, but little has been done to correct them.
Brazil has South America’s biggest government (with a tax take exceeding one-third of GDP), yet the authorities save and invest too little, which creates both micro- and macroeconomic problems.
On the micro side, too little public investment means poor infrastructure and high export costs.
Brazil has none of neighboring Argentina’s hefty export taxes, but its heavy transport costs have the same effect.
Education, too, receives little public funding, especially at the pre-school and primary levels.
Like Chile, Brazil has sharply increased school enrollment but has yet to provide high-quality learning opportunities to disadvantaged children.
In the OECD’s international PISA rankings of educational achievement, Brazil places near the bottom, below Mexico and Chile.
On the macro side, too little public savings means insufficient savings at the national level.
When international funds are available, this produces short-lived booms and large current-account deficits, financed by heavy external borrowing.
When international liquidity dries up, as it often does for Brazil and Latin America, weak domestic investment and sluggish growth follow.
Neves had a plan to address these shortcomings.
Dilma does not.
Her election-night speech was full of calls for unity and dialogue, and included a pledge to “take urgent action” to resume growth.
But, like her campaign, the speech was short on specifics.
On industrial policy, the PT has the right intuition but the wrong tools.
Partnering with leading domestic sectors to promote innovation is one thing; doing so through price controls (as with fuels), indiscriminate subsidies, and protectionism is another.
In recent years, Brazil has taken the latter route.
Rousseff has little time to waste.
She will govern a country with substantial public debt (60% of GDP), a volatile currency, and high inflation.
Nervous financial markets will keep the government on a tight leash.
Neves and his PSDB have come out of this election considerably strengthened, but they also will face difficult challenges in the coming years.
The social democrats will have a larger delegation in Congress (including Neves himself in the Senate) and will govern some of Brazil’s larger states, including São Paulo, home to 43 million people and one-third of the country’s GDP.
But to reach the Planalto Presidential Palace after the 2018 election, the PSDB will have to convince poor Brazilians – those living in Bacha’s India – that it works on their behalf, and that the policies it advocates benefit them the most.
Then, and only then, will Brazil’s longstanding divisions begin to heal.
When they do, the country will get the modern and effective social-democratic government that it deserves.
Diplomacy’s Darkest Hours
MADRID – Diplomacy is not having its finest hour nowadays.
Quite the contrary: resistance to diplomatic solutions is a common thread in most of today’s major conflicts.
Afghanistan will continue to bleed until the allies finally recognize that only by engaging the Taliban do they stand a chance of ending the war.
But the West will also have to recognize that conflicts with a potent cultural and religious component are simply not susceptible to a military solution – a realization that points toward ending the ostracism of political Islam – Hamas and Hezbollah, for example.
Meanwhile, Iran’s unstoppable rush to develop nuclear weapons could prove to be a monument to the international community’s failure to stem the atomic tide in the region.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to be the diplomatic charade that it has been for many years now.
Indeed, the list of Nobel Peace Prize laureates is not lacking in men – Roosevelt, George Marshall, Menachem Begin, Anwar Sadat, Yitzhak Rabin, Yasser Arafat, and Henry Kissinger – who either ended up recognizing the limits of military power or were simply following Clausewitz’s dictum that war is the continuation of politics by other means. 
Conflicts start to be ripe for diplomatic solutions only when the parties get trapped in an unbearably painful mutual deadlock.
Without such a deadlock, neither United Nations resolutions, nor premature peace initiatives can cut short the dynamic of war.
It is only then that formulas for power-sharing – such as those in Northern Ireland, Lebanon, Guatemala, or Iraq – emerge as a realistic alternative.
It was NATO’s robust military intervention, not European diplomacy, that created the conditions for the end of genocide and ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia.
Martti Ahtisaari fully deserved his Nobel Peace Prize for articulating a diplomatic solution to Kosovo’s drive for independence.
But this could not be achieved before Serbia was militarily humbled.
However encouraging, Czechoslovakia’s peaceful “velvet divorce” into two states has not been the norm in Europe or elsewhere.
If it were not for the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Israel and Egypt would never have reached a peace settlement.
And it was the first Gulf War and Palestinian Intifadah that created the conditions for the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference and the subsequent Oslo Accords.
After Rabin’s assassination, the notion has been gaining ground that any Israeli-Palestinian accord would be the “peace of the exhausted,” not Rabin’s “peace of the brave.”
But the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is nonetheless sui generis: either the parties’ six-decade mutual deadlock is not unbearable enough, or they prefer to pay the price of conflict rather than compromise their national ethos.
Such is now the loss of hope in a negotiated solution that those who advocate an internationally imposed solution seem to be gaining ground.
Internal conflicts that end not with mutual deadlock but with an overwhelming victory by one of the parties hardly ever produce diplomatic solutions.
Long years of mediation and endless peace proposals in the Sri Lanka conflict failed to end the war and the devastation of entire Tamil communities.
“Peace” came about only with the total and unconditional defeat of the Tamil Tiger rebels.
Likewise, the failure of Chechnya, Biafra, Tibet, or the Kurdish areas of the Middle East to reach independent statehood is attributable entirely to their military impotence.
By contrast, Eritrea, East Timor, and parts of the former Yugoslavia achieved independence by exhausting their occupiers and/or their internal rivals.
There are few cases where diplomacy actually succeeded in preventing war.
Almost invariably, the greatest diplomatic successes have followed, rather than preceded, bloodshed.
In 1919, John Maynard Keynes told the statesmen of post-World War I Europe to abandon their vindictive patriotism for the sake of building a future of peace based on European integration.
Alas, it took another world war to convince European leaders of the validity of Keynes’s approach.
The European Union – an empire built through diplomacy and consensus – emerged out of the ashes.
One should, however, resist falling back on fatalism.
Colombia’s new president, Juan Manuel Santos, showed genuine courage in cutting short a march to war with Venezuela and calming down the entire Bolivarian axis (Venezuela, Ecuador, and Bolivia) by reviving the region’s diplomatic channels.
His was a truly revolutionary shift from the politics of saber-rattling to the hard work of establishing regional peace.
To be sure, much hope still lies in popular diplomacy, in civil society mobilizing for peace.
Frequently, governments need to be coaxed into accepting the inevitability of compromise, thanks to pressure from below.
Civil society’s support for bridging the psychological gap between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland helped pave the way to peace.
And Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon in May 2000, after 18 years of useless military occupation, largely reflected the immense impact of the “Four Mothers’ Movement” on Israel’s government.
But popular diplomacy alone never forces political leaders to end wars and make peace.
Official diplomacy begins where the battlefield ends.
Unfortunately, in today’s most consequential militarized conflicts, that boundary is still nowhere in sight.
Disarming the Middle East
TEL AVIV – Israel’s desperate plea that the world act to curtail what its intelligence service describes as Iran’s “gallop toward a nuclear bomb” has not gotten the positive response that Israel expected.
With the United Nations sanctions regime now having proven to be utterly ineffective, and with international diplomacy apparently futile in preventing the Iranians from mastering the technology for enriching uranium, Israel is being boxed into a corner.
What was supposed to be a major international effort at mediation is deteriorating into an apocalyptic Israeli-Iranian showdown.
This is an intriguing anomaly, for, notwithstanding Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s vile anti-Semitic rhetoric, the implications of Iran’s emerging power extend far beyond the Jewish state.
Indeed, it affects the entire Arab world, particularly the vulnerable Gulf countries, and even Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The United States, as a major Middle East power, and Europe also have an interest in stemming the tide of nuclear proliferation that now threatens the Middle East. For a nuclear Iran would open the gates to an uncontrolled rush for the bomb across the region.
The international system’s failure to address effectively the nuclear issue in the Middle East stems mostly from the Russia-US divide, to which wrongheaded American strategy has contributed mightily.
Russia cannot want a nuclear Iran.
But in its quest for leverage against what it perceives as hostile American policies, and as way to bargain for a more acceptable security framework with the West, the Russians refuse to join America’s leadership in international efforts to curtail Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Russia holds the key not only to Iran’s diplomatic isolation, but also – through the weapons transfers that it has already pledged to Iran – to the Iranian government’s capacity to protect its nuclear installations.
In October 2007, Vladimir Putin became the first Russian leader since Leonid Brezhnev to visit Iran, bringing along five leaders of the Caspian Sea states.
Since then, Putin has sought to expose the bankruptcy of America’s policy of isolating Iran.
Russia probably can tame the Iranian regime, but it will do so only in exchange for America’s respect for its interests in the former Soviet Republics, and possibly also a revision of post-Cold War strategic agreements.
But, even if abandoned by the Russians, it is highly unlikely that Iran will give up its nuclear ambitions unless its regional concerns are addressed.
Iran’s nuclear drive reflects a broad national consensus, the result of a deep-seated sense of vulnerability and betrayal.
The Iranians remember how the international community remained indifferent when Saddam Hussein attacked with chemical weapons in the 1980’s.
Nor is the presence of America’s formidable might in today’s Iraq comforting to them.
Iran believes that it is the victim of an international double standard – acceptance of Pakistan’s and India’s nuclear status, not to mention Israel’s – which only fuels its sense of discrimination and its resolve to pursue its ambitions.
By exposing the inadequacy of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Iran, a signatory, has signaled to Israel that the regional order can no longer be based on Israel’s nuclear monopoly as a non-NPT member.
Hence, the solution lies not only in forcing NPT members like Iran and Syria to comply with their commitments, but in creating a broader regional security and cooperation architecture in the Middle East.
But it is highly unlikely that the Arabs will agree to such a system so long as Israel refuses to address her own nuclear capabilities.
Any regional security architecture will have to be premised on the Middle East becoming a zone free of all weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.
The Middle East retains the infamous distinction of being the only region in the world to have used such weapons since the end of World War II.
Indeed, Arab states have both developed and used chemical and biological weapons – not against Israel, so far, but against others in the region.
Iraq used them against Iran, Egypt in its war in Yemen of the 1970’s, and Iraq against its own Kurds.
In 1993, Israel signed the international treaty banning chemical weapons, but did not ratify it because of the Arab states’ refusal to follow suit as long as Israel maintained its nuclear advantage.
The international community must recognize that the Middle East security equation is not a simple linear one involving Israel versus the Arab world.
The proliferation of nuclear weapons in a region that has seen fit to use weapons of mass destruction before threatens everyone.
So a concerted effort is needed by outside powers such as the US and Russia, not to act as spoilers of each other’s policies in the region, but to create a WMD-free zone.
Such a regional system cannot be built in a political vacuum.
A major effort to assist in the solution of the region’s major political disputes is a vital prerequisite.
The nuclear clock is ticking.
Dispersing the Terrorist Storm
WARSAW – On September 11, 2001 at three p.m., Warsaw time, I was talking on the telephone with Poland’s Consul General in New York.
She informed me that two planes had hit the World Trade Center.
That moment, I realized, was more than just a plane crash.
The United States, the world, indeed our very lives, were about to change fundamentally.
Ten years later, it is clear that the fanatics behind those attacks miscalculated in two central respects. They regarded Western democracies as weak – unwilling or unable to respond to their evil extremism.
And they expected Muslim communities and countries around the world to rise up and mobilize behind their millenarian worldview.
But, far from being uncertain or indecisive, the democratic world responded with unrelenting determination to terrorist outrages of all shapes and sizes.
Across Europe and in America, new arrangements have been set up to pool information about possible terrorist attacks and take the speedy (and sometimes robust) action needed to prevent or disrupt them. Where possible, we work closely with India, Russia, Pakistan, the Gulf states, and other key international partners.
The institutions and policies established by the European Union are a vivid example of the unobtrusive benefits of modern cross-border integration.
EU member states share highly sensitive intelligence and police information as never before, thereby increasing public security while upholding world-class legal and democratic standards.
These operational measures have been complemented by carefully calibrated policies that aim to acknowledge social diversity but reduce the political space available for intolerance and bigotry.
Success does not come easy.
Most of Al Qaeda’s leaders are dead, but our democracies rightly experience impassioned debates about means and ends, and about the balance between individual freedom and state authority.
In the current difficult global economic climate, public concerns about immigration and access to jobs inevitably grow more acute, increasing the risk that rival forms of lumpen populism and associated tensions will emerge.
Above all, the West’s effective crackdown on domestic extremism has tended to drive would-be terrorists – now often based in remote parts of the world, where they hope to operate with impunity – to higher levels of technical sophistication.
As a result, painful policy dilemmas arise, and they can divide even the closest allies.
How best to respond if some states cannot or will not take the necessary steps to thwart terrorist planning on their territory?
How to deal with evidence of terrorist planning gleaned from states suspected of practicing torture?
The sheer nihilistic irrationality of terrorism strains and tests our own beliefs like nothing else can.
Yet the terrorist blows inflicted on New York, London, and Madrid over the past decade have not shaken Western democracies.
Our societies are more resilient, open, and diverse than ever.
That said, we are not doomed to succeed.
Even well-intentioned social policies can have unwelcome consequences.
Above all, we should be grateful to the police forces and intelligence agencies whose unflagging hard work and dedication far away from the public eye help keep us safe.
The 9/11 terrorists’ second blunder was to believe that their terrorist attacks would inspire irresistible surge in anti-Western Islamist extremism.
In some parts of the world, radicalization of this sort did take place.
Yet, since 9/11, most victims of Islamist-inspired terrorist extremism – often in the vile form of suicide attacks – have been Muslims, in Iraq, Pakistan, and elsewhere. Terrorist groups have to resort to organized crime to fund themselves.
In short, far from leading some sort of worldwide Islamist revolution, the violent fanaticism of Al Qaeda and other organizations now resembles a repulsive, but manageable, form of ideological toxic waste.
And the focus this year has shifted decisively away from it. Millions of people in North Africa and the Middle East have started to demand a normal society with basic democratic rights and, above all, the rule of law.
They welcome measured and respectful US, European, and wider support.
Faced with this unexpected challenge, some desperate rulers, above all now in Syria, have been using repressive, even terrorist methods against their open people.
European pressure on President Bashar al-Assad’s regime is intensifying.
In Libya, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s appalling tyranny has collapsed; the EU will be generous in helping the Libyan people start to build a modern pluralist society.
Poland’s initiative to create a European Endowment for Democracy could play a leading role here, and with Europe’s own unfinished business of democratization in Belarus and elsewhere, like backsliding Ukraine.
Few people decide to commit terrorist outrages. Of those who do, a minute fraction actually tries to carry them out, and only a tiny number of those succeed.
But the main lesson of 9/11 is that in any free society a tiny number of people can exploit their freedom and do vast damage, especially when the underlying motivation is incoherent.
This is exemplified in very different ways by the murderous killing spree in Norway in July, and now by WikiLeaks’ disgraceful release of huge numbers of unredacted diplomatic cables.
The terrorism threat ten years from now probably will be even more diverse and unpredictable.
In Europe various homegrown “single issue” extremist groups need close monitoring.
In each case, we see obsessive people arrogating to themselves the right to decide others’ fate, and using modern technology for their harmful purposes.
By its very nature, this sort of disaggregated but highly focused threat is almost impossible to identify and intercept in advance.
Of course, the democratic world cannot build a bomb-proof house. But we can minimize risk by remaining vigilant and upholding at all times the values on which our societies are based.
Managing the Age of Disruption
NEW YORK – Bold predictions based on intuition are rarely a good idea.
Margaret Thatcher, as Education Secretary in 1973, famously asserted that the United Kingdom would not have a woman prime minister in her lifetime.
IBM’s president, Thomas J. Watson, declared in 1943 that there was “a world market for perhaps five computers.”
And, when movies with sound made their debut in 1927, Warner Brothers’ Harry Warner asked, “Who the hell wants to hear actors talk?”
At a time when four powerful forces are disrupting the global economy, upending most of our assumptions, such pronouncements on the future, shaped by intuitions based on the past, are even more likely to be wrong.
Each of these four “great disruptions” is transformational on its own, and all are amplifying the effects of the others, producing fundamental and unpredictable changes on a scale the world has never seen – and that will prove our intuitions wrong.
The first great disruption is the shift of economic activity to emerging-market cities.
As recently as 2000, 95% of the Fortune Global 500 was headquartered in developed economies.
By 2025, nearly half of the Fortune Global 500 companies will be based in emerging economies, with China home to more of them than the United States or Europe.
Cities are at the vanguard of this shift.
Nearly half of global GDP growth from 2010 to 2025 will come from 440 emerging-market cities, many of which Western executives may not even know exist.