-1.2
-2.6
-2.2
-2.4
0.2
-0.7
1.4
2.8
-3.4
-2.7
-5.2
-0.1
-2.2
-1.4
-1.4
0.8
-0.8
0.8
1.3
-3.2
-2.8
-5.8
-0.5
-2.6
-0.7
-1.4
0.7
-1.7
-0.1
1.0
-2.7
-2.5
-3.8
-0.9
-2.9
-0.1
-1.8
0.0
-1.8
-0.6
0.6
-2.7
-2.1
-3.1
-1.0
-3.6
0.2
-2.9
-0.2
Euro area
-1.8
-2.3
-2.3
2.0
-2.2
-2.0
-2.0
Denmark
Sweden
United Kingdom
1.5
3.6
1.0
1.8
2.7
0.3
1.6
-0.1
-1.7
2.4
0.9
-3.4
1.6
0.6
-3.4
1.6
0.3
-3.5
1.3
0.2
-3.4
p Projected
Source:
 OECD 
 Economic Outlook
 76 database.
Can US-Iran Relations Be Revived?
During World War II, Allied soldiers occupied Iran, using the country as a way station to transport supplies from the Persian Gulf to the Soviet Union.
This was Iran’s first exposure to Americans.
“They arrived in our country with a certain innocence,” said the respected Iranian historian Kaveh Bayat, “and without any colonial pretenses.”
The Americans’ supply train would regularly pass through my father’s ancestral village, Arak, then a scenic oasis of green gardens and fruit orchards.
“Whenever we heard the train coming,” my father once told me, “all the young boys in the village would run as fast as we could through the apple orchard to greet the passing Americans.
They would smile and wave and throw us whatever gifts they happened to have – playing cards, chewing gum, lifesaver candies….For us they were like heroes from another world.”
So much has changed since then.
Iran’s 1979 revolution did away with the pro-American, undemocratic regime of the Shah, bringing in its place the anti-American, undemocratic regime of the clerics.
Relations between the United States and Iran have been officially non-existent since a group of radical students stormed the US embassy in Teheran – 25 years ago this week – taking sixty six Americans hostage for 444 days.
Sixty years ago, Arak was a humble village known to US troops for its grapes; today Pentagon officials hone in on it as an industrial city that is integral to Iran’s worrisome nuclear program.
And yet few countries have a more paradoxical relationship than the US and Iran.
While the Iranian regime continues to be belligerently anti-American, the Iranian people are overtly pro-American.
While the governments in Teheran and Washington appear to be strategic archrivals, in the words of former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, “there are few nations in the world with which the United States has less reason to quarrel or more compatible interests than Iran.”
Indeed, Iran has likely benefited more than any other country from US-led regime changes in Afghanistan and Iraq, as both the Taliban and Saddam Hussein were the country’s sworn enemies.
But neither side seized the opportunity to build on this common ground, and today US-Iran relations are as antagonistic as they have been in years.
For the US, Iran’s nuclear ambitions, opposition to Israel, and support for extremist groups have become increasingly intolerable in the context of the war on terror.
Iran’s long-standing opposition to relations with the US is a bit more complex.
To be sure, many of Iran’s ruling elites came of age politically during the anti-imperialist and anti-colonialist agitations of the 1960’s and 1970’s, and still cling to that worldview.
Although their revolutionary zeal may have waned over the years, they still tend to share the outlook of the late Ayatollah Khomeini, who likened the relationship between Iran and the US to that “between a sheep and a wolf.”
Ideological rigidity alone, however, does not explain Iran’s often-gratuitous anti-Americanism.
For Iran’s political and military elite, any increased liberalization that would likely result from an opening of ties with the US represents a threat to their interests.
From their perspective, Iran is now a closed party – their party – and the less who join in, the merrier.
With America bogged down in Iraq and oil prices hitting record highs, regime hardliners see little reason to compromise these days.
On the other hand, some influential Iranians – led by former president Hashemi Rafsanjani – recognize that relations with the US are inevitable, given Iran’s need to re-integrate into the international community and face its economic deficiencies.
Moreover, the Iranian people are overwhelmingly in favor of rapprochement.
As author Afshin Molavi wrote in his incisive travelogue Persian Pilgrimages , Iranian youth today are not revolutionary idealists, like those of three decades ago.
Instead, they have concrete demands, like jobs and political and social freedom.
They are desperate to enter the global community and rid themselves of a damaged international reputation.
Today’s Iranian intellectuals have undergone a similar maturation process, dismissing the “utopianist” and “nativist” political ideals of their predecessors.
Referring to Jalal Al-e Ahmad’s 1962 book Gharbzadegi (“West-toxication”), which became one of the manifestos of the 1979 revolution, one secular intellectual in Teheran remarked to me that, “Nobody reads Al-e Ahmad anymore.
On the contrary, we long for interaction with the West.
If it can bring us more economic opportunities, as well as social and political freedoms, let us be ‘West-toxified.’”
Still, despite popular demand in Iran, and common strategic interests, it could be years before America and Iran sit down and make amends.
After 25 years of living without each other, reconciliation will not come immediately.
When it does, there is good reason to believe that Iranians will greet their long lost friends with the same friendliness and exuberance that they did sixty years ago in Arak.
Can We Increase Gross National Happiness?
PRINCETON – The small Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan is known internationally for two things: high visa fees, which reduce the influx of tourists, and its policy of promoting “gross national happiness” instead of economic growth.
The two are related: more tourists might boost the economy, but they would damage Bhutan’s environment and culture, and so reduce happiness in the long run.
When I first heard of Bhutan’s goal of maximizing its people’s happiness, I wondered if it really meant anything in practice, or was just another political slogan.
Last month, when I was in the capital, Thimphu, to speak at a conference on “Economic Development and Happiness,” organized by Prime Minister Jigme Y. Thinley and co-hosted by Jeffrey Sachs, Director of The Earth Institute at Columbia University and Special Adviser to United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, I learned that it is much more than a slogan.
Never before have I been at a conference that was taken so seriously by a national government.
I had expected Thinley to open the conference with a formal welcome, and then return to his office.
Instead, his address was a thoughtful review of the key issues involved in promoting happiness as a national policy.
He then stayed at the conference for the entire two and a half days, and made pertinent contributions to our discussions.
At most sessions, several cabinet ministers were also present.
Since ancient times, happiness has been universally seen as a good.
Problems arise when we try to agree on a definition of happiness, and to measure it.
One important question is whether we see happiness as the surplus of pleasure over pain experienced over a lifetime, or as the degree to which we are satisfied with our lives.
The former approach tries to add up the number of positive moments that people have, and then to subtract the negative ones.
If the result is substantially positive, we regard the person’s life as happy; if negative, as unhappy.
So, to measure happiness defined in that way, one would have to sample moments of people’s existence randomly, and try to find out whether they are experiencing positive or negative mental states.
A second approach asks people: “How satisfied are you with the way your life has gone so far?”
If they say they are satisfied, or very satisfied, they are happy, rather than unhappy.
But the question of which of these ways of understanding happiness best captures what we should promote raises fundamental questions of value.
On surveys that use the first approach, countries like Nigeria, Mexico, Brazil, and Puerto Rico do well, which suggests that the answer may have more to do with the national culture than with objective indicators like health, education, and standard of living.
When the second approach is taken, it tends to be the richer countries, like Denmark and Switzerland, that come out on top.
But it is not clear whether people’s answers to survey questions in different languages and in different cultures really mean the same thing.
We may agree that our goal ought to be promoting happiness, rather than income or gross domestic product, but, if we have no objective measure of happiness, does this make sense?
John Maynard Keynes famously said: “I would rather be vaguely right than precisely wrong.”
He pointed out that when ideas first come into the world, they are likely to be woolly, and in need of more work to define them sharply.
That may be the case with the idea of happiness as the goal of national policy.
Can we learn how to measure happiness?
The Center for Bhutan Studies, set up by the Bhutanese government 12 years ago, is currently processing the results of interviews with more than 8,000 Bhutanese.
The interviews recorded both subjective factors, such as how satisfied respondents are with their lives, and objective factors, like standard of living, health, and education, as well as participation in culture, community vitality, ecological health, and the balance between work and other activities.
It remains to be seen whether such diverse factors correlate well with each other.
Trying to reduce them to a single number will require some difficult value judgments.
Bhutan has a Gross National Happiness Commission, chaired by the prime minister, which screens all new policy proposals put forward by government ministries.
If a policy is found to be contrary to the goal of promoting gross national happiness, it is sent back to the ministry for reconsideration.
Without the Commission’s approval, it cannot go ahead.
One controversial law that did go ahead recently – and that indicates how willing the government is to take tough measures that it believes will maximize overall happiness – is a ban on the sale of tobacco.
Bhutanese may bring into the country small quantities of cigarettes or tobacco from India for their own consumption, but not for resale – and they must carry the import-tax receipt with them any time they smoke in public.
Last July, the UN General Assembly passed, without dissent, a Bhutanese-initiated resolution recognizing the pursuit of happiness as a fundamental human goal and noting that this goal is not reflected in GDP.
The resolution invited member states to develop additional measures that better capture the goal of happiness.
The General Assembly also welcomed an offer from Bhutan to convene a panel discussion on the theme of happiness and well-being during its 66th session, which opens this month.
These discussions are part of a growing international movement to re-orient government policies towards well-being and happiness.
We should wish the effort well, and hope that ultimately the goal becomes global, rather than merely national, happiness.
Can We Insure against Tsunamis?
Most of the discussion surrounding how to respond to Asia’s tsunami disaster has focused on government relief programs and official schemes to implement early warning systems.
Little discussion has focused on the promotion of private risk management institutions, notably insurance.
This is unfortunate.
Insurance companies provide professional, finely detailed risk management that respects the complexity of the dangers to be hedged and responds creatively to individual needs.
Promoting private insurance may seem an indirect response to the tsunami disaster, but it is a rational – and powerful – response.
Foreign aid is no substitute for insurance.
Charity inspires, reassuring us of our humanity, but it is often capricious. You wouldn’t want to rely on it.
Indeed, when deciding how much disaster aid to offer, countries often seem to be influenced mainly by their leaders’ concerns about how others will view them.
Charity responds to attention-grabbing events, often neglecting less sensational disasters.
Insurance, on the other hand, is a reliable and venerable institution, its modern form dating back to the seventeenth century.
But insurance and other risk management institutions have been slow to develop, even in advanced countries.
In the US, most people still do not have flood or earthquake insurance.
In California, one of the world’s most unstable geological regions, only one in six homeowners buys earthquake insurance.
A fundamental problem is that insurance is not a concept that comes naturally to most people.
In fact, as psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky have shown, there is a systematic human tendency to downgrade the perceived probability of low-probability events, so that people go about their lives as if the probability of these events’ occurrence is zero.
Similarly, humans tend to accept large downside risks in order to avoid small certain losses, such as insurance premiums.
Insurance companies have faced a slow and difficult process in weaning the public from these tendencies.
Moreover, designing new risk-management products is not easy.
Insurance companies face inherent difficulties in measuring risks, and they must tailor their policies creatively around the human foibles that limit uptake.
Insurers must also be attentive to a wide array of possible moral hazards – perverse incentives to risky behavior – and to problems of selection bias in attracting clients.
To deal with disasters more effectively, countries must find the will to create an environment in which a much more developed private insurance industry can flourish.
In the US, the National Flood Insurance Program of 1968 made it mandatory for those financing construction or improvement of structures within Special Flood Hazard Areas to buy flood insurance.
If not made mandatory, insurance must at least be promoted effectively.
Otherwise, people will build on flood plains in the belief that their government, or the governments of the world, will feel obligated to bail them out, thereby insuring, in effect, bad risks that should not be taken.
Many of the worst outcomes in Asia occurred in tsunami-prone areas, such as the low-lying coastal areas of Sri Lanka.
Private insurance would discourage construction in the most dangerous locations, owing to prohibitively high premiums, while encouraging the adoption of tsunami-resistant building standards in marginal areas.
Fortunately, our international risk-management institutions are steadily improving.
Various catastrophe bonds, covering earthquakes and other disasters, and weather derivatives have begun trading on financial markets in recent years.
The Kyoto Protocol created a mechanism for trading carbon dioxide emissions, which promises to manage the risks of an even bigger potential disaster: global warming.
The markets for these products are still small, but they have strong growth potential, and their further development would enhance insurance companies’ ability to cover risks of major international disasters.
Consider the absence of an early tsunami warning system in the worst affected countries.
It is easy to blame people for lack of foresight, but none of the nine hardest hit countries had developed one. They can’t all be bunglers.
The problem is not individual error.
The failure was caused by the absence of appropriate international institutions that would be alert to the broad spectrum of potential disasters.
Discussion of early warning systems for tsunamis has focused on government programs. But early warning means more than ocean sensors and satellites; it also implies directing construction away from disaster-prone areas and prodding private businesses to develop effective safety and evacuation procedures.
These are normal activities of insurance companies.
Indeed, one of the more striking features of the tsunami disaster was that it caught some of the most glamorous vacation resorts completely unprepared.
The lesson is clear: even high-class businesses are only as professional as the existing institutional infrastructure permits them to be.
The ultimate reason for their lack of preparation is that our insurance industry was not covering their tsunami risks, and hence not offering up-to-date disaster-prevention guidance.
The insurance industry can, and should, respond to the tsunami disaster by accepting the moral imperative to take concerted action to expand risk coverage.
To the extent that governments are involved, they can promote better risk management through responsive regulation and even subsidization of experiments with new private insurance products.
Can We Survive the “Anthropocene” Period?
For the past three centuries, humans’ effects on the global environment have escalated.
Most importantly, our emissions of carbon dioxide may cause global climate patterns to depart significantly from their natural course for many millennia to come.
It seems appropriate to assign the term “Anthropocene” to the current, in many ways human-dominated, geological epoch, supplementing the Holocene – the warm period of the past 10–12 millennia.
The Anthropocene Period could be said to have started in the latter part of the eighteenth century, when analyses of air trapped in polar ice showed the beginning of growing global concentrations of CO2 and methane.
Vernadsky and Teilhard de Chardin used the term “noösphere” – the world of thought – to mark the growing role of human brain-power in shaping its own future and environment.
Humans’ rapid expansion in terms of population and per capita use of Earth’s resources has continued apace.
During the past three centuries, the human population has increased ten-fold, to more than six billion, and is expected to reach 10 billion in this century.
As a result, 30–50% of the planet’s land surface is now exploited by humans.
At the same time, the methane-producing cattle population has risen to 1.4 billion, contributing to the increasing rate of destruction of tropical rainforests, which releases carbon dioxide and contributes to faster species extinction.
Land conversion for grazing (and construction), together with crop tillage, has also caused soil erosion at 15 times its natural rate.
Indeed, at its current pace, anthropogenic soil erosion would fill the Grand Canyon in 50 years.
Similarly, dam building and river diversion have become commonplace, as humans’ water consumption has risen nine-fold over the past century, to the point that mankind now uses more than half of all accessible fresh water – roughly two-thirds of it for agriculture.
Fisheries remove more than 25% of the primary production in upwelling ocean regions and 35% in the temperate continental shelf.
The consequences are numerous and profound: acid precipitation, photochemical “smog” and global warming, among others.
More by luck than by wisdom, this catastrophic situation did not develop. 
Unless there is a global catastrophe – a meteorite impact, a world war, or a pandemic – mankind will remain a major environmental force for many millennia.
In the first period, economic growth was sluggish, wealth was predominantly inherited, the rich dominated politics, and economic (as well as race and gender) inequality was extreme.
But after the upheaval of WWII, everything changed.
Income growth accelerated, wealth was predominantly earned (justly or unjustly), politics became dominated by the middle class, and economic inequality was modest (even if race and gender equality remained a long way off).
The West seemed to have entered a new era.
But then, in the 1980s, these trends seemed to start shifting steadily back to the pre-WWI norm.
Piketty’s central thesis is that we shouldn’t be surprised by this.
Our reversion to the economic and political patterns of the Gilded Age is to be expected as the economies of North America and Europe return to what is normal for a capitalist society.
In a capitalist economy, Piketty argues, it is normal for a large proportion of the wealth to be inherited.
It is normal for its distribution to be highly unequal.
It is normal for a plutocratic elite, once it has formed, to use its political power to shape the economy in a way that enables its members to capture a large chunk of a society’s income.
And it is normal for economic growth to be slow; rapid growth, after all, requires creative destruction; and, because what would be destroyed would be the plutocrats’ wealth, they are unlikely to encourage it.
Since the publication of his book, Piketty’s argument has come under ferocious attack.
Most of the critiques are at best mediocre; they strike me less as serious acts of engaged intellect than reflections of the political and economic power of a rising plutocracy.
Out of this cacophony, however, two lines of criticism suggest that Piketty may be wrong, both with respect to the normal characteristics of a capitalist economy and where we may be headed when it comes to inequality.
The modern champion of the first line of attack is Matthew Rognlie, a graduate student at MIT, though his argument has a long and impressive pedigree. It can be found in, among other places, John Maynard Keynes’s 1919 The Economic Consequences of the Peace and his 1936 The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
Rognlie agrees with Piketty (as Keynes would) that the normal operation of capitalism produces a class that accumulates wealth, which, as a result, takes on a sharp-peaked distribution.
But he disagrees about what happens next.
Rognlie argues that the rising concentration of capital is to some extent self-corrective, as it produces a proportionately larger fall in the rate of profit.
Unequal wealth distribution, in this view, produces what Keynes called “the euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital.”
The result is an economy with relatively equal income distribution and a polity in which the wealthy have a relatively small voice.
My response to this line of reasoning is an unequivocal “perhaps.”
The standard bearer for the second line of criticism is none other than Piketty himself – not in anything he has written, but in how he has behaved since becoming a celebrity and a public intellectual.
Piketty’s book encourages a passive response.
It portrays the forces favoring the formation of a dominant plutocracy as being so strong that they can be countered only by world wars and global revolutions – and even then, the correction is only temporary.
But Piketty is not behaving like a passive chronicler of unavoidable destiny.
He is acting as if he believes that the forces he describes in his book can be resisted.
If we look at what Piketty does – rather than what he writes – it seems evident that he believes we can collectively make our own destiny, even if the circumstances are not what he, or we, would choose.
Capitalism and Skepticism
BALTIMORE – As each new day brings word of another Wall Street bailout even more colossal than the last, one question presents itself with ever-increasing force: why does America’s economy perform so badly under Republican presidents?
The facts are hard to dispute; indeed, the historical record is now so stark that diehard Republicans are probably starting to wonder if there is a curse.
Over the period for which modern statistics are readily available, Democrats have outperformed Republicans by almost every traditional measure of economic performance (per capita GDP growth, unemployment, inflation, budget deficits).
Democrats have even managed to beat the Republicans on their own turf.
Thanks to the profligacy of the current Bush administration (and the prudence of the Clinton administration), average Federal spending as a proportion of GDP under Republican presidents now exceeds that under Democrats during the measured period.
The pattern of Republican deficiency holds up when the span of historical analysis is extended by using stock returns to measure economic performance.
On average, since the inception of the Standard and Poor’s composite stock index in 1926, the reward for putting your money in the market has been about 16 percentage points lower per presidential term under Republicans than under Democrats.
Republican underperformance remains a stubborn fact even when the Great Depression and World War II are left out of the analysis (in the fond hope that they will prove to have been unique experiences).
With the current presidential term lurching to such a calamitous close that the incumbent is probably worried about being remembered as George Herbert Hoover Walker Bush, the correlation between presidential party and economic outcome demands some kind of explanation.
The answer can’t be found in the specific policy proposals of Republicans or Democrats, which have evolved so much over the years that they defy meaningful generalization.
Nor are there clearly identifiable differences in doctrine that should translate into a reasonable expectation of better economic performance under one party than the other.
Perhaps the best explanation has to do with attitudes, not ideology.
Maybe capitalism works better when skeptics restrain its excesses than when true believers are writing, interpreting, judging, and executing the rules of the game.
The Democrats are surely the more skeptical of America’s two parties.
Some evidence can be found in those features of the American economy that we believe others should emulate.
There is now an overwhelming consensus that open, transparent, and accountable mechanisms of shareholder control are essential for the efficient functioning of public corporations.
Virtue is defined by good accounting rules.
But it is instructive to recall that many of those now-universally-admired rules were fiercely resisted when first proposed.
The options backdating scandal that recently caught Apple’s chairman, Steve Jobs, is a microcosm of innovation, prosecution, and reform; now that a rule has been written to prohibit backdating, this particular scam will not happen again.
Thus do accounting rules approach perfection.
What do we learn from this example?
It’s hard to say.
Maybe that capitalism works better when it is being held accountable to some external standard than when left to its own devices.
As the twentieth century recedes in the rear-view mirror, it increasingly seems that, for better or worse, our era’s defining manifesto has been Milton Friedman’s book Capitalism and Freedom .
But that book’s potency originally derived from its fierce independence from contemporary orthodoxies.
Friedman’s voice was a skeptical breath of fresh air at a time when the reigning viewpoint was a kind of smug pseudo-socialism that did not recognize the astounding power of markets to accomplish desirable aims.
Today, however, the reigning Republican orthodoxy is a kind of smug pseudo-Friedmanism that believes that markets left to themselves can do no wrong.
Perhaps it is time for another breath of fresh air.
The book for the new epoch has yet to be written, but I have a proposed title: Capitalism and Skepticism .
Skepticism might not be as bracing as freedom, but it’s something we could have used a bit more of in the past few years.
Capitalism’s Moral Bastards
Recent revelations that many corporate executives have backdated their stock options, ensuring excessive compensation even when their companies perform poorly, are merely the latest in a stream of examples of bad business behavior.
In an era of evaporated pensions and benefits for the rank and file, piggish pay packets for CEO’s have led a cynical public to wonder where big business has gone wrong.
The answer may be quite simple: too many bosses have abandoned basic human values and embraced the credo famously uttered by Gordon Gekko in the movie 
 Wall Street
 : “Greed is good.”
But a growing body of research concludes that greed is 
 not
 always good, and that moral values are a necessary element in the conduct of business.
The Gordon Gekkos are predators who take the quick payoff.
Although they do serve a useful purpose by keeping other players on their toes and raising efficiency through competition, market participants for the most part avoid them, preferring to do business with the Warren Buffetts – hard-driving businessmen, but known for fair play and creating long-term value.
Consider the trip to the mall, where shoppers buy goods produced and shipped from around the world.
This decentralized delivery of goods relies on employees working for two weeks before receiving a paycheck, companies offering each other lines of credit, and banks offering bridge loans.
Even though humans have engaged in exchange since before the birth of civilization, the impersonal system of trading is only around 1,000 years old.
While legal remedies exist should this system break down, impersonal trading cannot occur unless most people share the values of fair play and reciprocal cooperation.
If a fair division is not received, it elicits cries of outrage and hurled food by the wronged partner.
Moral values have powerful physiological representations in humans, too, and we feel them strongly when they are violated.
The philosopher Josh Greene and his colleagues at Princeton University have shown that personal moral dilemmas (for example, whether you would directly kill one person to save seven others) use our emotions rather than higher cognition – to the chagrin of many philosophers who claimed otherwise.
The personal aspect of such decisions makes our hearts speed up and our palms sweat.
In neuroeconomics experiments that my lab has conducted, we have found that when a stranger places trust in another by making a considered monetary investment that can either be returned or stolen, our brains release an ancient mammalian hormone called oxytocin.
Oxytocin is what bonds mammals to their offspring, and in humans makes spouses care about and love each other.
We have found that trust causes a spike in oxytocin and begets reciprocation – the sharing of money.
We are “wired” to cooperate, and we find it rewarding in the same way that our brains identify eating a good meal or sex as rewarding. 
Oxytocin is active in evolutionarily old areas of our brain, outside of our conscious awareness.
We simply have a sense that sharing with someone who has trusted us is the right thing to do.
We have also found that about 2% of undergraduates we studied are pure non-cooperators.
When they have an opportunity to share money with a stranger who has trusted him or her, non-cooperators keep all the money rather than share the largess.
The technical term in my lab for these people is “bastards.”
Our evidence suggests that bastards’ brains work differently.
Their character traits are similar to those of sociopaths.
They simply do not care about others the way most people do, and the dysfunctional processing of oxytocin in their brains appears to be one reason for this.
Because bastards are out there, we still need government and personal enforcement of economic exchange.
Nevertheless, too much government regulation may “crowd out” moral behavior.
When every offense has an associated penalty, transgressions cease to be moral violations, but are simply a way for wrongdoers to effectively “use the system” while facing some risk of getting caught and paying a fine.
These external penalties can displace the internal sanctions we feel when we do wrong.
At Enron, this was accomplished by breaking down tasks into small chunks so that no one person was ultimately responsible for a decision and could claim ignorance when caught.
Former Enron chief executive Jeffrey K. Skilling excused his behavior at his trial by saying, “I’m not an accountant.”
Many people have been convinced that market exchange diminishes our humanity.
Think of Charlie Chaplin’s film 
 Modern Times
 , in which the little tramp is literally a cog in the capitalist machine.
That view, a residue of Marxist thinking, is wrong.
On the contrary, working together, and trading with each other in markets, is morality in action.
Capitalism’s New Clothes
MELBOURNE – Is the global financial crisis an opportunity to forge a new form of capitalism based on sound values?
So French President Nicholas Sarkozy and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair appear to think.
At a symposium in Paris last month entitled “New World, New Capitalism,” Sarkozy described capitalism based on financial speculation as “an immoral system” that has “perverted the logic of capitalism.”
He argued that capitalism needs to find new moral values and to accept a stronger role for governments.
Blair called for a new financial order based on “values other than the maximum short-term profit.”
It is surprising how readily politicians of all parties – even strong ideological defenders of the unregulated market – accepted the idea that the state should bail out banks and insurance companies when they got into trouble.
With the exception of a small number of ideologically committed defenders of free enterprise, few were willing to take the risks inherent in letting major banks collapse.
Who knows what the consequences would have been?
Many feared mass unemployment, a tidal wave of bankruptcies, millions of families evicted from their homes, the social safety net strained to the breaking point, and perhaps even riots and a resurgence of the political extremism that brought Hitler to power in Germany during the depression of the 1930’s.
The choice to save the banks from the financial consequences of their own errors indicates a shift in values away from belief in the wisdom of the market.
Evidently, the market got some things – like the value of certain financial securities – horrendously wrong.
But will the downturn also produce a deeper shift in the values of consumers?
It is no accident that the “New World, New Capitalism” symposium was held in France, where some critics have seen the global financial crisis as necessary and desirable precisely because it is producing this change in values.
In the newspaper Le Figaro, a section on how to scale back one’s expenses predicted a “revolution in values” and claimed that people will put family ahead of work.
(Americans think the French, with their shorter working hours and longer summer vacations, already put family ahead of work.)
The French have always been less likely to go into debt – when they pay with plastic, they tend to use debit cards, drawing on funds they already have, rather than credit cards.
Now they see the current crisis as a vindication of the value of not spending money that you don’t have.
That means, in many cases, less luxury spending – something that is hard to reconcile with the image of France as the country of fashion, perfume, and champagne.
But excess is out of style, and there are reports of cutbacks in luxury goods everywhere.
Richemont, the Swiss luxury goods company that owns the Cartier and Montblanc brands, has said that it is facing “the toughest market conditions since its formation 20 years ago.”
But does this mark an enduring change in values, or just a temporary reduction, forced upon consumers by investment losses and greater economic uncertainty?
In his inauguration speech, American President Barack Obama said, “The time has come to set aside childish things” and instead to choose the noble idea that “all are equal, all are free, and all deserve a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness.”
It would be an excellent thing if the global financial crisis restored a proper sense of what is important. 
Could the crisis remind us that we buy luxury items more because of the status they bring than because of their intrinsic value?
Could it help us to appreciate that many things are more central to our happiness than our ability to spend money on fashion, expensive watches, and fine dining?
Could it even, as Obama suggests, make us more aware of the needs of those who are living in real poverty and are far worse off than we will ever be, financial crisis or no financial crisis?
The danger is that the potential for a real change in values will be co-opted, as has happened so often before, by those who see it as just another opportunity to make money.
The designer Nathalie Rykiel is reportedly planning to show the new Sonia Rykiel collection in March not in the usual vast rented area, but in the smaller space of her own boutique.
“It's a desire for intimacy, to go back to values,” she told the International Herald Tribune .
“We need to return to a smaller scale, one that touches people.
We will be saying, ‘Come to my house.
Look at and feel the clothes.’”
Ah yes, in a world in which ten million children die every year from avoidable, poverty-related causes, and greenhouse-gas emissions threaten to create hundreds of millions of climate refugees, we should be visiting Paris boutiques and feeling the clothes.
If people were really concerned about defensible moral values, they wouldn’t be buying designer clothes at all.
But what are the chances of Nathalie Rykiel – or the affluent elites of France, or Italy, or the United States – adopting those values?
Capitalist Meltdown
PARIS – There is a strange foreboding in the world economy.
Newspapers report downward revisions in growth estimates for all the major developed countries: the United States, Germany, France, Japan.
No one, it seems, is being left out.
Indeed, these estimates are roughly half a percentage point lower than those issued only last autumn.
At the same time, newspapers report in bleak terms almost exclusively about banks and financial markets, with little attention to the real economy, as if today’s crisis were purely financial and bound to remain so.
Indeed, some experts, too, believe that the crisis can be resolved simply by refinancing banks, and that the impact on the real economy will be relatively limited.
This is clearly the belief of the European Central Bank, which is pumping hundreds of billions of euros into the banking system to ensure liquidity.
But, unlike the US Federal Reserve, it has not lowered key interest rates, which is what matters most to firms and households.
Other experts, of course, believe that the real economy is in jeopardy, and that the threat of a recession is genuine.
But, unfortunately, hardly any experts can speak with confidence about both finance and macroeconomics.
So what is a non-expert to think?
It is helpful to review where the world economy now stands.
The largest number of defaults on sub-prime mortgages will occur this spring.
So the full impact of the crisis remains ahead of us: 1.3 million American homeowners have already defaulted on their mortgages.
In 2008, another three million will join them.
Moreover, the size of the bad debt threatening banks remains unknown, and could amount to several hundred billion dollars.
The total sum of assets now under threat is even more important, because mortgages have been mixed up with other kinds of securities, and these “packages” have been sold throughout the world.
A US subsidiary of Deutsche Bank, for example, has been barred by an American court from foreclosing on a house because it could not demonstrate ownership.
The global economy is overrun with such poisoned packages.
As a result, banks distrust one another and have mostly stopped lending to each other, which jeopardizes economic activity by severely reducing the availability of credit to businesses.
As a result, recession seems certain.
The quantity of liquidity in the world economy is surprising, and monetary expansion by central banks does not explain it completely.
For more than two decades, shareholders in all the developed countries, unorganized and passive from 1945 until 1975-1980, have recast themselves in the form of pension funds, investment funds, and hedge funds.
Now they are significant and active players (as majorities or strong minorities) in all the big companies of the developed world.
To boost the value of their shares, these shareholders backed the drive to reduce the global volume of the payroll and the number of workers that companies employ.
Indeed, in the last 25 years, the share of direct and indirect wages as a percentage of GDP has fallen by 8% to 11% in all the countries involved.
As a result, precarious employment and job insecurity, which hardly existed between 1940 and 1970, now affect more than 15% of the developed world’s population.
The average real wage has been flat in the US for 20 years, with 1% of the population capturing all of the gains brought about by a 50% growth in GDP during this period.
This “liberated” a lot of liquidity for financial activities, gambling, and speculation.
In France alone over the past 20 years, roughly 2.5 trillion euros have poured into the financial world, which suggests a total of 30-60 trillion dollars for the world economy as a whole.
This has been accompanied by a growing immorality of the system.
Remuneration of company bosses now reaches 300 to 500 times the average salary of rank-and-file employees, up from 40 to one for the century and a half before 1980.
Throughout the world, the number of companies facing legal problems for various types of fraud is growing dramatically.
The worst, sadly, is yet to come.
Because most people’s incomes are stagnant and being eroded as their mortgage payments rise, consumption is bound to fall, yielding lower growth and employment.
A recession will only increase job precariousness and unemployment, creating social tensions that will not, of course, help to ease the financial crisis.
All the ingredients seem to be in place for a long and powerful perfect storm of economic decline and social unrest.
We in the developed world live in democracies.
Every four or five years, the legitimacy of the system needs to be confirmed by elections.
But is the system being so delegitimized by the economic and social turmoil that elections will no longer be viable?
Of course, capitalism remains more compatible with personal freedom than communism ever was.
But it is now blindingly obvious that capitalism is too unstable to survive without strong public regulation.
That is why, after years of being neglected as a viable option, it is time for the social-democratic project to return to the political fore.
Capital Shrugged
LOS ANGELES – Capitalism’s greatest strength has been its resiliency – its ability to survive the throes and challenges of crises and business cycles to fuel innovation and economic growth.
Today, however, more than four years into a credit crisis, a conspicuous enigma calls this legacy into question.
Despite recent hopes of recovery in the US, including an inventory catch-up in the fourth quarter of 2011, real US GDP growth has remained persistently below trend.
Moreover, although seasonally adjusted January employment data have brought the unemployment rate down to 8.3% (while total jobs were actually lost in January), the more realistic rate of “underemployment” remains over 15% and the labor-force participation rate is at a record 30-year low.
And the US is clearly not alone in its malaise, with the eurozone fighting a far more urgent sovereign-debt crisis.
So, why is this time different?
The answer lies in Ayn Rand’s rhetorical invocation of despair in her 1957 epic Atlas Shrugged: “Who is John Galt?”
Simply put, when the state seizes the incentives and drivers of capital investment, owners of capital go on strike.
Rand portrays innovative industrialists as akin to Atlas in Greek mythology, carrying on his back a dystopian world of growing and overbearing collectivist government.
The hero, John Galt, calls for them all to shrug, to “stop the motor of the world” by withdrawing from their productive pursuits, rather than promoting a world in which, under the guise of egalitarianism, incentives have been usurped in order to protect the politically connected from economic failure.
Today, Rand’s fictional world has seemingly become a reality – endless bailouts and economic stimulus for the unproductive at the expense of the most productive, and calls for additional taxation on capital investment.
The shrug of Rand’s heroic entrepreneurs is to be found today within the tangled ciphers of corporate and government balance sheets.
The US Federal Reserve has added more than $2 trillion to the base money supply since 2008 – an incredible and unprecedented number that is basically a gift to banks intended to cover their deep losses and spur lending and investment.
Instead, as banks continue their enormous deleveraging, almost all of their new money remains at the Fed in the form of excess reserves.
Corporations, moreover, are holding the largest amounts of cash, relative to assets and net worth, ever recorded.
And yet, despite what pundits claim about strong balance sheets, firms’ debt levels, relative to assets and net worth, also remain near record-high levels.
Hoarded cash is king.
The velocity of money (the frequency at which money is spent, or GDP relative to base money) continues to plunge to historic lows.
No wonder monetary policy has had so little impact.
Capital, the engine of economic growth, sits idle – shrugging everywhere.
Rand, perhaps better than any economic observer, underscored the central role of incentives in driving entrepreneurial innovation and risk-taking.
Whittle away at incentives – and at the market’s ability to communicate them through price signals – and you starve the growth engine of its fuel.
Alas, central bankers, with their manipulation of interest rates and use of quantitative easing, patently neglect this fact.
Interest rates are more than a mere economic input that determines levels of saving and investment.
Rather, as the Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises emphasized, they are a reflection of people’s aggregate time preference – or desire for present versus future satisfaction – not a determinant of it.
Interest rates thus incentivize and convey to entrepreneurs how to allocate capital through time.
For example, lower interest rates and cost of capital raise the relative attractiveness of cash flows further in the future, and capital investment increases – the system’s natural homeostatic response to higher savings and lower consumption.
State manipulation of interest rates, however, does not influence time preference, even though it signals such a change.
The resulting inconsistency creates distortions: as with any price control, capital receives an incentive to flow to investment that is inconsistent with actual supply and demand.
The Fed is purposefully and insidiously distorting the incentive system – specifically, signals provided by the price of money – resulting in mal-investment (and, when public debt is monetized, inflation).
This can continue for a time, rewarding unproductive investments and aspiring oligarch-speculators who presume that the Fed has eliminated risk.
But, as Rand reminds us, at some point the jig is up.
Today, after the largest credit expansion in history, that point has clearly been reached.
Impassive capital now ignores deceptive market signals, and the liquidation of untenable mal-investment percolates through the system as immutable time preferences prevail.
The state, in the long run, simply cannot direct entrepreneurs to lend, borrow, and invest; investment capital will inevitably shrug when faced with oppressive manipulation of free markets.
When that happens, we see the true result of loose monetary policy: not the creation of more economic activity, but the destruction of the natural mechanism of economic coordination and adjustment, robbing the system of its resilience.
In effect, monetary policy has “stopped the motor of the world.”
At the conclusion of Atlas Shrugged, Galt aims to restore the old system anew as the collectivist regime crumbles.
Will something like that, too, happen in our own dystopian world (in which all remaining Republican US presidential candidates seem to favor firing Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke)?
How long must capital wait for the day when, free of distorted incentives, the engine of growth is fueled and humming again?
Capitals of Capital
NEW YORK – Recently, China’s government announced that it wants Shanghai to become a global financial capital equal to London and New York by 2020.
An ambitious goal, which may or may not be achieved.
But China’s aspirations also underscore a worrisome and increasingly pervasive new reality: political officials are making decisions normally left to markets on a scale not seen in decades.
Like the financial crisis itself, this trend is now global.
Political leaders in dozens of countries are making decisions that will drive the performance of local (and global) markets for the foreseeable future.
In China, exports fell by more than 25% in February.
Not to worry, said Premier Wen Jiabao: the Chinese government has “adequate ammunition” to add to its $586 billion stimulus package, a plan meant to create millions of jobs via enormous government investment in transportation, energy infrastructure, housing, and other large-scale projects.
In India, where government is more often considered a drag on commerce than a catalyst of growth, the decisions that move local markets are now more likely to come from bureaucrats in Delhi than from innovators in Mumbai.
In fact, the Congress Party-led government, anxious to appear responsive to public demand for help during an election-year economic slowdown, has pushed forward three stimulus packages since December.
The bottom line: to find out how, when, and where assets will be allocated and wealth generated in dozens of countries across the developed and developing worlds these days, we must now look toward political, not financial, capitals.  
This trend will spell trouble for longer-term global economic growth.
Most politicians craft policy to serve their local constituents and to protect their personal political capital.
Reinvigorating global growth runs a distant second.
In Washington, many Democrats will use these policy debates to capitalize on popular fury at Wall Street, while many Republicans look for an opening to capitalize on hoped-for public anger at the Democrats.
Some within the Chinese Communist Party leadership will support plans to engineer a shift from export-led growth to a model based on domestic consumption.
Others will try to direct state funding toward their personal investment projects.
Factions within the Russian, Indian, Mexican, and South African governments have their own competing political priorities.
With so many political officials crafting crisis responses to solve local problems or to create local opportunities, how likely are they to agree on a unified international approach?
Our first glimpse of the trouble in coordinating an international response to the financial crisis came last November, during the emergency G-20 summit in Washington.
To get the G-8 to agree on priorities is a complicated enough; building consensus within the G-20 is exponentially more difficult, not simply because of the larger number of players involved, but because many of them don’t agree on the most basic rules of the global economic game.
While the April G-20 summit in London produced more economic-policy agreement than expected, this was largely because the most divisive issue – the US and British demand for more global stimulus spending – was removed from the table beforehand.
As a result, the smiling presidents and prime ministers could afford to be more diplomatic than Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek, who, in his role as acting president of the European Union, had warned that Obama’s economic plan would lead others down a “road to hell.”
Topolanek wasn’t at the G-20; his country is not a member.
And, while British Prime Minister Gordon Brown agrees with Obama that the world’s leading industrialized countries must stimulate their domestic economies as much as they can, Bank of England Governor Mervyn King has warned that Britain may already have taken on too much debt for another round of stimulus.  
However frightening the global recession, a coordinated and coherent response to it by the world’s political leaders remains highly uncertain at best.
And the increasingly heavy influence of political factors on market performance will likely weigh on global growth for years to come.
Captured Europe
WASHINGTON, DC – Europe’s policy elite – the people who call the shots at the national and eurozone level – are in serious trouble.
They have mismanaged their way into a deep crisis, betraying all of the lofty promises of unity and prosperity issued when the euro was created.
The currency union may survive, but, for millions of people, the euro has already failed in its mission of sustaining growth and ensuring stability.
How did this happen?
The Greek, Portuguese, Irish, and Italian economies are reeling under fiscal austerity – with budget cuts and higher taxes as far as the eye can see.
This policy mix will slow their growth, and that of the rest of Europe.
But that is only part of the problem.
The bigger issue is the “debt overhang” that has forced European governments to pursue this course.
There are strong parallels to what happened in the United States in the past few years: many families felt crushed by their debts, so household consumption fell and has yet to recover.
The adjustment will be even more painful in Europe, because a sovereign-debt crisis has a depressing effect on everyone – consumers, investors, and the public sector alike.
There is a simple way to deal with a debt overhang: reduce payments by restructuring the debt.
Many firms are able to renegotiate financing terms with their creditors – typically extending the maturity of their liabilities, which enables them to borrow more to finance new, better projects.
If such negotiation cannot be achieved voluntarily, US firms can use Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code, under which a court supervises and approves the reorganization of liabilities.
So you would think the same would be true for US households and embattled European governments.
But the restructuring of debt has been too little and has come too late.
Why?
In both cases, the main argument for not removing the debt overhang came from bankers, who claimed that it would create havoc in financial markets for two reasons.
First, banks were the primary creditors, and the large losses that they would face in any restructuring was bound to trigger a domino effect, with waves of pessimism driving up interest rates and ruining other borrowers’ prospects.
Second, banks would also suffer because they had sold insurance against default – in the form of credit-default swaps.
When these swaps were activated, the banks would incur potentially further crippling losses.
In the case of Greece, international bankers argued long and hard that debt restructuring would generate contagion far and wide within the eurozone – and perhaps more broadly.
And yet, in the end, Greece had little choice but to restructure its debt, cutting the value of private claims by about 75% relative to their face value (although even this is probably not enough to make the country’s debt burden sustainable).
This was deemed a “credit event,” so credit-default swaps were exercised: anyone who insured against default had to pay out.
Did all hell break loose?
No.
Banks have not failed, and there is no sign of tumbling dominoes.
But that is not because banks prepared themselves by raising more capital.
On the contrary, compared to their likely future losses, European banks have raised relatively little capital recently – and much of this has been creative accounting, rather than truly loss-absorbing shareholder equity.