The key to the South Korean turnaround was a large depreciation of the currency, the won.
A depreciation of the euro seems to be one likely way that the eurozone will turn the corner.
Every crisis is different, but South Korea shared many features with other troubled emerging markets in the 1990’s.
Large, politically well-connected groups of companies – known as chaebol – expanded rapidly by taking on large amounts of cheap debt.
Outside shareholders had little influence over the powerful individuals who ran the chaebol, and creditors lent money freely, assuming that the leading chaebol were too important for the government to allow them to go bankrupt.
Meanwhile, political factors played an important role in allowing debt to build up – creating vulnerabilities that could quickly become an economic crisis once investors became nervous.
Even though South Korean state-owned banks nominally controlled the flow of capital, tight relationships between the private sector and the government meant that the chaebol felt they had little to fear.
In the fall of 1997, after crises battered Thailand and Indonesia, full-scale panic erupted in South Korea.
As the currency depreciated, the corporate sector’s foreign loans became more onerous – further exacerbating the panic.
Early support offered by the International Monetary Fund did not stabilize the situation.
The eurozone today does not have a foreign-debt problem – all of the debt in question is in euros, and most of it is owed by European governments to their own countries’ banks.
But this is a toxic combination, as Greece and Italy have discovered.
European debt dynamics are quite distinct from those in South Korea, but the problem in both instances could be considered insurmountable.
The obvious escape route leads through economic growth, which would reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio and make interest payments look reasonable.
But the standard ways to stimulate the European economy are not available: fiscal policy is constrained by already-high debt levels; and the European Central Bank, fearing inflation, has kept a tight rein on monetary policy.
None of the other ideas on the European table, including various kinds of “structural reform,” will provide fast growth in the short term.
In September, Portugal planned to pursue a form of “internal devaluation,” by cutting payroll taxes and increasing the VAT; this has now been shelved, presumably because it is politically unworkable.
A genuine devaluation, on the other hand, would work wonders for the real economy.
The moribund Italian economy would spring to life if the euro fell by 30%, adjusted for inflation.
In 1997, South Korea’s economy took a nosedive, and 1998 was still difficult, but GDP soared by 11.1% in 1999.
How the euro would be able to depreciate, given that it is a floating currency with very little intervention – that is, the exchange rate is largely market determined – depends on monetary policy.
If the ECB agreed to loosen monetary policy or provide enough “liquidity” to support various bailouts, investors would fear inflation, weakening the euro.
On the other hand, if the ECB preferred to let major countries, such as Italy, default on their debts, this would likely weaken the euro even further, as investors feared a contagion of defaults.
While depreciation would never be eurozone officials’ stated policy, it currently looks like all roads lead in that direction.
Of course, currency depreciation is not a panacea.
The South Korean situation also involved difficult steps, including a confrontation between the government and the largest chaebol, some of which had quite blatantly violated the law.
After a series of showdowns, in which one company, Daewoo, threatened to default, and political forces rallied to its assistance, the government won; the hugely powerful Daewoo group underwent bankruptcy and restructuring.
Overall, South Korea managed to curb its corporate sector’s excessive power (which holds lessons for dealing with today’s mega-banks).
Similarly, Europe needs to fix its deeper structural problems.
It needs a fiscal center – much as the United States needed a federal authority to tax in 1787.
Indeed, the Europeans need the equivalent of the US Constitutional Convention – and the difficult ratification debate that followed.
But some depreciation of the euro would provide a bridge to reach internal governance reform.
And, like it or not, rising pressure on the euro is likely to force European officials to cross it.
Does Growth Have a Future?
MILAN – What can we expect as the world’s economy emerges from its most serious downturn in almost a century?
The short answer is a “new normal,” with slower growth, a de-risked and more stable core financial system, and a set of additional challenges (energy, climate, and demographic imbalances, to name a few) with varying time horizons that will test our collective capacity to improve management and oversight of the global economy.
Lower growth is the best guess for the medium term.
It seems most likely, but no one really knows.
The financial crisis, morphing quickly into a global economic downturn, resulted not just from a failure to react to growing instability, risk, and imbalance, but also from a widespread pre-crisis inability to ”see” the rising systemic risk.
These defining characteristics will condition the responses and the results in coming years.
There are countervailing forces. The high-growth countries (China and India) are large and getting larger relative to the rest.
That alone will tend to elevate global growth compared to the world where industrial countries, and the US in particular, were in the growth driving seat.
The current crisis has come to be called a “balance-sheet recession” of global scope and tremendous depth and destructive power because of its origins in the balance sheets of the financial and household sectors.
Extreme balance-sheet destruction is what made it distinctive.  In the future, central banks and regulators will not be able to afford a narrow focus on (goods and services) inflation, growth, and employment (the real economy) while letting the balance-sheet side fend for itself.
Somewhere in the system, accountability for stability and sustainability in terms of asset valuation, leverage, and balance sheets will need to be assigned and taken seriously.
Financial re-regulation should and will emphasize capital, reserve, and margin requirements; limiting systemic risk buildup by constraining leverage; eliminating fragmented and incomplete regulatory coverage and regulatory arbitrage (a huge challenge internationally); and a focus on transparency.
Isolating and further constraining a portion of the banking system, so that the channels of credit intermediation are less prone to complete and simultaneous breakdown, also seems likely.
Relative to the recent past, the cost of capital will increase, debt will be more expensive and less ubiquitous, and risk spreads will not return to pre-crisis compressed levels.
Assets bubbles will not disappear, but they will be less likely to be turbocharged by leverage.
American consumers will save more and spend less, abandoning the pattern of the last few years.
The large hole (on the order of $700 billion or more) in global aggregate demand will have to be filled over time by a compensating increase in consumption in surplus economies, such as China and Japan.
The longer this takes, the greater the incentives at the national level to capture a share of global demand via protectionist measures.
The recent increase in protectionist measures is an understandable political price for a range of stimulus packages in advanced and developing countries.
But such measures may increase – and will be harder to phase out over time – in the context of a shortfall in aggregate demand.
This is the forward-looking version of the global imbalance issue.
Its resolution via coordinated policy action (or a failure to resolve it through such action) will have a huge impact (for good or ill) on the multinational incentive structure surrounding the global economy – and hence on its likely growth.
Responsibility for overseeing the global economy is passing rapidly from the G-7/8 to the G-20, as it should.
The latter accounts for 90% of global GDP and two-thirds of the world’s population, so this shift is highly desirable – indeed, essential.
But there is a risk that the interests of the remaining one-third of the world’s people (and the majority of the small countries) will not be adequately represented as the international architecture for managing the global economy evolves.
In the current crisis, a substantial fraction of countries outside the G-20 are essentially defenseless: small relatively poor economies, no fiscal capacity for stimulus, and inadequate reserves to offset the capital outflows that occurred to shore up damaged balance sheets in advanced markets.
Within the G-20 countries, there are mechanisms that attend to the interests of the most vulnerable citizens.
In the global economy, the most vulnerable are whole countries.
Inattention to their interests is not just a moral issue, but a potentially explosive social and economic one.
As a result, the world’s international economic institutions will need to be strengthened in terms of governance and resources so that they can act as circuit-breakers in the event of future financial and economic turbulence.
Entering the crisis, the International Monetary Fund was underfunded, and it continues to lack credibility and trust in certain systemically important parts of the world.
It is now in the process of being better funded, but we are eight months into a crisis in which international capital flows became volatile and were driven largely by emergency responses rather than underlying economic fundamentals.
Thus, there remains the central question of trust and confidence in the system, which have been badly damaged and will take time to rebuild.
At the moment, the majority view in most countries is that the financial system failed badly, but that the incentives and dynamics of the broader market-based system in a relatively open global architecture remain the best avenues for wealth creation, poverty reduction, and the expansion of opportunity.
There are, of course, dissidents, and the balance could shift quickly. It is not inconceivable that the baby will be thrown out with the bath water.
There is no magic bullet for today’s crisis.
Pragmatic, steady progress at the national and international levels in improving the regulatory architecture and increasing our collective ability to avoid non-cooperative behavior and suboptimal equilibria, is the best course to follow.
It is the course we are on.
But for now, it is a journey without a clearly defined, widely accepted endpoint.
Does Legalizing Prostitution Work?
AMSTERDAM – Prostitution is virtually the only part of the personal services industry in the Netherlands that works.
One can’t get a manicure in Amsterdam without booking an appointment two weeks in advance, but men can buy sex anytime – and at an attractive price.
The legalization of prostitution in October 2000 merely codified a long-standing Dutch tradition of tolerance towards buying and selling sex.
But is legalization the right approach?
Even in the Netherlands, women and girls who sell their bodies are routinely threatened, beaten, raped, and terrorized by pimps and customers.
In a recent criminal trial, two German-Turkish brothers stood accused of forcing more than 100 women to work in Amsterdam’s red-light district ( De Wallen ).
According to the attorney who represented one of the victims, most of these women come from families marred by incest, alcohol abuse, and parental suicide. Or they come from countries in Eastern Europe or Southeast Asia and have fallen victim to human trafficking, lured by decent job offers or simply sold by their parents.
These women are Amsterdam’s leading tourist attraction (followed by the coffee shops that sell marijuana).
But an estimated 50-90% of them are actually sex slaves, raped on a daily basis with police idly standing by.
It is incomprehensible that their clients are not prosecuted for rape, but Dutch politicians argue that it cannot be established whether or not a prostitute works voluntarily.
Appalled by their daily routine, police officers from the Amsterdam vice squad have asked to be transferred to other departments.
Only this year, the city administration has started to close down some brothels because of their ties to criminal organizations.
According to a study published in the American Journal of Epidemiology , the average age of death of prostitutes is 34.
In the United States, the rate at which prostitutes are killed in the workplace is 51 times that of the next most dangerous occupation for women, working in a liquor store.
Other studies show that nine out of ten prostitutes urgently want to escape the job.
Almost half have attempted suicide at least once.
In 1999, the Swedish government decriminalized the sale of sex, but made it an offense to pimp or to buy sex.
Under Sweden’s so-called “Sex Purchase Law,” paying for sex is punishable by fines or up to six months in prison, plus the humiliation of public exposure.
According to the Swedish authorities, the number of prostitutes in Sweden has dropped 40% as a result.
Human trafficking rings tend to avoid Sweden, because business has gone sour.
Norway, a country that has a reputation to lose when it comes to women’s rights, carefully compared the Swedish and Dutch models and concluded that Sweden’s was the one to follow.
It has now changed its legislation accordingly.
The success of the Swedish approach is not so surprising.
According to a study in California, most men who bought sex would be deterred by the risk of public exposure.
For example, 79% said that they would be deterred if there was a chance that their families would be notified.
And a whopping 87% said that they would be deterred by the threat that the police might publish their photographs or names in the local newspaper.
Most of these men showed pathological behavior towards women.
One in five admitted to having raped a woman, while four out of five said that going to prostitutes was an addiction.
Prostitution is often dubbed “the oldest profession.”
But this is merely a way of justifying the exploitation of mostly vulnerable women (there is also a much smaller number of male prostitutes in the Netherlands, but they are not pimped out like female prostitutes).
It takes leadership and a vision of true gender equality to put an end to prostitution.
The Swedish practice of naming and shaming is quite un-Dutch.
But, for some men, part of the pleasure of buying sex may be the humiliation conferred on the woman involved.
For others, like former New York Governor Eliot Spitzer, the promise of discretion and anonymity may be the most appealing aspect of buying sex.
In any case, pillorying the clients is both a just punishment and an effective deterrent.
Does the UN Still Matter?
With 192 members and a mandate that covers everything from security to refugees to public health, the United Nations is the world’s only global organization.
But polls in the United States show that two-thirds of Americans think the UN is doing a poor job, and many believe it was tarnished by corruption during the Iraq oil-for-food program under Saddam Hussein.
Many also blame the UN for failing to solve the Middle East’s myriad problems.
But such views reflect a misunderstanding of the UN’s nature.
The UN is more an instrument of its member states than an independent actor in world politics.
True, UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon can make speeches, convene meetings, and propose actions, but his role is more secretary than general.
Sometimes likened to a “secular Pope,” the UN Secretary General can wield the soft power of persuasion but little hard economic or military power.
What hard power the UN has must be begged and borrowed from the member states.
And when they cannot agree on a course of action, it is difficult for the organization to operate.
As one wag has put it, “We have met the UN and it is us!”
When blame is assigned, much of it belongs to the members.
Consider the oil for food program, which was designed by member states to provide relief to Iraqis hurt by sanctions against Saddam’s regime.
The secretariat did an inadequate job of monitoring the program and some corruption was involved.
But the much larger sums that Saddam diverted for his own purposes reflected how the member governments designed the program, and they chose to turn a blind eye to the abuse.
Yet the program’s problems are portrayed in the press as “the UN’s fault.
The cost of the entire UN system is about $20 billion, or less than the annual bonuses paid out in a good year on Wall Street.
Of that sum, the secretariat in New York accounts for a mere 10%.
Some universities have larger budgets.
Even in the area of security, the UN retains an important role.
The original 1945 concept of collective security, by which states would band together to deter and punish aggressors, failed because the Soviet Union and the West were at loggerheads during the Cold War.
For a brief moment after a broad coalition of countries acted together to force Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait in 1991, it looked like the original concept of collective security would become “a new world order.”
Such hopes were short-lived.
Consensus within the UN proved unachievable on both Kosovo in 1999 and Iraq in 2003.
Skeptics concluded that the UN had become irrelevant for security questions.
Yet in 2006, when Israel and Hezbollah fought to a stalemate in Lebanon, states were only too happy to turn to a UN peacekeeping force.
Ironically, peacekeeping was not specified in the original charter.
It was invented by the second Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold, and Canadian Foreign Minister Lester Pearson after Britain and France invaded Egypt in the Suez crisis of 1956.
Since then, UN peacekeeping forces have been deployed more than 60 times.
There are now roughly 100,000 troops from various countries wearing UN blue helmets around the world.
Peacekeeping has had its ups and downs.
Bosnia and Rwanda were failures in the 1990’s, and then Secretary General Kofi Annan proposed reforms to deal with genocide and mass killings.
In September 2005, the states in the UN General Assembly accepted the existence of a “responsibility to protect” vulnerable peoples.
In other words, governments could no longer treat their citizens however they wanted.
A new Peace-building Commission was also created to coordinate actions that could help prevent a recurrence of genocidal acts.
In East Timor, for example, the UN proved vital in the transition to independence, and it is now working out plans for the governments of Burundi and Sierra Leone.
In the DRC, peacekeeping forces have not been able to curb all violence, but they have helped to save lives.
The current test case is the situation in Sudan’s Darfur region, where diplomats are trying to establish a joint peacekeeping force under the UN and the African Union.
In the poisonous political atmosphere that has bedeviled the UN after the Iraq War, widespread disillusionment is not surprising.
Ban Ki Moon has a tough job.
But, rather than calling the UN into question, states are likely to find that they need such a global instrument, with its unique convening and legitimizing powers.
While the UN system is far from perfect, the world would be a poorer and more disorderly place without it.
Dog Days For The Super Dollar
CAMBRIDGE &#45;&#45; Is the United States’ position as the world’s dominant superpower at risk if the dollar loses its super-currency status?
Maybe not, but Americans will certainly find global hegemony a lot more expensive if the dollar falls off its perch.
Until now, Americans have been raking in profits by borrowing cheaply from pliant foreigners and investing the money in high-yield foreign equities, land, and bonds.
Counting capital gains, Americans have profited to the tune of $300 billion to $400 billion annually in many recent years – an amount roughly equivalent to the entire US military budget.
Former French president Valéry Giscard d’Estaing once famously complained about America’s “exorbitant privilege.”
D’Estaing was incensed that the US seemed to be able to flood the world with dollar currency and debt without ever seeming to pay a price in terms of higher inflation or interest rates.
At least half the $800 billion US currency supply is held abroad, mainly in the world’s underground economy.
But the really big bucks come from the fact that places like the People’s Bank of China and the Bank of Japan passively hold enormous volumes of low-interest US debt, while Americans romp around the world with venture capital, private equity, and investment banks, reaping huge gains.
It has been a great ride for the US, and America’s financial supremacy has certainly eased the burden of being a superpower.
But, between the sub-prime US mortgage crisis and the dollar’s ongoing decline, America’s exorbitant privilege now looks a bit shaky.
The dollar is already down 25% over the past five years, and if the US tips into recession – a 50/50 chance right now &#45;&#45; the dollar is going to drop a lot more.
Foreign investors are already reshuffling their portfolios, moving into euros, pounds, and even emerging-market currencies like the Brazilian real and the South African rand.
Controversial “sovereign wealth funds,” which invest funds for governments in the Middle East, Asia, Russia, and elsewhere, are just one manifestation of the search for alternatives to low-yielding, rapidly depreciating, dollar bonds.
Even without any portfolio shift, Americans shouldn’t expect their recent luck to hold up in the future.
If there is a global downturn, any region that is long stocks and short bonds is going to get burned.
Unfortunately, faced with the growing risks to the dollar’s status, American policymakers, rather than nursing the country’s premier export, seem to be more interested in milking it.
The US government itself has taken advantage by running vast deficits.
The Federal Reserve appears to care about exchange rates only to the extent that they affect growth and inflation, and right now the weak dollar is helping US exports.
Last but not least, US tax policy hardly encourages private-sector savings, especially giving the preferential tax treatment of real estate.
Professor Maury Obstfeld of the University of California at Berkeley and I have been warning for some time that without pro-active policy adjustments, the dollar is vulnerable to a sharp collapse, with many attendant risks.
Unfortunately, that scenario now seems to be unfolding.
This year alone, the dollar’s value has fallen by another 10% in purchasing power terms against America’s major trading partners, and it could fall at the same rate in 2008 – or faster if global investors decide to cut and run.
When the Chinese premier, OPEC heads of state, and the world’s richest supermodel all express concern about the dollar, you can be sure we are in for a bumpy ride.
The good news for Americans is that there is enormous inertia in the world trading and financial system.
It took many decades and two world wars before the British pound lost its super-currency status.
Nor is there any obvious successor to the dollar yet.
Indeed, the sub-prime crisis has made the European financial system look just as vulnerable as that of the US.
Likewise, while the Chinese Yuan might be king in 50 years, China’s moribund financial system will prevent it from being crowned anytime soon.
A huge share of world trade is denominated in dollars, even if some OPEC presidents, such as Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez, openly preach mutiny.
Central banks still hold more than 50% of their foreign exchange reserves in dollars.
But danger signs abound.
Unless the US gets its act together soon, it may find the value of its super-currency franchise much diminished.
American voters, who are famously loathe to increase taxes, might start thinking a lot harder about the real economic costs of their country’s superpower status.
Doing Better on Climate Change
Los Angeles – Tackling global warming, we are often told, is the defining task of our age.
An army of pundits tells us that we need to cut emissions, and cut them immediately and drastically.
But this argument is clearly losing the battle for hearts and minds.
Global warming has now become the lowest-priority policy problem among Americans, according to a new Pew survey.
Another Pew survey showed that China, the world's biggest emitter, cares even less than the US about global warming.  Just 24% of Chinese regard global warming as a very serious problem, making China the world's least concerned country.
In the UK, an Opinium survey shows that most voters think green taxes are mainly for raising cash rather than the environment, and 7 out of 10 are not willing to pay more in taxes to combat climate change.
At the same time, the proposed solutions for the problem of global warming have been awful.
In Rio de Janeiro in 1992, politicians from wealthy countries promised to cut emissions by 2000, but did no such thing.
Leaders met again in Kyoto in 1997 and promised even stricter carbon cuts by 2010, yet emissions keep increasing, and Kyoto has done virtually nothing to change that.
What is most tragic is that when leaders meet in Copenhagen this December, they will embrace more of the same solution: promises of even more drastic emission reductions that, once again, are unlikely to be fulfilled.
Measures that consistently over-promise and under-achieve at vast cost do not win hearts and minds in the best of times. And this is manifestly not the best of times.
Fortunately, we have a much better option, with a much better chance of success: we should make low-carbon energy sources like solar power become a real, competitive alternative to old energy sources, instead of the preserve of rich people who want to feel “greener.”
We should therefore invest on an effective scale in inventing new technology.
Contrary to what one would imagine, the Kyoto Protocol has not prompted this research.
Indeed, research investment has plummeted since the 1980’s and has actually not increased since, even among Kyoto-participating countries.
Investing heavily in research and development of low-carbon energy, solar power, or other new technologies would become cheaper than fossil fuels much more quickly.
Economic estimates show that for every $1 spent, we would do $16 worth of good.
Every country should agree to spend 0.05% of its GDP on low-carbon energy R&amp;D. The total global cost would be 15 times higher than current spending on alternative energy research, yet six times lower than the cost of Kyoto.
An agreement of this nature could be the new Kyoto treaty for the world – the principal difference being that this protocol would actually make a difference and stand a good chance of global acceptance.
Why not do both: invest in R&amp;D, but still promise to cut carbon emissions now?
Kyoto-style policies can only ever be an expensive distraction from the real business of weaning us off fossil fuels.
There are two fundamental reasons why a focus on reducing carbon emissions is the wrong response to global warming.
First, using fossil fuels remains the only way out of poverty for developing countries.
Coal provides half of the world’s energy.
In China and India, it accounts for about 80% of power generation, and is helping Chinese and Indian laborers enjoy a quality of life that their parents could barely imagine.
Capping emissions means, effectively, ending this success story for hundreds of millions of people.
There is no “green” energy source that is affordable enough to replace coal in the near future.
Instead, our upsized research will make green energy cheaper than fossil fuels by mid-century.
Second, immediate carbon cuts are expensive – and the cost significantly outweighs the benefits.
If the Kyoto agreement had been fully implemented throughout this century, it would have cut temperatures only by an insignificant 0.2°C (0.3°F), at a cost of $180 billion every year.
In economic terms, Kyoto only does about 30 cents worth of good for each dollar spent.
And deeper emissions cuts like those proposed by the European Union – 20% below 1990 levels within 12 years – would reduce global temperatures by only one-sixtieth of one degree Celsius (one-thirtieth of one degree Fahrenheit) by 2100, at a cost of $10 trillion.
For every dollar spent, we would do just four cents worth of good.
The saddest thing about the global warming debate is that nearly all of the key protagonists – politicians, campaigners, and pundits – already know that the old-style agreement that is on the table for Copenhagen this December will have a negligible effect on temperatures.
Unless we change direction and make our actions realistic and achievable, it is already clear that the declarations of “success” in Copenhagen this December will be meaningless.
We will make promises.
We will not keep them.
And we will waste another decade.
Instead, we must challenge the orthodoxy of Kyoto.
We can do better.
Doing Development Better
CAMBRIDGE – Jim Yong Kim’s appointment as World Bank president may have been predictable, given the long-standing tradition that renders the selection an American prerogative.
But even the appearance of competition between Kim and the other candidates, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala and José Antonio Ocampo, served to expose a deep fissure within the field of development policy, because Kim and his two rivals represented dramatically different approaches.
The vision for which Kim stands is bottom-up.
It focuses directly on the poor, and on delivering services – for example, education, health care, and microcredit – to their communities.
This tradition’s motto could be, “Development is accomplished one project at a time.”
The other approach, represented by Okonjo-Iweala and Ocampo, takes an economy-wide approach.
It emphasizes broad reforms that affect the overall economic environment, and thus focuses on areas such as international trade, finance, macroeconomics, and governance.
Practitioners in the first group idolize NGO leaders like Mohammad Yunus, whose Grameen Bank pioneered microfinance, and Ela Bhatt, a founder of India’s Self-Employment Women’s Association (SEWA).
The heroes of the second group are reformist finance or economy ministers such as India’s Manmohan Singh or Brazil’s Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
At first sight, this might seem like another dispute between economists and non-economists, but the rift runs within, rather than between, disciplinary boundaries.
For example, recent work with field experiments and randomized controlled trials (RCTs), which has caught on like wildfire among development economists, lies strictly in the tradition of bottom-up development.
The relative effectiveness of the two visions is not easy to determine.
Proponents of the macro approach point out that the greatest development successes have typically been the product of economy-wide reforms.
The dramatic reductions in poverty achieved by China over the span of a few decades, as well as by other East Asian countries like South Korea and Taiwan, resulted largely from improved economic management (as much as earlier investments in education and health may have played a role).
Reforms in incentives and property-rights arrangements, not anti-poverty programs, enabled these economies to take off.
The trouble is that these experiences have not proved as informative for other countries as one might have wished.
Asian-style reforms do not travel well, and, in any case, there is significant controversy about the role of specific policies.
In particular, was the key to the Asian miracle economic liberalization or the limits that were placed on it?
Moreover, the macro tradition vacillates between specific recommendations (“set low and uniform tariffs,” “remove interest-rate ceilings on banks,” “improve your ‘doing business’ ranking”) that find limited support in cross-country evidence, and broad recommendations that lack operational content (“integrate into world economy,” “achieve macroeconomic stability,” “improve contract enforcement”).
Development specialists in the bottom-up tradition, for their part, can deservedly claim success in demonstrating the effectiveness of education, public health, or microcredit projects in specific contexts.
But, too often, such projects treat poverty’s symptoms rather than its causes.
Poverty is often best addressed not by helping the poor to be better at what they are already doing, but by getting them to do something altogether different.
This calls for diversification of production, urbanization, and industrialization, which in turn require policy interventions that may lie at considerable distance from the poor (such as fixing regulations or targeting the value of the currency).
Moreover, as with macro-level economic reforms, there are limits to what can be learned from individual projects.
An RCT conducted under specific conditions does not generate usable hard evidence for policymakers in other settings.
Learning requires some degree of extrapolation, converting randomized evaluations from hard evidence into soft evidence.
The good news is that there has been real progress in development policy, and, beneath the doctrinal differences, is a certain convergence – not on what works, but on how we should think about and do development policy.
The best of the recent work in the two traditions shares common predilections. Both favor diagnostic, pragmatic, experimental, and context-specific strategies.
Conventional development policy has been prone to fads, moving from one big fix to another.
Development is held back by too little government, too much government, too little credit, the absence of property rights, and so on.
The remedy is planning, the Washington Consensus, microcredit, or distributing land titles to the poor.
By contrast, the new approaches are agnostic. They acknowledge that we do not know what works, and that the binding constraints to development tend to be context-specific.
Policy experimentation is a central part of discovery, coupled with monitoring and evaluation to close the learning loop.
Experiments do not need to be of the RCT type; China certainly learned from its policy experiments without a proper control group.
Reformers in this mold are suspicious of “best practices” and universal blueprints.
They look instead for policy innovations, small and large, that are tailored to local economic circumstances and political complications.
The field of development policy can and should be reunified around these shared diagnostic, contextual approaches.
Macro-development economists need to recognize the advantages of the experimental approach and adopt the policy mindset of enthusiasts of randomized evaluation.
Micro-development economists need to recognize that one can learn from diverse types of evidence, and that, while randomized evaluations are tremendously useful, the utility of their results is often restricted by the narrow scope of their application.
In the end, both camps should show greater humility: macro-development practitioners about what they already know, and micro-development practitioners about what they can learn.
The Dollar Joins the Currency Wars
NEW YORK – In a world of weak domestic demand in many advanced economies and emerging markets, policymakers have been tempted to boost economic growth and employment by going for export led-growth.
This requires a weak currency and conventional and unconventional monetary policies to bring about the required depreciation.
Since the beginning of the year, more than 20 central banks around the world have eased monetary policy, following the lead of the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan.
In the eurozone, countries on the periphery needed currency weakness to reduce their external deficits and jump-start growth.
But the euro weakness triggered by quantitative easing has further boosted Germany’s current-account surplus, which was already‎ a whopping 8% of GDP last year.
With external surpluses also rising in other countries of the eurozone core, the monetary union’s overall imbalance is large and growing.
In Japan, quantitative easing was the first “arrow” of “Abenomics,” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s reform program.
Its launch has sharply weakened the yen and is now leading to rising trade surpluses.
The upward pressure on the US dollar from the embrace of quantitative easing by the ECB and the BOJ has been sharp.
The dollar has also strengthened against the currencies of advanced-country commodity exporters, like Australia and Canada, and those of many emerging markets.
For these countries, falling oil and commodity prices have triggered currency depreciations that are helping to shield growth and jobs from the effects of lower exports.
The dollar has also risen relative to currencies of emerging markets with economic and financial fragilities: twin fiscal and current-account deficits, rising inflation and slowing growth, large stocks of domestic and foreign debt, and political instability.
Even China briefly allowed its currency to weaken against the dollar last year, and slowing output growth may tempt the government to let the renminbi weaken even more.
Meanwhile, the trade surplus is rising again, in part because China is dumping its excess supply of goods – such as steel – in global markets.
Until recently, US policymakers were not overly concerned about the dollar’s strength, because America’s growth prospects were stronger than in Europe and Japan.
Indeed, at the beginning of the year, there was hope that US domestic demand would be strong enough this year to support GDP growth of close to 3%, despite the stronger dollar.
Lower oil prices and job creation, it was thought, would boost disposable income and consumption.
Capital spending (outside the energy sector) and residential investment would strengthen as growth accelerated.
But things look different today, and US officials’ exchange-rate jitters are becoming increasingly pronounced.
The dollar appreciated much faster than anyone expected; and, as data for the first quarter of 2015 suggest, the impact on net exports, inflation, and growth has been larger and more rapid than that implied by policymakers’ statistical models.
Moreover, strong domestic demand has failed to materialize; consumption growth was weak in the first quarter, and capital spending and residential investment were even weaker.
As a result, the US has effectively joined the “currency war” to prevent further dollar appreciation.
Fed officials have started to speak explicitly about the dollar as a factor that affects net exports, inflation, and growth.‎ And the US authorities have become increasingly critical of Germany and the eurozone for adopting policies that weaken the euro while avoiding those – for example, temporary fiscal stimulus and faster wage growth – that boost domestic demand.
Moreover, verbal intervention will be followed by policy action, because slower growth and low inflation – partly triggered by a strong dollar – will induce the Fed to exit zero policy rates later and more slowly than expected.
That will reverse some of the dollar’s recent gains and shield growth and inflation from downside risks.
Currency frictions can lead eventually to trade frictions, and currency wars can lead to trade wars.
And that could spell trouble for the US as it tries to conclude the mega-regional Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Uncertainty about whether the Obama administration can marshal enough votes in Congress to ratify the TPP has now been compounded by proposed legislation that would impose tariff duties on countries that engage in “currency manipulation.”
If such a link between trade and currency policy were forced into the TPP, the Asian participants would refuse to join.
The world would be better off if most governments pursued policies that boosted growth through domestic demand, rather than beggar-thy-neighbor export measures.
But that would require them to rely less on monetary policy and more on appropriate fiscal policies (such as higher spending on productive infrastructure).
Even income policies that lift wages, and hence labor income and consumption, are a better source of domestic growth than currency depreciations (which depress real wages).
The sum of all trade balances in the world is equal to zero, which means that not all countries can be net exporters – and that currency wars end up being zero-sum games.
That is why America’s entry into the fray was only a matter of time.
Dollars and Depression
The falling dollar has emerged as a source of profound global macroeconomic distress.
The question now is how bad that distress will become.
Is the world economy at risk?
There are two possibilities.
If global savers and investors expect the dollar’s depreciation to continue, they will flee the currency unless they are compensated appropriately for keeping their money in the US and its assets, implying that the gap between US and foreign interest rates will widen.
As a result, the cost of capital in the US will soar, discouraging investment and reducing consumption spending as high interest rates depress the value of households’ principal assets: their houses.
The resulting recession might fuel further pessimism and cutbacks in spending, deepening the downturn.
A US in recession would no longer serve as the world’s importer of last resort, which might send the rest of the world into recession as well.
A world in which everybody expects a falling dollar is a world in economic crisis.
By contrast, a world in which the dollar has already fallen is one that may see economic turmoil, but not an economic crisis.
If the dollar has already fallen – if nobody expects it to fall much more – then there is no reason to compensate global savers and investors for holding US assets.
On the contrary, in this scenario there are opportunities: the dollar, after all, might rise; US interest rates will be at normal levels; asset values will not be unduly depressed; and investment spending will not be affected by financial turmoil.
Of course, there may well be turbulence: when US wage levels appear low because of a weak dollar, it is hard to export to America, and other countries must rely on other sources of demand to maintain full employment.
The government may have to shore up the financial system if the changes in asset prices that undermined the dollar sink risk-loving or imprudent lenders.
But these are, or ought to be, problems that we can solve.
By contrast, sky-high US interest rates produced by a general expectation of a massive ongoing dollar decline is a macroeconomic problem without a solution.
Yet so far there are no signs that global savers and investors expect a dollar decline.
The large gap between US and foreign long-term interest rates that should emerge from and signal expectations of a falling dollar does not exist.
And the $65 billion needed every month to fund the US current-account deficit continues to flow in.
Thus, the world economy may dodge yet another potential catastrophe.
That may still prove to be wishful thinking.
After all, America’s still-large current-account deficit guarantees that the dollar will continue to fall.
Even so, the macroeconomic logic that large current-account deficits signal that currencies are overvalued continues to escape the world’s international financial investors and speculators.
On one level, this is very frustrating: we economists believe that people are smart enough to understand their situation and capable enough to pursue their own interests.
Yet the typical investor in dollar-denominated assets – whether a rich private individual, a pension fund, or a central bank – has not taken the steps to protect themselves against the very likely dollar decline in our future.
In this case, what is bad for economists is good for the world economy: we may be facing a mere episode of financial distress in the US rather than sky-high long-term interest rates and a depression.
The fact that economists can’t explain it is no reason not to be thankful.
Do Low Interest Rates Ensure High Asset Prices?
Asset prices– stocks, commercial real estate, and even oil – are, historically, at high levels around the world.
Although history is often a good predictor of future trends, every now and then something fundamental changes that makes for a new pattern.
The important question now is whether today’s high asset prices are the result of some such fundamental development, or whether bubbles have formed.
One oft-heard justification for high asset prices is that real (inflation-adjusted) long-term interest rates are very low.
But investors should be wary of this argument.
It may sound plausible, but it is hardly conclusive, and, more importantly, it certainly does not tell us that high prices are sustainable.
It is, of course, true that real long-term interest rates have declined quite markedly – not suddenly and not only recently, but at a fairly steady pace for more than twenty years.
According to the IMF, world real long-term interest rates peaked at nearly 7% on average in 1984, and fell to just below 2% by 2004.
There were some ups and downs along the way, but the overall trend has been downward, and the magnitude of the decline – nearly five percentage points – is striking.
Ben Bernanke, the Chairman of President George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisors and a likely candidate to succeed Alan Greenspan as the Federal Reserve’s chairman in January, has called the decline in real interest rates over just the last decade a “global savings glut.”
It is not that there is “too much” saving around the world today, but that the amount of saving has been high enough that returns, as measured by real interest rates, are a lot lower than they once were.
In a March 2005 speech, Bernanke argued that this “glut” helps explain several features of the American economy, possibly including the enormous fiscal and trade deficits.
Low real long-term rates mean that any long-term asset that pays, say, $100 a year in real terms would have been worth a real $1,429 in 1984, when it yielded 7%, but would have to be worth a real $5,000 now, when it yields just 2%.
A decline in long-term rates of such magnitude would thus appear to imply massive price inflation for real assets, justifying the high prices we are in fact seeing.
Case closed, according to some advocates of pricey investments.
But there are holes in this case.
We have to look at the reasons that real interest rates were so much higher 10 or 20 years ago, and think about what that means, and we also have to look at the broader history of asset prices and their relation to real interest rates.
Twenty years ago, real short-term interest rates were exceptionally high by historical standards because the major central banks of the world wanted to combat what was seen at the time as inaction against spiraling inflation.
It took the courage – or recklessness, depending on your point of view – of US Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker to send the world into recession in 1981-2 in order to break the back of inflation.
That recession was destructive, but it had one silver lining: an inspiration to the world that an independent central bank can take tough measures to ensure price stability.
But, while the worldwide recession of 1981-2 brought inflation down rapidly, nominal long-term interest rates did not fall immediately, for the world’s markets were still not convinced.
Hence, real long-term rates remained quite high in the mid-1980’s.
Gradually, with lenders becoming increasingly confident in subsequent years that low inflation was here to stay, real long-term interest rates began heading south.
But this history means that the true real long-term interest rate was not as high in the 1980’s as our measures show, because long-term inflation expectations must have been much higher than the one-year inflation rate was at the time.
Holders of long-term bonds, for example, must have thought that inflation would come roaring back after the effects of the 1981-2 global recession had passed.
The inflation-indexed bond markets were not well developed in the 1980’s.
But we do know that in 1984 the best-developed such market (in the United Kingdom) was quoting long-term real interest rates of only around 3% – far below the IMF’s figure.
Even if we were to accept that real rates were genuinely very high in the mid-1980’s, then the logical conclusion would be that the stock and housing markets should have been even lower in the 1980’s, not that real prices should be very high in 2005.
Whatever their other benefits, the low rates we see around the world now hardly amount to insurance against future drops in asset prices.
The African Paradox
PARIS – Earlier this month, the trial of Pascal Simbikangwa, accused of complicity in the genocide in Rwanda, in which 800,000 people were killed between April and July 1994, began in Paris.
Unfortunately, mass killings in Africa continue.
In South Sudan, Africa’s newest state, massacres of civilians are still taking place, particularly around the city of Bor.
And French military intervention in the Central African Republic has not put an end to severe inter-communal violence there.
Yet, paradoxically, even as such episodes continue to occur in Africa, perhaps on a larger scale than anywhere else in the world, the continent has also become a beacon of hope.
Indeed, the perpetuation of extreme violence contrasts starkly with Africa’s favorable demographic profile, and its economic – and even political and social – progress in recent years.
One way to think about this paradox is in terms of the closing of a four-century-long parenthesis.
Since the seventeenth-century, Africa has been mainly an object of history.
Its people were first treated by the slave trade as mere commodities, necessary for economic growth elsewhere.
Then colonial powers carved up the continent artificially and arbitrarily, masking their greed behind noble-sounding goals: theirs was a “civilizing” mission.
Later, during the first half of the twentieth century, Africa offered the blood of its inhabitants, and then recourse to its territories, to a European continent in the throes of two world wars.
And, in the second half of the twentieth century, after a brutal anti-colonial struggle, Africa’s newly independent countries became proxy battlegrounds in the Cold War.
Today, by contrast, Africa is in the process of returning as a subject of history.
With more than one billion inhabitants, representing 18% of the world’s population, Africa is regaining the place it occupied at the beginning of the sixteenth century.
Then, with 100 million people, it represented 20% of the world’s population.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, after more than 200 years of colonialism and slavery, Africa’s population had fallen to 95 million – just 9% of the world total – whereas other continents had experienced a large population increase over the same period.
Economically, Sub-Saharan Africa has experienced a decade of 5-6% average annual GDP growth.
In Tanzania, growth this year should be around 7%.
At a time when the major emerging economies – with the exception of China – are facing a sharp slowdown, Africa, with its untapped energy resources and precious raw materials, including rare earth minerals, has naturally become a focus of investors’ attention.
But, though Africa can be described as the continent of hope, it is unlikely to become the “New Asia” – that is, a long-term dynamo of global growth – for a combination of cultural, political, geopolitical, and perhaps psychological reasons.
Asia has experienced the historical continuity of great empires.
China is the best illustration of this phenomenon.
It is a reemerging power, not an emerging one, a decisive factor that explains Chinese confidence.
Asia’s long history of rivalry and competition among its various powers has also been an important factor in its recent economic success.
The dynamic of competition and emulation among China, Japan, and South Korea has not existed in peacefully reconciled post-WWII Europe; there is nothing like it in Africa, either.
Nigeria is not Africa’s equivalent of what China is for Asia.
And post-apartheid South Africa, for all its progress, has not fulfilled the expectations placed on it, and remains unlikely to become the continent’s gendarme.
Colonialism and the slave trade constituted a historical rupture for Africa.
Beyond the human toll – including 10-15 million direct victims – absolute subjugation begot a unique loss of confidence.
Who today can name Africa’s great empires and kingdoms?
Who knows where the worlds’ gold came from before its discovery in Latin America in the sixteenth century?
Africa must find the confidence it desperately needs in the way others look at it.
The problem is that others are abysmally ignorant about the continent’s pre-colonial past.
One may criticize the cynicism of the Chinese, but it is China that has contributed more than any other country to the transformation of Africa’s self-image.
Today, it is Africans themselves who hold their continent’s future in their hands.
And, as Africa returns as a subject, rather than an object, of world history, it appears to embody all the fears and hopes of humanity.
Everything is there in extreme form: desertification, mass movements of populations, and, yes, genocidal violence – but also the hope for new forms of economic growth, if not new modes of governance.
The Trauma of France’s Jews
PARIS – “Death to the Jews!”
In Paris and other French cities, the hate-filled words ring out.
Attacks on synagogues have taken place for the first time since the Dreyfus Affair at the end of the nineteenth century.
In suburban areas near Paris, such as the town of Sarcelles, known for its climate of religious and ethnic tolerance, groups of young people have deliberately targeted Jewish properties.
Faced with the spectacular rise of anti-immigrant populism in France, and now with anti-Zionist demonstrations (which often coincide with an updated version of anti-Semitism), the French Jewish community is anguished and puzzled.
Some of its members are quietly asking themselves whether there is a future for them in the land of human rights.
French Jews are rediscovering the dual trauma that they experienced during the twentieth century: the death-camp deportations of World War II and their flight from Algeria following its independence in 1962.
It is to be expected that these episodes color – and tend to exacerbate – the emotions of the present.
French descendants of Eastern European Jews have not yet fully come to terms with a continent – including Vichy France – that they still associate with the Holocaust, whereas Jews from the Maghreb tend to resent the fact that even in France, they remain surrounded by “Arabs.”
Indeed, a significant portion of the Jewish community in the south of France votes for the far-right National Front, which, under the leadership of Marine Le Pen, has concentrated its xenophobia on Muslims.
In this tense setting, it comes as no surprise that the question of whether anti-Semitism has returned to France, after a seven-decade hiatus, is making international headlines.
British and American media reports have made comparisons to the Nazi era, with some even referring, in the aftermath of attacks on French synagogues, to a French Kristallnacht.
Such hyperbole must be firmly rejected, for it offends the memory of those who suffered as a result of Vichy France’s collaboration with Nazi Germany.
After the Gestapo arrested my father in Nice in 1943, he was escorted by French gendarmes to the transit camp at Drancy, in the Paris suburbs, before being deported to Auschwitz.
In 2014, by contrast, the French state defends the synagogues and denounces any form of anti-Semitism.
But even if the French state is not anti-Semitic, anti-Semitism does exist in France – and probably more so recently than in the postwar period.
And the worsening situation in the Middle East has, of course, played a key role in this, particularly the shocking images from Gaza.
The asymmetrical war being waged there by Israel seems disproportionate to a majority of world opinion, not just Arabs and Muslims.
To be sure, no state can passively accept rocket attacks on its cities.
And, yes, Hamas deliberately chooses to place its military arsenal in highly populated areas under the involuntary protective shield of innocent civilians – or those Israeli officials sometimes refer to, with barely concealed mistrust, as the “uninvolved.”
But the strategy of terror used by the Israeli authorities to deter further attacks or to restore a temporary “quiet” has been costly not only in terms of Palestinian lives lost and Israeli soldiers killed; it has also contributed to the deterioration of the security of Jews around the world.
In France, too, many of them express – often quietly – both their deep love for what Israel is and their deep concern for what Israel is now doing.
It is one thing to say that the Middle East conflict should not be exported to France.
It is another to recognize the inevitable impact of images of dead Palestinian women and children on communities in France that feel close to Palestine the way that Jews feel close to Israel.
If the images from Gaza seem to resonate so much in France, it is partly a matter of sheer numbers: the largest Muslim community in Europe faces the largest Jewish community in Europe.
But it is not only a question of numbers.
The young thugs who have attacked synagogues come mostly from the ranks of the unemployed and frustrated.
They vent their rage at a system that does not integrate them.
They even resent the Republic’s commemoration of Jews’ suffering during WWII.
For them, past horror is abstract; only the present horror can be felt.
The encounter between the images of today’s Middle East and the discontent of Muslim minorities (sometimes influenced by radical fundamentalist ideologies) should not be allowed to obscure traditional French anti-Semitism, white and bourgeois, which still lingers and is never far beneath the surface.
Thanks to the Internet, it, too, has begun to emerge more often.
But the French state does what it has to do to repress and contain anti-Semitism.
Comparisons to Nazi-era Europe do nothing to reassure a community that, despite all of the major historical differences between then and now, cannot quite shake the feeling that it is dancing on the rim of a volcano.
Turkey’s Lost Illusions
PARIS – “Day by day, Europe is moving further away from Turkey,” Egemen Bağış, Turkey’s Minister for European Union Affairs, declared last week.
But the reverse is equally true: With a mixture of disillusion and defiance, Turkey has been distancing itself from Europe in recent years.
“If you do not want us,” the Turks appear to be saying, “we really do not want you.”
In reality, nearly three years after the beginning of the “Arab Spring,” Turkey is more in search of itself than it is of Europe, even if it needs Europe more than Turks are willing to admit.
What is Turkey today, what are its values, and what is its destiny in a highly fluid regional environment?
The Arab Spring was initially seen as a great opportunity for Turkey, an ideal setting in which to highlight the country’s economic success, democratic political model, and indispensable strategic role in the region.
The inheritors of one of the world’s great empires were proving to the world that Islam and modernity were perfectly compatible – an inspiring example for Arab countries like Egypt.
Instead, Turkey’s role inspired reservations among Egyptians; after all, the Ottoman Empire had ruled over Egypt.
And, on the Turkish side, there was a sense of superiority vis-à-vis the Arab world.
The collapse of the Soviet Union awakened “neo-Ottoman” Turkish ambitions in the Caucasus and Central Asia, and revolution in the Middle East seemed to offer the heirs (if not orphans) of a long-dead empire an opportunity to avenge its loss.
If a lazy and fearful Europe did not want Turkey, so much the worse for Europe; history was offering more glorious alternatives to the Turks.
Whereas Turkey could appear too Oriental and too religious in Brussels or Paris, when viewed from Cairo or Tunis, it looked like an ideal Muslim bridge to the democratic West and economically dynamic Asia.
Moreover, Turkey could play some powerful cards, owing to its “good neighbor” policy with two partners and rivals, Iran and Syria, as well as its support for the short-lived presidency of Mohamed Morsi in Egypt.
Unfortunately, Turkish elites’ hopes (if not expectations) were not realized.
The Arab revolutions ended up exposing Turkey’s own weaknesses and contradictions, further aggravated by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s repressive policies and overweening political style.
This became clear in the demonstrations that spread this spring from Istanbul’s Taksim Square to much of the rest of the country (though the protests had more in common with Brazil’s recent unrest or the revolt in Paris in 1968 than with the popular movements in Egypt or Tunisia).
What characterizes Turks today is not so much pride and hope in their country’s expanding influence as fear of its disintegration.
The Kurdish problem preoccupies Turks, as does their growing sense that they are losing control of two essential issues – the Syrian and Iranian crises.
In recent months, Turkey’s government has adopted an increasingly tougher stance toward Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, convinced that it can only fall.
The agreement recently reached by the United States and Russia is, from this standpoint, frustrating news: For the price of destroying its chemical arsenal, the regime may have saved itself.
So Turkey must wonder what purpose is to be served by courting the West.
Why resume, under US pressure, a nearly normal dialogue with Israel if the outcome is to be abandoned, if not betrayed, by American policy?
Similarly, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani’s moderate rhetoric, together with possible progress on Iran’s dispute with the West over its nuclear program, has left Turkey with a sense of uselessness, if not isolation.
How can a country perceive itself, and be perceived by others, as a key regional actor if it finds itself marginalized at the critical moment?
History is moving in the Middle East, but not in the direction that Turkey would prefer.
And, with their country’s economic growth faltering, its government hardening, and its diplomatic performance a source of growing disappointment, many Turks now openly wonder what happened.
But, far from engaging in an open and positive self-examination, they are too often retreating into a strident nationalism that is all the more defensive to the extent that it reflects a growing lack of self-confidence.
Turkey’s current challenge is to overcome lost illusions.
And that means that Turks may need Europe more than they are willing to admit, even to themselves.
But is Europe today any more ready and willing than it was yesterday to engage in serious talks with Turkey?
Europe’s Anti-Europeans
PARIS – In 2005, two founding members of the European Union, France and the Netherlands, rejected by popular referendum the EU’s proposed constitutional treaty.
Two far-right parties from these countries, the French National Front and the Dutch Freedom Party, have now formed an alliance ahead of the European Parliament elections in May 2014.
They hope to attract likeminded parties in other EU countries and form a parliamentary bloc powerful enough to slay “the monster of Europe,” as Geert Wilders, the Freedom Party’s leader, calls the EU.
It is no accident that France and the Netherlands have taken the lead in this sordid venture.
Both countries are in the midst of a deep identity crisis that is mutating into disdain for Europe, foreigners, migrants, and all who represent the “other.”
And both countries are experiencing an increase in popular suspicion toward traditional political elites.
In this environment, the upcoming European Parliament elections seem tailor-made for extremist parties, with recent public-opinion polls suggesting that the National Front will come out on top in France.
European elections leave most citizens indifferent, which translates into low voter turnout – except among those who, defined by what they oppose, wish to express their anger and frustration with the status quo.
Marine Le Pen, the National Front’s leader, is shrewd and efficient, running on a straightforward message: “Europe is against the people, so the people must mobilize against Europe.”
With her semblance of moderation, she is far more appealing than her father and former party leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen.
Her strategy is to enter the mainstream of French politics by shedding all traces of past anti-Semitism, thereby turning the National Front into a seemingly legitimate alternative to a decadent traditional right, which has suffered a prolonged bout of infighting since Nicolas Sarkozy’s defeat in the 2012 presidential election.
In the Netherlands, Wilders – more a one-man show than the leader of a real party – has already been in government, thereby providing a veneer of legitimacy to Le Pen simply by forming an alliance with her.
Interestingly, the main Danish and British anti-European parties have refused to follow suit, refusing to enter into a pact with a party that was and probably remains anti-Semitic at its core.
And yet what ultimately unites Europe’s far-right parties is similar to what underlies the Tea Party’s rise within America’s Republican Party: covert racism and xenophobia.
Though the Tea Party’s followers – a group that one early opinion poll identified as 89% white and just 1% black – claim to oppose government spending above all else, they accept government help for themselves.
What they cannot accept is a black president and government spending on “others.”
Likewise, though Europe’s populists use their opposition to “Brussels” as a rallying flag, their ideology retains the atavism that motivated their forebears.
Today’s far-right forces may be more anti-Muslim than anti-Semitic – Wilders may even be sincerely pro-Israel – but they maintain the anti-humanist, cynical, and racist worldview of their predecessors in the 1930’s.
Of course, a country like France is not returning to the politics of the 1930’s, if only because the memories of the country’s military and moral collapse in 1940 have not faded.
But the vicious racist attacks on the justice minister, Christiane Taubira, who is black, would have been unthinkable in past decades.
And, throughout Europe, the loss of taboos and the belief that anything can be said – and anyone insulted – has led to an increase in racist incidents that are only superficially isolated.
Europe is not about to turn fascist; yet it would be dangerous to ignore that it is going astray, or to attribute recent developments solely to economic hard times and high unemployment.
More fundamental causes, political as well as ethical, are at work.
For example, Germany fares better than other European countries in its resistance to populism, not only because its economy is strong and its history constitutes a form of vaccination.
Germans can also thank the mettle and competence of their political leaders, including Chancellor Angela Merkel and her predecessor, Gerhard Schröder.
The best response to today’s unholy alliance of populist/racist parties is courage, determination, and clarity of position.
Any alliance by mainstream conservative parties with far-right forces will turn out to be a guarantee of defeat – moral as well as political.
That was true in Europe’s past, just as it is true for America’s Republicans today.
Sometimes no spoon is long enough to sup with the devil.
The Containment Debate, Round Two
PARIS – At the Cold War’s outset, there was an intense debate in the United States between those who wanted to contain communism and those who wanted to roll it back.
Was it sufficient to fix limits on the Soviet Union’s ambitions, or was a more aggressive stance, sometimes described as “containment plus,” necessary?
The recent spat between US President Barack Obama and his former secretary of state (and possible successor), Hillary Clinton, seems to have revived that debate.
But are its terms of reference useful today, as the West faces the simultaneous challenges of the Islamic State in the Middle East and a revisionist Russia?
Are Western leaders right to assume that the two challenges are distinct, and that containment will suffice in the case of Russia, while rollback is absolutely necessary in the case of the Islamic State?