With the risks of inflation and asset bubbles being mitigated by lower oil prices and excess capacity, now is a good time to initiate this policy shift.
Of course, China will probably face some short-term headwinds, so the positive effects of this shift will take some time to emerge.
As the central government consolidates its power through fiscal reform and an anti-corruption campaign, orchestrating the next phase of structural reforms at the local level will require deft coordination.
After decades of high-speed growth and policy experimentation, cyclical overshoots – reflected in excess capacity, ghost towns, and local-debt overhangs – are no surprise.
Now it is time to address them.
Only by confronting these structural issues can China complete its shift to its new, more developed, and more equitable “normal.”
China’s Transparency Problem
HONG KONG – The Chinese economy has caught a surprisingly severe cold this winter – a cold so bad that almost all global markets are sneezing.
During the first two weeks of 2016, the Shanghai Composite Index fell 18%.
On January 15, the index closed at 2,901 – very close to the trough of last summer’s stock-market crash.
Foreign analysts almost uniformly predict another market crash or even a hard landing.
With oil prices dipping below $28 per barrel, the specter of a global economic pandemic has appeared.
China’s New Year financial-market shock has been attributed to several causes, primarily related to policy transparency and clarity.
One was the reversal of China’s attempt to install a stock-market “circuit breaker,” which, far from tempering volatility, spurred a new wave of selloffs.
The other – arguably more serious – problem was market confusion about the direction of the renminbi exchange rate, following a gradual but constant ten-day depreciation against the US dollar that fueled capital outflows, until the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) intervened.
According to the PBOC, the confusion arose from a technical change in the process of setting the renminbi exchange rate, with the common reference rate against the US dollar replaced by a rate established on the basis of an undisclosed basket of key international currencies.
This reform may be intended to boost the renminbi’s stability; but it is not good for markets, which prefer stability against the dollar to the uncertainty of a managed float.
This is not the first time markets have felt blindsided by well-meaning reforms.
Last August, the PBOC announced a more market-oriented mechanism for setting the renminbi exchange rate in the interbank market, with the daily fixing rate to be based on the previous day’s closing price.
But, because the move coincided with a one-time devaluation of 1.9% against the US dollar, markets wrongly assumed that the central bank would pursue a policy-induced depreciation.
Unclear policy communication was compounded by global developments.
The US Federal Reserve’s decision in December to raise the federal funds rate, together with the uncertainty generated by collapsing oil prices, has also spurred investors to reduce their China exposure and switch to dollars.
Recognizing that exchange rates can overshoot much more than the stock market, especially in emerging economies, the PBOC moved to stabilize the exchange rate, intervening heavily in the offshore renminbi markets and tightening controls on short-term cross-border capital flows.
In December, China’s government reiterated its commitment to implementing tough market-oriented reforms, including measures to address environmental pollution, overcapacity, excessive debt, high taxes, bureaucratic red tape, and monopoly privileges for state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
The problem is that short-term investors are unlikely to wait around for long-term reforms to pay off – preferring short-term hedges against unclear exchange-rate policy.
All modern economies struggle with the inconsistency between sharp and volatile short-term price movements in financial markets and more gradual long-term structural adjustments in the real economy.
Unlike in the past, when Chinese policymakers were able to concentrate on the real economy without worrying about excessive financial-market instability, they now must manage short-term volatility caused by liberalized interest and exchange rates, together with larger and faster capital flows both within and across borders.
For China, coordinating short-term Keynesian fiscal and monetary policies aimed at stabilizing markets with long-term changes to the industrial structure – all without allowing growth to fall low enough to disrupt expectations – will be no easy feat.
But one thing is clear: effective communication with market participants and real-economy players is crucial to market credibility and stability.
In relatively closed economies, explaining complex policies is less important than delivering results.
But with increasing foreign participation and interaction, maintaining stability means anchoring market confidence with transparent, credible policymaking and action.
Only with market-savvy central- and local-government officials and SOE managers can China implement short-term stabilization measures or long-term structural reforms.
The problem, as China Securities Regulatory Commission Chairman Xiao Gang recently lamented, is that such talent is not widely available in the country; those who possess it tend to seek higher pay elsewhere, worry about the limits of the authorities’ market-friendly approach, or even feel vulnerable to corruption accusations.
The key to attracting market-oriented talent to China’s large bureaucracy is to make it clear that risk-taking – and even failure – will be tolerated.
Only if skilled officials feel comfortable making real-time decisions under uncertain conditions can the state keep pace with markets, responding effectively to new developments and thus maintaining high levels of confidence.
To support officials during this process, which will include unpopular decision such as cutting capacity and restructuring failed enterprises, China also needs transparent processes that ensure fairness to all stakeholders.
China is in a strong position to handle the challenges that it faces.
Growth, while slower than in the last three decades, remains relatively strong, as does China’s foreign-asset position and its central-government and household-sector balance sheets.
Stable markets need stable policy transitions.
By installing officials with strong policy credibility and the ability to handle market volatility deftly, China can complete its transition to a more market-oriented, innovation-driven economy – one that also supports stronger global growth.
Soviet Lessons for Chinese Purges
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – On August 1, China’s People’s Liberation Army celebrated its 88th anniversary.
But the country’s 2.3 million soldiers have little to cheer about.
On the eve of the anniversary, the PLA’s former top general, Guo Boxiong, was unceremoniously booted out of the Communist Party and handed over to military prosecutors to face corruption charges, including allegations that he took large bribes from fellow PLA officers in exchange for promotions.
And Guo will not be the last PLA officer to face such charges.
Guo, a vice chairman of the Central Military Commission, was in charge of the military’s day-to-day affairs from 2002 to 2012.
His arrest follows that of General Xu Caihou, who served on the commission from 2007 to 2012, in June of last year.
Guo and Xu are not the only senior officers to have fallen since their commander-in-chief, President Xi Jinping, launched his war on corruption at the end of 2012.
Based on official data, 39 generals (including Guo’s son, a major general) have already been arrested.
And if there is merit to the allegations that a large number of generals bribed Guo and Xu for their promotions, it is reasonable to assume that the most wide-ranging purge of senior PLA officers since the Cultural Revolution will continue.
That is precisely the message Xi sent to the military in a recent speech to the 16th army group, for which Xu served as political commissar in the early 1990s.
After vowing to eradicate Xu’s influence, “ideologically, politically, and also in terms of organization and work style,” Xi stressed that disobedience to the Party leadership would not be tolerated.
The army must, Xi declared, “resolutely conform to orders from the party Central Committee and the Central Military Commission.”
Anyone who has been watching Xi over the last two and a half years could discern his goal of consolidating Communist Party rule in China by strengthening his personal authority, reinvigorating domestic repression, and pursuing an assertive foreign policy.
To achieve this goal, Xi needs to secure the PLA’s unimpeachable loyalty – and that requires the purge of unreliable or corrupt officers.
On a personal level, the PLA’s loyalty is vital to make up for Xi’s lack of an institutional power base.
By contrast, when former President Jiang Zemin became General Secretary of the Communist Party following the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989, he was able to rely on capable and loyal officials in Shanghai to run the bureaucracy; he then expanded his support base by co-opting other factions in the 1990s.
And Jiang’s successor, Hu Jintao, hailed from the Communist Youth League, which has alumni at all levels of the party-state.
While Xi will work to build a strong power base by gradually appointing his supporters to key positions, he needs the PLA to defend his political authority in the interim.
The most efficient way for Xi to secure the PLA’s loyalty is to replace its top generals – most of whom were promoted by previous presidents – with his own supporters.
It seems that the lesson from the fall of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in 1964 was not lost on Xi.
Khrushchev was ousted in a palace coup sponsored by the KGB and blessed by the military.
Had the Red Army been completely loyal to Khrushchev, the conspirators would not have succeeded.
But Xi’s plans extend beyond his personal authority – and so do the lessons of the Soviet Union.
Shortly after Xi’s assumption of power, he lamented to local officials in Guangdong that when the Soviet Union collapsed, the elite had lost the will to fight.
At a time when the Chinese Communist Party’s political monopoly is increasingly being challenged, Xi will not make that mistake.
To avoid the Soviet Union’s fate, Xi and his colleagues have re-imposed ideological control and curtailed civil liberties.
While the Party has so far employed only the police and Internet censors (and now wants to embed secret policemen within all Internet companies), its longer-term survival is inconceivable without a loyal PLA, especially if protests like that in Tiananmen Square in 1989 erupt again.
The final pillar of Xi’s strategy for solidifying the Communist Party’s authority is to replace Deng Xiaoping’s cautious foreign policy with a muscular one.
Should China have to back its aggressive tactics in, say, the South China Sea or the Taiwan Strait with force, its military must not be led by venal and perfidious generals.
If Xi’s efforts to root out corruption in the PLA can accomplish these three objectives, one must grudgingly admit that it will be a stroke of political genius.
But, to ensure that China is in the strongest possible position, Xi must learn one more lesson from the Soviets: Purges can easily lead to excesses.
Stalin annihilated the Red Army’s officer corps on the eve of Nazi Germany’s invasion.
Xi cannot afford to make the same mistake.
The Real Singapore Model
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – The death of Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s founding father, offers an occasion to reflect on his legacy – and, perhaps more importantly, on whether that legacy has been correctly understood.
During his 31 years as prime minister, Lee crafted a unique system of government, intricately balancing authoritarianism with democracy and state capitalism with the free market.
Known as “the Singapore model,” Lee’s brand of governance is often mischaracterized as a one-party dictatorship superimposed on a free-market economy.
His success in transforming Singapore into a prosperous city-state is frequently invoked by authoritarian rulers as justification for their tight control of society – and nowhere more so than in China.
Indeed, Chinese President Xi Jinping is pursuing a transformative agenda heavily influenced by the Singapore model – a relentless war on corruption, a broad crackdown on dissent, and pro-market economic reforms.
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) sees in Singapore a vision of its future: the perpetuation of its monopoly on political power in a prosperous capitalist society.
But the Singapore model, as China’s rulers understand it, never existed.
To emulate Lee’s model of government – rather than its cartoon caricature – would require allowing a far more democratic system than the CCP would ever tolerate.
The true secret of Lee’s political genius was not his skillful use of repressive practices, such as launching lawsuits against the media or his political opponents; such tactics are common and unremarkable in semi-authoritarian regimes.
What Lee did that was truly revolutionary was to use democratic institutions and the rule of law to curb the predatory appetite of his country’s ruling elite.
Unlike China, Singapore allows opposition parties to contest in competitive and free (though not necessarily fair) elections.
In the last parliamentary election in 2011, six opposition parties won a total of 40% of the vote.
Should the People’s Action Party (PAP), the party Lee founded, lose its legitimacy due to poor governance, Singapore’s voters could throw it out of office.
By holding regular competitive elections, Lee effectively established a mechanism of political self-enforcement and accountability – he gave Singaporean voters the power to decide whether the PAP should stay in power.
This enforcement mechanism has maintained discipline within Singapore’s ruling elite and makes its promises credible.
Regrettably, most of the rest of the world has never given Lee proper credit for crafting a hybrid system of authoritarianism and democracy that vastly improved the wellbeing of his country’s citizens, without subjecting them to the brutality and oppression to which many of Singapore’s neighbors have resorted.
China would be wise to embrace this model, by introducing a considerable degree of democracy and strengthening adherence to the rule of law.
China’s 1.4 billion citizens would benefit immensely if their rulers were to adopt Singapore-style political institutions and practices.
This would mean, at a minimum, legalizing organized political opposition, introducing competitive elections at regular intervals, and creating an independent judiciary.
Emulating Lee would allow China to achieve immense progress and become a more humane and open society with a brighter future.
Sadly, there is almost no chance of this happening, at least any time soon.
When China’s leaders cite the Singapore model, what they have in mind is limited to the perpetuation of their power.
They want the benefits of political dominance, without the checks imposed by a competitive institutional context.
Lee may have been skeptical about the benefits of democracy, but he was not viscerally hostile to it; he understood its usefulness.
By contrast, China’s leaders view democracy as an existential ideological threat that must be neutralized at any cost.
For them, allowing even a modicum of democracy as a means to impose some discipline on the elite is considered suicidal.
Unfortunately, Lee is no longer with us.
One would like to imagine him explaining to China’s leaders what has been truly innovative about the Singapore model.
Obviously, that is not an option.
But it would behoove the CCP – if for no other reason than simple respect for one of Asia’s great statesmen – to stop appropriating the Singapore brand in the service of a completely different agenda.
Moving From Debt to Equity in China
HONG KONG – A spate of recent commentary has been warning of the vertiginous rise in China’s debt, which jumped from 148% of GDP in 2007 to 249% at the end of the third quarter of 2015.
Many are anxiously pointing out that China’s debt is now comparable to that of the European Union (270% of GDP) and the United States (248% of GDP).
Are they right to worry?
To some extent, they are.
But while observers’ concerns are not entirely baseless, it is far too early to sound the systemic-risk alarm.
As a recent HSBC report points out, the reasons for China’s rapid accumulation of debt, which is concentrated in the corporate and local-government sectors, suggest that the situation is not nearly as dangerous as many are making it out to be.
For starters, China has a very high saving rate – above 45% over the last decade, much higher than in the advanced economies – which enables it to sustain higher debt levels.
Moreover, China’s banking system remains the primary channel for the deployment of the household sector’s savings, meaning that those savings fund corporate investment through bank lending, rather than equity financing (which accounts for only about 5% of net investment).
Indeed, the sharp acceleration in the debt-to-GDP ratio is partly attributable to the relative underdevelopment of China’s capital market.
Once these factors are taken into account, China’s overall debt levels do not seem abnormally high.
While debt might be a problem for Chinese companies with excess capacity and low productivity, companies in fast-growing, productive sectors and regions may not be in too much trouble.
More generally, China has made recent progress in boosting labor productivity, encouraging technological innovation, and improving service quality in key urban areas, despite severe financial repression and inadequate access to funding by small and medium-size private enterprises.
Of course, China’s debt is still rising – a trend that, if left unchecked, could pose a mounting threat to financial and economic stability.
Furthermore, after more than three decades of rapid income growth, China has accumulated wealth (or net assets) in almost all sectors.
By any standard, China’s household sector has very low leverage, with a debt-to-deposit ratio of 47.6%.
In addition, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences estimates that the central and local governments have accumulated net assets amounting to nearly 146% of GDP, mostly in real estate.
In short, while China has a problem with inefficient capital allocation, it is nowhere near a solvency or liquidity crisis.
Nonetheless, China does need to address its domestic debt overhang.
One option is higher inflation.
But advanced countries have learned the hard way in recent years how difficult this approach can be, as their massive unconventional monetary policies have failed to overcome deflationary forces.
With much of the world facing very low inflation, and even the possibility of outright decline in the price level, the real burden of debt has been increasing.
A second option is to issue more equity.
The banking system is the wrong channel for allocating resources to high-growth, high-risk sectors, which should hold equity as risk capital.
But last year’s A-share debacle – when a price rout drove the government to suspend trading in more than half of A-share companies – underscored how difficult it is to build a strong equity market when the investment culture and tax system remain tilted toward debt.
But China still has options.
A substantial share of the corporations holding large debts are state-owned, and are thus more subject to policy than they are to markets.
Simply put, the government has the power to bring about balance-sheet changes.
The key will be to encourage the reduction of bad debts and increases in the stock of safe assets, while taxing excess capacity and encouraging innovation, thereby improving total factor productivity.
Giacomo Corneo of the Free University of Berlin has proposed that, in addition to taxing underused real estate, China should create a sovereign wealth fund to improve the management of public assets.
Given that those assets amount to an estimated $18 trillion, a higher return on capital would boost GDP and reduce debt.
China’s bank regulators have already permitted experiments in debt-equity swaps, which the International Monetary Fund says should be incorporated in a comprehensive strategy to accelerate reform of state-owned enterprises.
China has the savings to address its growing debt burden.
Amid slowing growth, however, its window of opportunity is narrowing.
The sooner China rebalances from debt to equity, the better off it will be.
China’s Latest Five-Year Plan
CAMBRIDGE – I was in Beijing last month when the Chinese government released a preliminary summary of its 13th Five-Year Plan.
This is an important document for understanding where China is headed in the 2016-2020 period.
And yet China’s five-year plans just aren’t what they used to be.
The Chinese economy is no longer the state-owned and state-managed system that it was when I first visited more than 30 years ago.
In those days, there was no private enterprise, and it was illegal for anyone but the government or a state-owned enterprise to hire an employee.
Today, only 20% of employees in China work for SOEs.
The rest of the Chinese economy is dynamic, decentralized, and privately owned.
American multinational companies and other foreign firms are an important part of the economic scene.
So the five-year plan is no longer a detailed blueprint for industrial expansion; rather, it provides a picture of what the Chinese leadership hopes will be achieved under the government’s general guidance.
The aim is to improve the overall standard of living – achieving moderately strong growth, raising the share of consumption in GDP, and improving air and water quality – through a combination of Western-style monetary and fiscal policies, state-financed infrastructure development, and changes in environmental and other regulations.
One of the key goals was set back in 2010: doubling real GDP and real personal incomes by 2020.
The government now officially estimates that achieving this target will require average annual GDP growth of 6.5% over the next five years.
Given that China is still a relatively poor country, with per capita GDP only about 25% of the level in the United States, maintaining such a rapid pace of growth certainly is not impossible.
But many observers are skeptical about China’s official GDP data and dubious of its ability to sustain 6.5% growth.
That skepticism reflects a variety of recent news indicating weak output in parts of the Chinese economy – for example, headlines about reduced industrial production, declines in manufacturing exports, and shutdowns in particular industries.
Although I cannot claim to be an expert on Chinese economic statistics, I think these headlines are a natural but misleading consequence of the authorities’ intentional effort to shift China’s economic structure away from industrial expansion and exports toward greater reliance on services and household consumption.
Chinese economic experts say that the output of the service sector is growing fast enough to offset growth in industrial output of 5% or even less, thereby achieving the current overall growth rate of about 7%.
But even if annual growth really is now at about 7%, achieving a 6.5% rate for the next five years will be a challenge, for at least four reasons.
For starters, China’s shift from heavy industry to services implies less output per worker and less control by the central government.
At the same time, the environmental policies that are urgently needed to improve air and water quality absorb resources and impede growth.
And President Xi Jinping’s crackdown on corruption has had the side effect of delaying decision-making and inhibiting new projects.
Finally, and perhaps most important, the population of working-age individuals is no longer growing, a result of the 35-year-long policy of restricting most families to no more than one child.
Although the government recently replaced the one-child limit with a two-child limit, it will be nearly two decades before that change can increase the size of the working-age population.
Until then, increasing the growth rate of the effective labor force requires shifting workers from low-productivity employment in agriculture to the urban labor force.
The Chinese government is therefore considering several policies to increase the pace of urbanization, including the creation of several new large cities to accommodate some of the 600 million individuals who still live in rural China.
Similarly, the government will phase out the hukou system of residency permits that now prevents migrants to the cities from obtaining full health care and education benefits.
A third policy change aimed at promoting urbanization will be to allow Chinese farmers to sell their land rights at realistic market prices, thereby increasing their incentive to cash out and move.
And the introduction of a Western-style rental market will allow families without substantial cash or parental support to move to cities (where families currently must purchase their apartments).
Not all of these policies have to succeed in order to keep the urban labor force expanding in the next five years.
If enough of them succeed well enough, 6.5% growth over the next few years might not be out of reach.
China also has a variety of short-run problems.
There is excess capacity in some heavy industries and in residential real-estate markets in some second- and third-tier cities.
Local governments have significant debts that were incurred at the request of the central government in 2007 and 2008 in order to avoid a serious economic downturn.
And there is a large volume of bad loans in some state-owned banks and in the shadow banking system.
Fortunately, the authorities recognize these problems and have strategies – and, more important, the resources – to deal with them.
China’s economy will not grow as strongly over the next five years as it did in past decades.
But if the goals set out in the 13th Five-Year Plan are realized, the Chinese people can look forward to a period of rising consumer spending and an improving standard of living.
China’s Slowing New Normal
MILAN – The world’s two largest economies, the United States and China, seem to be enduring secular slowdowns.
But there remains considerable uncertainty about their growth trajectory, with significant implications for asset prices, risk, and economic policy.
The US seems to be settling into annual real (inflation-adjusted) growth rates of around 2%, though whether this is at or below the economy’s potential remains a source of heated debate.
Meanwhile, China seems to be headed for the 6-7% growth rate that the government pinpointed last year as the economy’s “new normal.”
Some observers agree that such a rate can be sustained for the next decade or so, provided that the government implements a comprehensive set of reforms in the coming few years.
Others, however, expect China’s GDP growth to continue to trend downward, with the possibility of a hard landing.
There is certainly cause for concern.
Slow and uncertain growth in Europe – a major trading partner for both the US and China – is creating headwinds for the US and China.
Moreover, the US and China – indeed, the entire global economy – are suffering from weak aggregate demand, which is creating deflationary pressures.
As central banks attempt to combat these pressures by lowering interest rates, they are inadvertently causing releveraging (an unsustainable growth pattern), elevated asset prices (with some risk of a downward correction, given slow growth), and devaluations (which merely move demand around the global economy, without increasing it).
For China, which to some extent still depends on external markets to drive economic growth, this environment is particularly challenging – especially as currency depreciation in Europe and Japan erode export demand further.
Even without the crisis in major external markets, however, a large and complex middle-income economy like China’s could not realistically expect growth rates above 6-7%.
Yet, in the aftermath of the global economic crisis, China insisted on maintaining extremely high growth rates of 9% for two years, by relying on fiscal stimulus, huge liquidity injections, and a temporary halt in the renminbi’s appreciation.
Had the government signaled the “new normal” earlier, expectations would have been conditioned differently.
This would have discouraged undue investment in some sectors, reduced non-performing loans, and contained excessive leverage in the corporate sector, while avoiding the mispricing of commodities.
Growth would still have slowed, but with far less risk.
In the current situation, however, China faces serious challenges.
Given weak growth in external demand and an already-large market share for many goods, China cannot count on export growth to sustain economic performance in the short run.
And, though support for infrastructure investment by China’s trading partners – especially through the “one belt, one road” policy – may help to strengthen external markets in the longer term, this is no substitute for domestic aggregate demand.
Investment can sustainably drive growth only up to the point when returns decline dramatically.
In the case of public-sector investment, that means that the present value of the increment to the future GDP path (using a social discount rate) is greater than the investment itself.
The good news is that growing discipline seems to be pushing out low-return investment.
And there is every reason to believe that investment will remain high as the economy’s capital base expands.
But, in order to boost demand, China will also need increased household consumption and improved delivery of higher-value services.
Recent data suggest that, notwithstanding recent wage increases, consumption amounts to only about 35% of GDP.
With a high household savings rate of around 30% of disposable income, per capita disposable income amounts to roughly half of per capita GDP.
Expanded social-security programs and a richer menu of saving and investment options could go a long way toward reducing precautionary saving and boosting consumption.
But what is really needed is a shift in the distribution of income toward households.
Without a concerted effort to increase households’ share of total income and raise consumption’s share of aggregate demand, growth of consumer products and services on the supply side will remain inadequate.
Given that services are a significant source of incremental employment, their expansion, in particular, would help to sustain inclusive growth.
Another key challenge concerns China’s slumping property sector, in which construction and prices dropped rapidly last year.
If highly leveraged developers are under stress, they could produce non-performing loans – and thus considerable risk – in both the traditional and shadow banking sectors.
Fortunately, Chinese households’ relatively low leverage means that the kind of balance-sheet damage that occurred in some advanced countries during the crisis, leading to a huge drop in demand, is unlikely, even if real-estate prices continue to decline.
It also means that there remains some space for expanding consumer credit to boost demand.
That is not the only source of hope.
Wages are rising, deposit insurance will be introduced, and deposit rates are being liberalized.
Internet investment vehicles are growing.
New businesses in the services sector – 3.6 million of which were started just last year – are generating incremental employment, thanks partly to a new streamlined licensing framework.
And online platforms are facilitating increased consumption, while expanding market access and financing for smaller businesses.
China’s leaders should aim to accelerate and build upon these trends, rather than pursuing additional fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Public investment is high enough; expanding it now would shift the composition of aggregate demand in the wrong direction.
And, with the corporate sector already overleveraged, a broad-based expansion of credit is not safe.
Any fiscal stimulus now should focus on improving public services, encouraging consumption, and increasing household income.
Accelerating the expansion of state-funded social security could bring down household savings over time.
More generally, China must deploy its large balance sheet to deliver income or benefits that expand what households view as safely consumable income.
Given that private investment responds mainly to demand, such measures would likely reverse its current downward path.
A further slowdown in China is a distinct possibility.
China’s leaders must do what it takes to ensure that such a slowdown is not viewed as secular trend – a perception that could undermine the consumption and investment that the economy so badly needs.
China’s New Normal and America’s Old Habits
NEW HAVEN – China is generating a lot of confusion nowadays, both at home, where senior officials now tout the economy’s “new normal,” and abroad, exemplified by America’s embrace of Cold War-style tactics to contain China’s rise.
On both counts, the disconnects are striking, adding a new dimension of risk to the impact of the “China factor” on a fragile world.
The official view in China is that its economy has already arrived in the Promised Land of the “new normal.”
Indeed, that was the theme of the just-concluded China Development Forum (CDF) – an important platform for debate among China’s senior officials and a broad cross-section of international participants that occurs immediately after the annual National People’s Congress.
Since the CDF’s inception in 2000, the Chinese government has used the event to signal its policy priorities.
In 2002, for example, the CDF focused on the impact of China’s accession to the World Trade Organization – a precursor to a spectacular surge of export-led growth.
In 2009, the emphasis was on China’s aggressive post-crisis stimulus strategy.
And last year’s event addressed implementation of the so-called Third Plenum reforms.
This suggests that China’s “new normal” will be the government’s top priority this year.
But there remains considerable ambiguity as to what exactly the new normal entails – or whether it has even been achieved.
In his keynote speech at the CDF, Zhang Gaoli, one of the seven members of the Politburo Standing Committee (the Chinese Communist Party’s highest decision-making body), declared that the senior leadership has rendered the “strategic judgment that China’s economy has entered the stage of the new normal.”
Yet, at the CDF’s wrap-up session, Premier Li Keqiang suggested, a bit less decisively, that China is basically following the world economy in its transition to a new normal.
In short, China’s government is confusing a path with the final destination – a point that I stressed in my remarks to the CDF, in which I argued that China is in the early stages of rebalancing its economy toward services and consumption.
In fact, China is far from settling in to a new normal.
The best way to measure how far China still has to go is to consider the development of its services sector – the infrastructure of consumer demand in an economy.
The good news is that services are now growing faster than any other sector, having reached 48% of GDP in 2014 (thus surpassing the end-2015 target of 47% well ahead of schedule).
The tough news is that this remains significantly lower than the 60-65% share typical of a more “normal” economy.
Given this, it is worrying that China’s leaders believe that the new normal is already at hand.
The notion that this critical transition has occurred risks generating complacency at a time when China should be focused on the wrenching, but essential, process of structural adjustment – one that will take at least another decade to complete.
Continuing the shift to a services-led growth model is important for a number of reasons.
With services in China employing 30% more workers per unit of output than manufacturing and construction, the sector’s expansion will help to preserve social stability, even as economic growth slows to 7%.
Observers in the West, focused largely on the slowdown of headline GDP growth, continue to miss this key point.
Moreover, because the services sector also requires fewer commodities and less energy, this transition will help China address its serious environmental problems.
In the meantime, China faces another, equally daunting challenge: the United States’ growing determination to contain its growing influence.
At this year’s CDF, tensions between the hegemon and the rising power were widely discussed, both in the formal sessions and on the sidelines.
Three developments were especially noteworthy: US resistance to China’s efforts to establish the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank – a stance now rejected by most of America’s closest allies; President Barack Obama’s signature trade initiative, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which excludes China; and yet another effort by the US Senate to enact legislation on currency manipulation that takes dead aim at China.
Combined with ongoing disputes over cyber security and territorial claims in the East and South China Seas – not to mention questions about America’s geostrategic “pivot” toward Asia – these issues have chilled the Sino-American relationship.
It fell to Henry Kissinger, who was present at the dawn of the modern US-China relationship, to put it all into context.
At the CDF, he stressed how different the situation is now, compared to 1972, when he and then-President Richard Nixon first met with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai.
Unlike the immediate military threats back then, today’s challenges – such as climate change, cyber security, and global health – can be addressed only through collaborative strategic engagement.
The imperative to cooperate is an inevitable outgrowth of globalization.
As Kissinger emphasized, the Middle Kingdom of China’s dynastic era knew nothing of the Roman Empire, and vice versa.
In today’s world, however, no great power can afford to operate in a vacuum.
They receive instantaneous feedback from one another – especially on shared challenges – whether they like it or not.
In a sense, it is no surprise that the US is bristling over China’s ascendance.
After all, dominant powers have always struggled to cope with rising ones.
Nonetheless, China, burdened by 150 years of perceived humiliation by the West, does not take kindly to that reaction.
As China confronts the challenges of its economy’s shift to a new normal, it will need to find common ground with the US.
And America will need to work to deepen its understanding of China’s transition.
Both countries will have to show leadership, vision, and openness to collaborative engagement.
Sadly, there was little sign of that at this year’s CDF.
Navigating China’s New Silk Road
BEIJING – Since its introduction by Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2013, the “one belt, one road” initiative – an ambitious plan to revitalize the ancient Silk Road overland and maritime trade routes linking East and West – has attracted considerable attention.
And for good reason: The project, which involves more than 60 countries and quite a few international organizations, implies unprecedented opportunities – and challenges.
The original Silk Road, established more than 2,000 years ago, was a critical network of trade routes that promoted economic, political, and cultural exchange among Asia, Africa, and Europe.
China’s new “Silk Road Economic Belt” and “Twenty-First Century Maritime Silk Road” will do the same, with newly built or upgraded infrastructure facilitating the flow of trade, investment, culture, and ideas – and thus supporting shared economic growth.
From China’s perspective, the logic behind the strategy is clear.
With its sources of GDP growth coming under increasing strain, China must continue to make progress in opening up the economy.
That means building mutually beneficial relationships with neighboring countries, which can benefit by taking over some of China’s lower-value-added activities.
That promises to boost their own growth while creating space for the Chinese economy to move up the value chain, where productivity and wages – important determinants of consumption – are higher.
China has already laid the groundwork for these relationships, strengthening economic cooperation and trade with countries along the “belt and road.”
It has also spearheaded the creation of multilateral institutions – notably, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank – to support the investment projects.
China’s comparative advantages, including a global financial center in Hong Kong and a regional financial center in Shanghai, reinforce its leadership role.
Add to that the recent surge in fast-growing, innovative companies – such as Huawei, Alibaba, and Wanda – and China is well placed to implement Xi’s ambitious vision.
But it will not be smooth sailing.
Like any cross-border initiative, the “one belt, one road” initiative will require wise diplomacy to manage relationships with diverse countries and careful planning to scale up effectively.
Each country along the “belt and road” faces a unique combination of risks and challenges.
Many face macroeconomic risks, owing to exchange-rate volatility, large debt burdens, and non-diversified, unsustainable economic structures.
On the microeconomic level, risks include, for example, weak banking sectors.
Governance failures, ranging from corruption to inefficient implementation of reforms, also pose a serious challenge, as do social and political tensions (and, in some areas, the threat of terrorism).
And one must not forget the ever-present risk of natural disasters, exacerbated by climate change.
Then there are the complex and varied laws, rules, and regulations shaping the business environment in each country.
Of course, it is virtually impossible for Chinese enterprises to understand fully each environment before entering it.
But any violation could put a company’s entire operation and investment at risk.
The challenges may be complex, but the formula for navigating them is simple.
First and foremost, there can be no corruption, which would not only hurt the “one belt, one road” initiative, but would also undermine China’s ability to pursue other cross-border initiatives in the future.
Second, no infrastructure project should be pursued without careful consideration of both its financial costs and benefits and its ecological impact, such as air pollution and destruction of ecosystems.
Finally, all projects must be transparent and include effective checks and balances.
To reinforce this approach, the provision of financing for “belt and road” projects must adhere strictly to market rules.
Given the scale of most investments, project finance – which is based on projected cash flows, rather than its sponsors’ balance sheets – will prove highly useful, as will effective risk-sharing mechanisms.
Furthermore, sponsors should look beyond a project’s construction to the achievement of its long-term objectives, such as ensuring profitability and managing its lasting impact on the local community and the environment.
Consultants, lawyers, auditors, NGOs, and other entities with international experience can play a vital role in all of these efforts.
There are also practical steps that can be taken to mitigate specific risks.
For example, to minimize the risks associated with operating in an unfamiliar regulatory and legislative environment, businesses should establish links in advance with a local entity to guide their activities.
China, as the leading promoter of the “one belt, one road” initiative, must take steps to ensure that businesses act responsibly.
The central government will have to regulate and coordinate sub-national governments effectively, while working to ensure that competition is fair and constructive.
At the same time, China should implement a well-designed training program that provides officials at all levels of government and entrepreneurs with basic information about operating abroad.
And it should do more to spur the involvement of Hong Kong – which possesses major advantages in finance and logistics, information accessibility, talent recruitment, and implementation of the rule of law – in the initiative.
Last but not the least, the central government needs to strengthen the guidance of crisis management and exit strategies.
Realizing the “one belt, one road” initiative will not be easy.
But China has all of the tools it needs to succeed.
As long as it uses them in a way that is clean, green, and transparent, China and its neighbors will reap vast rewards.
China’s Pursuit of a New Economic Order
SHANGHAI – Economists are increasingly divided over China’s economic future.
Optimists emphasize its capacity for learning and rapid accumulation of human capital.
Pessimists focus on the rapid decline of its demographic dividend, its high debt-to-GDP ratio, the contraction of its export markets, and its industrial overcapacity.
But both groups neglect a more fundamental determinant of China’s economic prospects: the world order.
The question is simple: Can China sustain rapid GDP growth within the confines of the current global order, including its trade rules, or must the current US-dominated order change drastically to accommodate China’s continued economic rise?
The answer, however, remains unclear.
One way that China is attempting to find out is by pushing to have the renminbi added to the basket of currencies that determine the value of the International Monetary Fund’s reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right (SDR).
As it stands, that basket comprises the euro, the Japanese yen, the British pound, and the US dollar.
The SDR issue was the audience’s main concern when IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde spoke in Shanghai in April.
Her stance – that it is just a matter of time before the renminbi is added to the basket – garnered considerable media attention.
(Regrettably, however, the media read too much into her statement.)
Former US Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke faced the same question in Shanghai last month.
He was purposely vague in his response: the renminbi’s inclusion in the SDR would be a positive step, he said, but it could not be taken until China makes much more progress in reforming its financial sector and transforming its growth model.
The IMF is expected to vote on the renminbi’s inclusion in the SDR this October, at its regular five-year review of the SDR basket’s composition.
But even if, unlike in 2010, a majority votes to add the renminbi to the basket, the United States may exercise its veto power.
Such an outcome would not be surprising, given that US opposition (though in Congress, not within the Obama administration) blocked reforms, agreed in 2010, to increase China’s voting power within the IMF.
Limited use of the SDR implies that adding the renminbi would be a largely symbolic move; but it would be a powerful symbol to the extent that it served as a kind of endorsement of the currency for global use.
Such an outcome would not only advance the renminbi’s internationalization; it would also provide insight into just how much room there is for China within the existing global economic order.
So far, it seems that there is not enough.
In a 2011 book, the economist Arvind Subramanian projected that the renminbi would become a global reserve currency by the end of this decade, or early next decade, based on his observation that the lag between economic and currency dominance is shorter than traditionally believed.
Today, China is the world’s largest economy (based on purchasing power parity) and the largest participant in world trade, and its government has been actively promoting renminbi internationalization, such as through the relaxation of foreign-exchange regulations.
And yet the renminbi is used internationally much less than Subramanian’s model predicted.
As a result, China remains subject to US monetary policy.
If the Federal Reserve raises interest rates, China must follow suit to keep capital from flowing out, despite the negative impact of higher interest rates on domestic growth.
Given the US dollar’s dominance in international transactions, Chinese companies investing abroad also face risks associated with exchange-rate fluctuations.
In fact, over the last decade, international trade rules have created significant friction between China and many other countries, including the US.
Now, free-trade agreements are being negotiated – namely, the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership – that will undermine the continued expansion of Chinese exports to the extent that they raise entry barriers for Chinese firms.
Clearly, China has faced major challenges within the existing global system as it tries to carve out a role befitting its economic might.
That may explain why, with its “one belt, one road” initiative and its establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), China’s government is increasingly attempting to recast the world order – in particular, the monetary and trading systems – on its own terms.
The “one belt, one road” initiative aims to re-create the ancient overland and maritime Silk Roads that carried goods and ideas from Asia to Europe.
Given that the project will entail significant Chinese investment affecting some 50 countries, its appeal in the developing world is not difficult to fathom.
The AIIB, too, has proved appealing – and not just to developing countries.
In fact, 57 countries – including major powers like France, Germany, and the United Kingdom – have signed up as founding members, which may reflect a growing awareness of the US-dominated order’s diminishing returns.
From China’s perspective, sustained domestic economic growth seems unlikely within the existing global system – a challenge that Japan and the other East Asian economies did not encounter during their economic rise.
Indeed, the only country that has encountered it is the US, when it replaced the UK as the world’s dominant economic and financial power before World War II; fortunately, that precedent is one of accommodation and a peaceful transition.
To be sure, China still needs to undertake important domestic reforms, especially of the financial sector, in order to eliminate distortions in resource allocation and stem the economy’s slowdown.
But the refusal by China’s leaders to pursue export-boosting currency depreciation, even in the face of decelerating growth, suggests that they are willing to make the needed sacrifices to secure the renminbi’s international role and, with it, long-term economic growth and prosperity.
Whether or not the renminbi is added to the SDR basket this October, a gradual transformation of the global system to accommodate China seems all but inevitable.
China’s One-Child Calamity
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – The abolition of China’s 35-year-old one-child policy closes one of the darkest chapters in the country’s history.
In the late 1970s, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), determined to boost economic growth, decided that population control was the answer.
Millions of abortions, sterilizations, and infanticides later, its chickens are coming home to roost.
In raw numbers, the one-child policy’s human toll has been even greater than that of Mao’s Great Leap Forward, which caused a famine that killed around 36 million people from 1959 to 1961.
And it exceeded that of the Cultural Revolution, in which large-scale political violence likely caused as many as another ten million deaths from 1966 to 1976.
As for the one-child policy, data released by China’s health ministry in 2013 indicate that from 1971 to 2012, 336 million abortions – more than the entire US population – were carried out in registered facilities alone.
(Though the one-child policy was not introduced until about 1979, other family-planning policies were already in place at the time.)
The National Health and Family Planning Commission, the government agency responsible for enforcing the one-child policy, reports an even higher figure: more than 13 million surgical abortions each year – a figure that does not include abortions induced by drugs or carried out in unregistered private clinics.
Of course, it is impossible to know precisely what share of those abortions can be attributed to enforcement of the one-child policy.
But in, say, India, where abortion is legal and no comparable family-planning policy exists, the figure is significantly lower – though probably not as low as the 630,000 annual figure provided by the Indian Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Indeed, it is probably closer to six million per year.
Although there is undoubtedly an economic disparity between India and China, their populations are roughly equal.
So it is reasonable to estimate that as many as half of China’s abortions – some 6.5 million registered surgical abortions, plus untold numbers of drug-induced or unregistered abortions, per year – are attributable to the one-child policy.
This implies that there were upwards of 200 million abortions over the policy’s 35 years.
But forced abortions are only the beginning.
Indeed, these figures – however shocking – do not capture the human suffering or the harsh economic consequences brought about by the one-child policy.
Media often reported stories of unspeakable brutality by local officials against pregnant women and families who violated the policy – a unique savagery captured in Ma Jian’s novel The Dark Road.
In a much-publicized 2012 case, local officials in Shaanxi province forced a woman to undergo an abortion seven months into her pregnancy.
Beyond physical and emotional trauma, violators of the one-child policy – who are most often among the country’s poorest – face serious economic penalties.
Provincial sampling suggests that the Chinese government collects about CN¥20 billion ($3 billion) per year in family-planning fines.
And local officials in many localities explicitly threaten violators with other harsh punishments, including destruction of their houses and confiscation of their farm animals.
The one-child policy’s long-term demographic consequences have been devastating as well.
According to official data, China’s old-age dependency ratio – the ratio of those aged 65 and up to working-age people (aged 15-64) – currently stands at 13%.
As the one-child generation ages – adding some ten million retirees annually – this ratio will skyrocket, with the labor surplus that supported China’s economic miracle giving way to a severe shortage that depresses growth.
Equally problematic is China’s alarming gender imbalance.
Families’ preference that their one child be male led to innumerable sex-selective abortions, as well as female infanticide and abandonment.
As of 2013, boys aged 0-24 outnumbered girls by 23 million, implying that more than 20 million young men will not be able to find marriage partners in the coming decades.
The most sobering lesson from this tally of the one-child policy’s toll on China lies in the simple fact that the authorities were able to enforce it for so long.
In fact, China is the only country in history where a government has actually succeeded in using coercion to limit its people’s reproductive choices.
The key is its unconstrained one-party regime, underpinned by a huge and powerful bureaucracy.
Outside observers often marvel at the CCP’s capacity to get things done – at least when those things are the construction of super-modern cities and a high-speed rail network.
Seldom do they note the disastrous consequences when the Party applies its power in stubborn pursuit of a brutal and destructive objective.
Now is the time to recognize those consequences, particularly given that China’s leaders are not done limiting their citizens’ reproductive choices.
On the contrary, they are simply moving from a one-child policy to a two-child policy.
Outsiders and Chinese alike must emphasize the senseless cruelty that such measures imply and work to ensure that they are never seen again – in China or anywhere else.
China’s Online Financial Sector Comes of Age
BEIJING – Last month, China’s leaders revealed details of the 13th Five-Year Plan, which will guide the economy’s trajectory until 2020.
Gone are the directives to expand industrial production at a breakneck pace that characterized previous five-year plans.
Now, the focus is on achieving sustainable long-term growth, underpinned by domestic consumption, a stronger services sector, entrepreneurship, and innovation.
The Internet – which already has more than 680 million active users in China – will play a key role in facilitating this shift.
In particular, online peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, a streamlined approach to credit allocation, may hold the key to expanding and deepening China’s financial sector, enabling firms to grow and innovate, and bolstering domestic consumption.
In online P2P lending, individual (and, lately, institutional) investors provide funds that can be lent out to individual borrowers, without involving a traditional financial intermediary.
Loans can range from CN¥100 ($16) to CN¥1 million, and target small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), as well as individual borrowers, that currently struggle to access credit through traditional institutions.
Over the last three years, China’s P2P lending sector has been growing annually at an astounding average rate of 245%, with its total value reaching CN¥253 billion last year.
China now has more than 2,000 registered active P2P loan platforms, up from just 50 four years ago.
Even so, P2P lending still accounts for just a small fraction of overall lending in China.
Last year, total loans issued through peer-to-peer networks were equivalent to just 1.5% of the CN¥15.1 trillion in consumer loans issued by Chinese banks.
Clearly, there is plenty more room for growth.
This growth must, however, be carefully managed.
The very factors that enable online P2P platforms to deliver loans quickly and broadly – that is, their reliance on consumer credit-ratings databases and eschewal of collateral or guarantees – can generate risks, as they leave important questions about borrowers unanswered.
And, in fact, the risks have already begun to materialize.
According to the P2P lending database Wangdaizhijia, from 2011 to mid-2015, more than one-third of China’s registered platforms experienced serious problems.
For example, investors reported difficulties withdrawing funds on more than 300 platforms, and platform operators absconded with investors’ money on over 300 more.
For the industry as a whole, high-quality, easily accessible data remains difficult to come by.
Fortunately, however, these shortcomings can be overcome.
Regulators and Internet financiers can look to traditional bank lending to individuals and SMEs as they devise new measures to minimize risk and lock up bottom lines in the P2P lending sector.
In a study of loan data from five Chinese banks, a team of researchers and I identified five factors that influence the emergence of non-performing SME and consumer loans.
Some were fairly obvious: Larger loans and higher leverage ratios contribute to higher rates of NPLs.
Others – the existence of guarantees or collateral, lending to small companies (instead of the companies’ owners), and lending to borrowers who are geographically farther away – were less so.
The lessons are clear: Institutions should aim to issue a higher number of smaller loans to local individuals, while depending less on guarantees.
To aid in this process, lending platforms need better channels for sharing credit and leveraging data, and they must build up identity verification systems.
That will require coordination between the government and the private sector, as well as dedicated networks for sharing information.
Current regulations will have to be improved in many areas as well.
For example, all online P2P lending platforms, regardless of the scope of their business, should be required to register with regulators.
They should also receive training, provided by a professional association for the sector, aimed at preventing money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
Overall, however, a thicket of regulations is unnecessary and should be avoided, as the systemic risks that P2P lending poses to the wider economy are small.
Instead, regulators should adopt a flexible approach.
A tiered licensing system, for example, would work best to address the varying degrees of financial complexity and risk among platforms.
Under this scenario, platforms that function as information intermediaries between borrowers and lenders, but are not directly involved in loan transactions, would be free from virtually all formal regulation and supervision, as they generate the least amount of risk.
Platforms that offer basic deposit and loan facilities should be classified as banks, whose transactions entail credit, liquidity, and trading risks that merit prudential supervision alongside measures like risk-based capital requirements.
Nonetheless, it is important not to overburden these firms with complex, high-level capital-adequacy requirements that would impede their operational flexibility.
Finally, platforms with business models that involve higher degrees of financial complexity must be watched carefully for misconduct, as they are the most likely to conduct proprietary trading without adequate expertise, or offer guaranteed returns without appropriate risk assessment and control.
And, of course, financial interconnectedness demands international coordination of appropriate standards for the industry.
P2P lending has its pitfalls, but if they are properly accounted for, the sector will undoubtedly continue to grow, fueled by those whose financing needs have been overlooked by traditional banks.
This will help to secure a major role for the sector in the Chinese economy.
China on the Launch Pad
SINGAPORE – Behind a veil of secrecy, China’s development of strategic and tactical missiles is well into its third generation of modernization.
While the development of Chinese long-range missile and nuclear forces has traditionally been characterized as conservative, incremental, and slow, it has taken place against a backdrop of steadily growing official emphasis on the country’s defense-industrial complex, particularly its aerospace sector.
In particular, China is developing, testing, and deploying a new generation of solid-propellant, road-mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
These include the DF-31 and DF-31A, which are equipped with nuclear payloads.
It is also designing and developing new classes of conventional short-range ballistic missiles (SRBMs) and medium-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs), such as the DF-21 – mobile, solid-propellant, longer range, more accurate, and able to exploit vulnerabilities in ballistic missile-defense systems.
As part of its missile and nuclear-force modernization, China is also focusing on developing its sea-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) such as the JL-2, testing the DF21-D as an anti-ship ballistic missile (ASBM) for maritime strikes, and further developing its anti-satellite weapon capabilities (ASAT).
The purpose behind China’s continuous modernization of its strategic assets is to enhance the credibility of its deterrent threat by improving the survivability of its nuclear forces.
Thus, China is diversifying its missiles in terms of their strike capabilities and mobility, and formulating innovative anti-access/area-denial asymmetric warfare concepts to close the gap with technologically more advanced adversaries and near competitors – principally the United States, Russia, and Japan.
China’s progress in modernizing its strategic assets and capabilities owes much to the ongoing transformation of China’s defense industries, particularly the aerospace sector, over the past decade.
Since the late 1990’s, China’s government has gradually introduced elements of competition and globalization, with the aim of overcoming the entrenched monopoly of China’s traditional defense-industrial conglomerates.
The reforms have been guided by two broad concepts: the “Four Mechanisms” – competition, evaluation, supervision, and encouragement – and yujun yumin, or identifying military potential in civilian capabilities, with defense industries integrating into the broader civilian economy.
The reforms have essentially enabled China to streamline research and development efforts, as well as technology transfers between selected components of its civil and commercial space programs.
As a result, China has also been able to bypass existing export controls and restrictions on the transfer of sensitive military technologies, particularly aerospace and satellite components and know-how.
Indeed, China’s military use of space is increasingly dependent and interlinked with civilian and commercial space activities, infrastructure, and human capital.
Its space launch vehicles (SLVs) can be used for satellites with a range of applications – including communications, weather, observation, and navigation – which may significantly enhance the effectiveness of China’s military space operations and systems.
While ballistic missiles have generally different rocket engines, basing profiles, and launch methods, their guidance and control systems may use similar components, and SLVs may use stage components based on ballistic missiles.
The trajectory of China’s ballistic missile R&amp;D and production shows a gradual transition from copying and reproducing first-generation Soviet ballistic-missile technologies to adapting and modifying smaller, mobile, solid-propellant ballistic missiles and their follow-on second-generation systems.
China is now an independent producer and technological innovator of selected missile systems and related aerospace technologies.
Ultimately, China views its military, civil, and commercial space programs as being at the forefront of its national defense, economic development, and geostrategic influence.
The rest of the world should regard China’s aerospace capabilities as an important part of its future power projection.
Trump Through Chinese Eyes
IRVINE – When Donald Trump won the United States’ presidential election in November, he had a lot of Chinese fans.
But Trump’s popularity has since plummeted, owing to his statements – often via Twitter – on contentious issues, such as Taiwan and the South China Sea.
This isn’t the first time China’s view of a US leader has deteriorated rapidly.
The abrupt change in Chinese sentiment toward Trump is reminiscent of what happened to US President Woodrow Wilson after his reelection a century ago.
At the time, many Chinese intellectuals, including the young Mao Zedong, admired Wilson, a political scientist and former president of Princeton University.
Then, in 1919, Wilson backed the Treaty of Versailles, which transferred control of former German territories in Shandong Province to Japan, rather than return them to China.
Wilson quickly lost his luster in China.
The shift was similar – but the reasons are very different.
A century ago, China was driven to support Wilson, and then to loathe him, by its own weakness.
Today, it is China’s strength that is guiding its view of the US president.
In 1916, the year Wilson was elected to his second term, China was in terrible shape.
While the republic established in 1912 was ostensibly a single entity, it was actually highly fragmented.
Military strongmen controlled different regions, while foreign powers, through bribes and bullying, seized large swaths of China’s territory.
For Chinese intellectuals, Wilson offered a bookish contrast to thuggish warlords.
But Wilson’s appeal in China went beyond image.
In 1918, Wilson’s popularity soared – and not just in China – following an address to Congress calling for national “self-determination.”
Overlooking Wilson’s support of Jim Crow in the US and the invasion of Haiti on his watch, intellectuals in imperialism-ravaged countries from Egypt to Korea took his declaration to heart, and began to view him as a savior and champion of the oppressed.
Chinese patriots, in particular, hoped that, under Wilson’s leadership, the US might deepen its involvement in Asia in ways that would help protect China from the predations of Imperial Japan.
For them, Wilson’s support of the Treaty of Versailles constituted a profound betrayal.
The China of 2016 is unimaginably different from the China of 1916.
It has leap-frogged even advanced countries in the global economic hierarchy.
It is unified under a strong and focused leadership.
And it is very big, including nearly all the territories that were part of the Qing Empire at its peak.
A rare exception is Taiwan, but the “one China” diplomatic fiction sustains the fantasy that someday, somehow, the democratic island and authoritarian mainland will be reintegrated.
In short, China no longer needs US protection.
Instead, it wants a US president who is occupied largely with domestic issues, and is not much concerned with constraining China’s rise, as Barack Obama was.
That way, China could get to work reshuffling power relationships in Asia for its own benefit, without having to worry about American interference.
Before the election, Trump was already known to level wild accusations at China, typically related to economic issues like trade.
But his apparent lack of interest in foreign policy was very appealing for Chinese leaders.
He seemed far more likely than his opponent, former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, to leave China alone.
His suggestion that he would be less committed than his predecessors to supporting traditional US allies in Asia, like South Korea and Japan, was music to Chinese nationalists’ ears, much as his questioning of American commitments to NATO was music to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s.
Like Wilson, Trump also gained some fans simply by virtue of a personality that is atypical for a politician.
Of course, Trump is no bookworm.
But many people liked that he seemed to say (or tweet) whatever he felt, offering “straight talk” that contrasted sharply with the approach of more polished politicians, including President Xi Jinping, who watches his every word.
A similar desire for “authenticity” has fueled – albeit in a very different way – the popularity of another US official, Gary Locke, who became the US ambassador to China in 2011.
Photographs of Locke carrying his own daypack and buying coffee at Starbucks – humble acts that high-ranking Chinese officials would have underlings do – spurred a flurry of online posts celebrating him as a virtuous public servant.
How different America must be, his fans claimed, from China, where corrupt officials and their pampered offspring indulge in luxurious lifestyles reminiscent of the imperial families of dynastic times.
It is hard to imagine that particular US-China contrast carrying weight now, as photos of Trump’s garish Manhattan penthouse and opulent Mar-a-Lago parties continue to emerge.
And while Trump’s communication style remains striking, particularly in comparison to Xi’s, it becomes far less appealing when one is the target of his blunt comments on touchy topics.
Just as a weak China was not able to count on Wilson’s protection, a strong China will not be able to count on Trump to get out of its way – at least not without throwing a few elbows.
Keynes and Hayek in China’s Property Markets
HONG KONG – Real-estate prices in China’s top cities are spiking, generating contradictory predictions of either bursting bubbles or a coming economic turn-around.
This, he suggests, may be the last hurrah before a market meltdown.
Liu Shijin, former Vice Minister of the Development Reform Center of China’s State Council, disagrees.
Instead, he posits that after six years of reduced investment in infrastructure and construction, growth in the Chinese property market may be bottoming out, and liquidity and consumer confidence may be shifting back to housing.
To determine who is right, it is important, first, to recognize that not all Chinese cities’ property markets are surging.
In 42 of the cities surveyed by the NBS – those with industrial overcapacity and excessive property inventories – price increases amounted to less than 5%, with eight cities recording falling or stagnant property prices.
This pattern of divergence creates a dilemma for Chinese policymakers and investors, who now must weigh carefully the insights of two economic giants: John Maynard Keynes and Friedrich Hayek.
At a time of slowing economic growth, some are advocating more Keynesian macro-stabilization measures, much like those China used to sustain growth after the global economic crisis of 2008.
But in many areas, particularly in the northeast, central, and western parts of the country, the slowdown cannot be resolved through more stimulus.
In fact, stimulus in those regions would largely flow out, along with the labor and capital that is already being propelled toward coastal areas, which boast more advanced technology, higher rates of innovation, superior infrastructure, and a more market-friendly business environment.
What slower-growth regions need, therefore, is time to carry out supply-side structural reforms, including cutting inventories, reducing overcapacity, and writing off the bad debts of local governments and state-owned enterprises.
The regions with surging property prices, meanwhile, tend to be the ones that are drawing labor and capital with high growth and superior job opportunities.