How else can the crisis-battered housing market finally clear for the remainder of US homeowners?
The same can be said for enhanced saving incentives, which would contribute to longer-term financial security for American households, most of which suffered massive wealth losses in the Great Recession.
Expanded individual retirement accounts and 401K pension schemes, special incentives for low-income households (most of which have no retirement plans), and an end to the financial repression that the Fed’s zero-interest-rate policy imposes on savers must also be part of the solution.
Yes, these are controversial policies.
Debt forgiveness raises thorny ethical concerns about condoning reckless and irresponsible behavior.
But converting underwater “non-recourse” mortgage loans, where only the house is at risk, into so-called “recourse liabilities,” for which nonpayment would have consequences for all of a borrower’s assets, could address this concern, while simultaneously tempering America’s culture of leverage with a much greater sense of responsibility.
Timing is also an issue, especially with respect to saving incentives.
To avoid the shortfall in aggregate demand that might arise from an abrupt surge in saving, these measures should be phased in over a period of 3-5 years.
The main benefit of these proposals is that they are more strategic than tactical – better aligned with the balance-sheet problems that are actually afflicting the economy.
As the quintessential laissez-faire system, the US has outsourced strategy to the invisible hand of the market for far too long.
That has left the government locked into a reactive and often misguided approach to unexpected problems.
Thus, the Fed is focused on cleaning up after a crisis rather than on how to avoid another one.
The same is true of US fiscal policy, with an event-driven debate that now has ever-shorter time horizons: the fiscal cliff on January 1, sequestration of expenditures on March 1, expiration of the continuing budget resolution on March 27, and the new May 18 debt-ceiling limit.
A compliant bond market, which may well be the next bubble, is mistakenly viewed as the ultimate validation of this myopic approach.
The dangers of America’s strategy vacuum and the related penchant for short-termism have been mounting for some time.
Harvard Business School professor Michael Porter famously raised this concern in a 1996 article in the Harvard Business Review.
His focus was on corporate decision-making and misaligned incentives leading to a worrisome dichotomy between the short-term tactics of “operational effectiveness” (cost cutting, outsourcing, and reengineering) and the long-term visionary bets that frame successful strategies.
While Porter’s critique was directed at business managers, it bears critically on the current US policy debate.
A successful long-term strategy cannot be seen as a succession of short-term fixes.
The internal debate in the FOMC represents a healthy and long-overdue recognition that the central bank may be digging itself into an ever-deeper hole by committing to misguided policies aimed at the wrong problem.
A comparable debate is raging over fiscal policy.
Can America finally face up to the perils of its strategy vacuum?
America’s Political Class Struggle
NEW YORK – America is on a collision course with itself.
This month’s deal between President Barack Obama and the Republicans in Congress to extend the tax cuts initiated a decade ago by President George W. Bush is being hailed as the start of a new bipartisan consensus. I believe, instead, that it is a false truce in what will become a pitched battle for the soul of American politics.
As in many countries, conflicts over public morality and national strategy come down to questions of money. In the United States, this is truer than ever.
The US is running an annual budget deficit of around $1 trillion, which may widen further as a result of the new tax agreement.
This level of annual borrowing is far too high for comfort. It must be cut, but how?
The problem is America’s corrupted politics and loss of civic morality.
One political party, the Republicans, stands for little except tax cuts, which they place above any other goal.
The Democrats have a bit wider set of interests, including support for health care, education, training, and infrastructure.
But, like the Republicans, the Democrats, too, are keen to shower tax cuts on their major campaign contributors, predominantly rich Americans.
The result is a dangerous paradox.
The US budget deficit is enormous and unsustainable.
The poor are squeezed by cuts in social programs and a weak job market.
One in eight Americans depends on Food Stamps to eat.
Yet, despite these circumstances, one political party wants to gut tax revenues altogether, and the other is easily dragged along, against its better instincts, out of concern for keeping its rich contributors happy.
This tax-cutting frenzy comes, incredibly, after three decades of elite fiscal rule in the US that has favored the rich and powerful.
Since Ronald Reagan became President in 1981, America’s budget system has been geared to supporting the accumulation of vast wealth at the top of the income distribution.
Amazingly, the richest 1% of American households now has a higher net worth than the bottom 90%.
The annual income of the richest 12,000 households is greater than that of the poorest 24 million households.
The Republican Party’s real game is to try to lock that income and wealth advantage into place.
They fear, rightly, that sooner or later everyone else will begin demanding that the budget deficit be closed in part by raising taxes on the rich.
After all, the rich are living better than ever, while the rest of American society is suffering.
It makes sense to tax them more.
The Republicans are out to prevent that by any means.
This month, they succeeded, at least for now.
But they want to follow up their tactical victory – which postpones the restoration of pre-Bush tax rates for a couple of years – with a longer-term victory next spring.
Their leaders in Congress are already declaring that they will slash public spending in order to begin reducing the deficit.
Ironically, there is one area in which large budget cuts are certainly warranted: the military.
But that is the one item most Republicans won’t touch.
They want to slash the budget not by ending the useless war in Afghanistan, and by eliminating unnecessary weapons systems, but by cutting education, health, and other benefits for the poor and working class.
In the end, I don’t think they will succeed.
For the moment, most Americans seem to be going along with Republican arguments that it is better to close the budget deficit through spending cuts rather than tax increases.
Yet when the actual budget proposals are made, there will be a growing backlash.
With their backs against the wall, I predict, poor and working-class Americans will begin to agitate for social justice.
This may take time.
The level of political corruption in America is staggering.
Everything now is about money to run electoral campaigns, which have become incredibly expensive.
The mid-term elections cost an estimated $4.5 billion, with most of the contributions coming from big corporations and rich contributors.
These powerful forces, many of which operate anonymously under US law, are working relentlessly to defend those at the top of the income distribution.
But make no mistake: both parties are implicated.
There is already talk that Obama will raise $1 billion or more for his re-election campaign.
That sum will not come from the poor.
The problem for the rich is that, other than military spending, there is no place to cut the budget other than in areas of core support for the poor and working class.
Is America really going to cut health benefits and retirement income?  Will it really balance the budget by slashing education spending at a time when US students already are being out-performed by their Asian counterparts?
Will America really let its public infrastructure continue to deteriorate?
The rich will try to push such an agenda, but ultimately they will fail.
Obama swept to power on the promise of change.
So far there has been none.
His administration is filled with Wall Street bankers.
His top officials leave to join the banks, as his budget director Peter Orszag recently did.
He is always ready to serve the interests of the rich and powerful, with no line in the sand, no limit to “compromise.”
If this continues, a third party will emerge, committed to cleaning up American politics and restoring a measure of decency and fairness.
This, too, will take time.
The political system is deeply skewed against challenges to the two incumbent parties.
Yet the time for change will come.
The Republicans believe that they have the upper hand and can pervert the system further in favor of the rich. I believe that they will be proved wrong.
America\u0027s Problems Run Deeper than Wall Street
CAMBRIDGE – With less than two months remaining before America’s presidential election, much attention is focused on the state of the American economy and the challenges that it will present to the next president.
We are in the midst of a financial crisis caused by the serious mispricing of all kinds of risks and by the collapse of the housing bubble that developed in the first half of this decade.
What started as a problem with sub-prime mortgages has now spread to houses more generally, as well as to other asset classes.
The housing problem is contributing to the financial crisis, which in turn is reducing the supply of credit needed to sustain economic activity.          
Indeed, the financial crisis has worsened in recent weeks, reflected in the US Federal Reserve’s takeover of quasi-government mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – which may cost American taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars – as well as the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the sale of Merrill Lynch.
Ultimately, these financial failures reflect the downward spiral of house prices and the increasing number of homes with negative equity, i.e., with substantial mortgage debt in excess of market values.
Negative equity is significant because mortgages in the United States are generally “no recourse” loans.
If a homeowner defaults, creditors can take the house, but they cannot take other property or income to make up any unpaid balance.
Even in those states where mortgages are not “no recourse” loans, creditors generally do not pursue the assets or income of individuals who default.
We cannot be sure about how much further house prices will fall.
Experts say another 15% decline is required just to return to the pre-bubble price path.
But there is nothing to stop the decline from continuing once it reaches that point.
The growing gap between mortgage debts and house prices will continue to increase the rate of defaults.
Many homeowners who can afford to make their mortgage payments will choose to default, move to rental housing, and wait to purchase until house prices have declined further.
As homeowners with large negative equity default, the foreclosed homes contribute to the excess supply that drives prices down further.
And the lower prices lead to more negative equity and therefore to more defaults and foreclosures.
It is not clear what will stop this self-reinforcing process.
Declining house prices are key to the financial crisis and the outlook for the economy, because mortgage-backed securities, and the derivatives based on them, are the primary assets that are weakening financial institutions.
Until house prices stabilize, these securities cannot be valued with any confidence.
And that means that the financial institutions that own them cannot have confidence in the liquidity or solvency of potential counterparties – or even in the value of their own capital.
Without this confidence, credit will not flow and economic activity will be constrained.
Moreover, because financial institutions’ assets were bought mainly with borrowed money, the shortage of credit is exacerbated by their need to deleverage.
Since raising capital is difficult and costly, they deleverage by lending less.
But the macroeconomic weakness in the US now goes beyond the decreased supply of credit.  Falling house prices reduce household wealth and therefore consumer spending.
Falling employment lowers wage and salary incomes.
The higher prices of food and energy depress real incomes further.
And declining economic activity in the rest of the world is lowering demand for US exports.
The US Federal Reserve has, in my judgment, responded appropriately by reducing the federal funds interest rate sharply and creating a variety of new credit facilities.
The low interest rate helped by making the dollar more competitive, but otherwise monetary policy appears to have lost traction because of the condition of the housing sector and the dysfunctional state of the credit markets.
The US Congress and the Bush administration enacted a $100 billion tax rebate in an attempt to stimulate consumer spending.
Those of us who supported this policy generally knew that history and economic theory implied that such one-time fiscal transfers have little effect, but we thought that this time might be different.
Our support was, in the words of Samuel Johnson, a triumph of hope over experience.
In the end, our hopes were frustrated.
The official national income accounting data for the second quarter are now available, and they show that the rebates did very little to stimulate spending.
More than 80% of the rebate dollars were saved or used to pay down debt.
Very little was added to current spending.
So that is where the US is now: in the middle of a financial crisis, with the economy sliding into recession, monetary policy already at maximum easing, and fiscal transfers impotent.
That is an unenviable situation, to say the least, for any incoming president.
Obama’s Burmese Gamble
ARLINGTON – The rapprochement between the United States and Myanmar (Burma) has proceeded at a blistering pace.
A year ago, the two countries did not even have ambassadors in each other’s capitals.
In May, President Thein Sein became the first leader from Myanmar to visit the White House in nearly a half-century.
But has Barack Obama’s administration been too quick to embrace what was, until recently, one of the world’s most repressive regimes?
Or, on the contrary, is decisive US support essential to Myanmar’s fledgling reform process?
Until the recent opening, Myanmar, which gained independence in 1948, had been ruled by a secretive military junta since 1962.
As recently as 2010, the regime held elections so blatantly rigged that the main opposition party refused to participate.
But in 2011, shortly before assuming the presidency, Sein, a general who served as Prime Minister under the junta, began to take steps that impressed even the most skeptical observers.
Unlike the token gestures of reform offered by previous rulers, Sein’s actions appeared substantive and meaningful.
One important change was the release of hundreds of political prisoners, including the regime’s most prominent opponent, Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been under house arrest for nearly 15 years.
Moreover, Sein initiated a dialogue with Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize winner and the leader of the National League for Democracy (NLD), about a transition to civilian rule.
The subsequent elections bolstered hope for Myanmar’s democratic future.
In 1990, when the NLD won 81% of the seats in Parliament, the junta promptly voided the results and arrested Suu Kyi.
In 2012, the NLD won 43 of the 44 seats that it contested, and the military accepted Suu Kyi as the reform movement’s legitimate leader.
Furthermore, Sein has reached out to the Karen, Kachin, and other ethnic minorities – groups whose members have suffered decades of official persecution and mistreatment.
And efforts to open Myanmar’s economy to international trade have transformed the country’s commercial capital, Yangon (Rangoon), with businesspeople now arriving on direct flights from at least a half-dozen foreign capitals and once-empty streets now congested with imported cars.
But, in some areas, reform has been painfully slow.
In fact, when it comes to human rights and minority protections, Myanmar may even be regressing.
The liberalization process has exposed the country’s long-standing religious divisions, leading to a wave of sectarian violence aimed primarily at the minority Muslim community.
From coastal Rakhine to inland towns like Meiktila and Tatkon, Buddhist monks have incited violence against Muslims (and sometimes vice versa), with local officials often tacitly permitting religious bloodletting.
At his meeting with Sein in Washington, DC, Obama condemned the violence against Myanmar’s Muslims, which has displaced many of them.
On the same day, the US State Department released its annual report on religious freedom, in which Myanmar was included among the world’s eight worst offenders.
This has not always been the case.
Although Myanmar is an overwhelmingly Buddhist country, dozens of religious and ethnic communities have long lived there side by side.
In the heart of Yangon, the golden dome of the Sule Pagoda stands just across the street from the minarets of the Bengali Mosque.
In order to achieve the peace and stability needed to consolidate Myanmar’s democratic transition, both Sein and Suu Kyi should do more to establish themselves as representatives of all of Myanmar’s citizens.
Muslims need to be assured of their personal security and guaranteed full civil rights.
The Obama administration has staked significant political capital on the wager that Myanmar’s promise may finally bear fruit.
And, indeed, the rate of change in Myanmar over the last two years has been nothing short of remarkable.
But, as Sein acknowledged at the White House, Myanmar’s government “has been encountering obstacles and challenges along [its] democratization process.”
How it copes with these problems – and those that have yet to arise – will determine whether America has given its blessing prematurely.
America\u0027s Renminbi Fixation
NEW YORK – For seven years, the United States has allowed its fixation on the renminbi’s exchange rate to deflect attention from far more important issues in its economic relationship with China.
The upcoming Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the US and China is an excellent opportunity to examine – and rethink – America’s priorities.
Since 2005, the US Congress has repeatedly flirted with legislation aimed at defending hard-pressed American workers from the presumed threat of a cheap Chinese currency.
Bipartisan support for such a measure surfaced when Senators Charles Schumer (a liberal Democrat from New York) and Lindsey Graham (a conservative Republican from South Carolina) introduced the first Chinese currency bill.
The argument for legislative action is tantalizingly simple: the US merchandise trade deficit has averaged a record 4.4% of GDP since 2005, with China accounting for fully 35% of the shortfall, supposedly owing to its currency manipulation.
The Chinese, insists a broad coalition of politicians, business leaders, and academic economists, must revalue or face sanctions.
This reasoning resonates with the US public.
Opinion polls conducted in 2011 found that fully 61% of Americans believes that China represents a serious economic threat.
As such, the currency debate looms as a major issue in the upcoming US presidential campaign.
“Enough is enough,” President Barack Obama replied, when queried on the renminbi in the aftermath of his last meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao.
Obama’s presumptive Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, has promised to declare China guilty of currency manipulation the day he takes office.
But, however appealing this logic may be, it is wrong.
First, America’s trade deficit is multilateral: the US ran deficits with 88 nations in 2010.
A multilateral imbalance – especially one that it is traceable to a saving shortfall – cannot be fixed by putting pressure on a bilateral exchange rate.
Indeed, America’s major threat is from within.
Blaming China merely impedes the heavy lifting that must be done at home – namely, boosting saving by cutting budget deficits and encouraging households to save income rather than rely on asset bubbles.
Second, the renminbi has now appreciated 31.4% against the dollar since mid-2005, well in excess of the 27.5% increase called for by the original Schumer-Graham bill.
Mindful of the lessons of Japan – especially its disastrous concession on sharp yen appreciation in the Plaza Accord of 1985 – the Chinese have opted, instead, for a gradual revaluation.
Recent moves toward renminbi internationalization, a more open capital account, and wider currency trading bands leave little doubt that the endgame is a market-based, fully convertible renminbi.
Third, there has been significant improvement in China’s external imbalance.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that China’s current-account surplus will narrow to just 2.3% of GDP in 2012, after peaking at 10.1% in 2007.
American officials have long bemoaned China’s saving glut as a major source of global instability.
But they should look in the mirror: America’s current-account deficit this year, at an estimated $510 billion, is likely to be 2.8 times higher than China’s surplus.
Finally, China has evolved from the world’s factory to its assembly line.
Research shows that no more than 20% to 30% of Chinese exports to the US reflect value added inside China.
Roughly 60% of Chinese exports represent shipments of “foreign invested enterprises” – in effect, Chinese subsidiaries of global multinationals.
Think Apple.
Globalized production platforms distort bilateral trade data between the US and China, and have little to do with the exchange rate.
Rather than vilifying China as the principal economic threat to America, the relationship should be recast as an opportunity.
The largest component of US aggregate demand – the consumer – is on ice.
With households focused on repairing severely damaged balance sheets, inflation-adjusted private consumption has expanded at an anemic 0.5% average annual rate over the past four years.
Consumer deleveraging is likely to persist for years to come, leaving the US increasingly desperate for new sources of growth.
Exports top the list of possibilities.
China is now America’s third largest and most rapidly growing export market.
There can be no mistaking its potential to fill some of the void left by US consumers.
The key to realizing that opportunity lies in access to Chinese markets – all the more significant in light of China’s upcoming pro-consumption rebalancing.
Historically, China has had an open development model, with imports running at 28% of GDP since 2002 – nearly three times Japan’s 10% import ratio during its high-growth era (1960-1989).
As a result, for a given increment of domestic demand, China is far more predisposed toward foreign sourcing.
As the Chinese consumer emerges, demand for a wide variety of US-made goods – ranging from new-generation information technology and biotech to automotive components and aircraft – could surge.
The same is true of services.
At just 43% of GDP, China’s services sector is relatively tiny.
There is enormous scope for America’s global services companies to expand in China, especially in transactions-intensive distribution sectors – wholesale and retail trade, domestic transportation, and supply-chain logistics – as well as in the processing segments of finance, health care, and data warehousing.
The US needs to refocus the US-China trade agenda toward expanded market access in these and other areas – pushing back against Chinese policies and government procurement practices that favor domestic production and indigenous innovation.
Some progress has been made, but more is needed – for example, getting China to join the World Trade Organization’s Government Procurement Agreement.
At the same time, the US should reconsider antiquated Cold War restrictions on Chinese purchases of technology-intensive items.
For a growth-starved US, the opportunities of market access far outweigh the currency threat.
The long-dormant Chinese consumer is about to be unleashed.
This plays to one of America’s greatest strengths – its zeal to compete in new markets.
Shame on the US if it squanders this extraordinary chance by digging in its heels at the upcoming Strategic and Economic dialogue.
America\u0027s Retreat from Asia
The United States' planned withdrawal of troops from Asia, which President George W. Bush announced on August 16, need not harm peace and stability in the region and particularly in Korea.
But a key condition for a smooth redeployment of US troops is close consultations by America with its allies, something it has not done well up to now.
South Korea and Japan need to have their views taken into serious account if this now inevitable withdrawal is to succeed.
By contrast, unilaterally announcing the withdrawal - and then unilaterally implementing it - may harm the very purpose that the remaining US troops in Asia are intended to serve: assuring deterrence, stability, and nonproliferation in Korea and Asia.
The withdrawal plan is causing countless worries.
In Japan, there are concerns that it will make the country America's frontline command post in Asia, possibly beyond the scope of its bilateral security treaty with the US.
One result is that China feels nervous about the implications of any expansion of the American-Japanese military partnership.
But the impact of America's planned troop withdrawals is felt most keenly in South Korea.
In June, the Bush administration revealed its plan to withdraw some 12,500 of the 37,000 US soldiers stationed in South Korea by the end of 2005. These include 3,600 troops from the 2nd Brigade of the 2nd Infantry Division, who are already earmarked for redeployment in Iraq.
The US Defense Department justifies this change as part of the so-called "Global Posture Review" that it has been carrying out to provide more flexibility and mobility in deploying troops to more urgently needed places around the world.
But the unilateral nature of the announcement, and the abrupt timing of the plan, has incited alarm in South Korea, and perhaps in Japan, that withdrawal could pose serious risks to the vital role that US forces have performed in deterring another war in Korea.
South Koreans genuinely fear that the plan may weaken deterrence by sending North Korea - which is demanding a US military withdrawal while refusing to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions - the message that intransigence pays.
Indeed, it should not be forgotten that North Korea maintains an army of 1.1 million troops.
Moreover, the manner in which the Bush administration unveiled its withdrawal plan has weakened the credibility of the US-Korean alliance.
America's unilateral announcement has fuelled rumors to the effect that withdrawal must have something to do with the rising tide of anti-Americanism in South Korea, and especially with the country's reluctance and delay in dispatching an additional 3,600 of its own soldiers to Iraq.
The Bush administration tries to rebut these charges by saying that the plan will not weaken the deterrence capabilities of American forces, for America's far more powerful air and naval presence in the area will be maintained.
Moreover, the US plans to strengthen South Korea's own forces by supplying some $11 billion worth of high-technology equipment over the next five years.
Militarily, this argument does make sense.
Politically and psychologically, however, the method, let alone the timing and implementation of the withdrawals, raises many questions about the ongoing viability of the US-Korean security alliance, for the alliance now seems adrift, without a common purpose and with little direction from either side.
Yet the Bush administration insists: "The US views South Korea as a strong and steadfast ally. We are committed to South Korea's security and to our alliance and partnership with Seoul."
If Washington is serious about these words, it should transform this commitment into a long-term and comprehensive alliance that can survive the current estrangement - and continue even after Korean unification - by making a joint declaration with South Korea's government at the highest level.
In order to allay misgivings and restore trust in the alliance, it is necessary for the US and South Korea to reaffirm their common interests and values in pursuing deterrence, nonproliferation, stability, and democracy on the Korean peninsula and across Asia.
Once they resolve to continue their alliance with these purposes in mind, it should be possible for responsible officials to work out guiding principles for concrete security cooperation.
Specific negotiations on withdrawing American troops from Korea or on redeploying them from the DMZ to south of Seoul must be carried out according to these principles.
In so doing, America must treat South Korea as a full partner with its own voice in making decisions that affect its security interests.
As an American ally for 51 years, and as East Asia's third-largest economy, South Korea is entitled to be fully consulted on such decisions.
Despite anti-American sentiments among some South Koreans, a majority of the country's people wants American forces to remain as a stabilizing force.
Securing a peaceful and nuclear-free Korean peninsula, a place where the interests of China, Japan, Russia, and America directly intersect, is one of the most important security goals anywhere on the planet.
For this reason, America and South Korea must restore a strategic vision for the future.
America\u0027s Schizophrenic Economy
The news about America's economy that dribbled out over the first half of March painted - once again - a picture that only a schizophrenic could create.
Real investment (investment adjusted for the declining prices of high-tech and information-related capital goods) continued to roar ahead.
Production and sales were consistent with the consensus forecast of real GDP growth at an annual rate of 4% or more.
Yet, despite all this, employment remained stagnant: net job creation in the United States continues to stall.
This does not mean that employment in America cannot grow.
Roughly 300,000 more Americans are employed in education and health care than a year ago - an annual rate of employment growth of 1.7%.
A quarter of a million more Americans are employed in business and professional services than a year ago - a 1.6% annual rate of employment growth.
The logic of stagnant employment is not that adding jobs to the American economy is impossible, but that demand growth is insufficient to create more jobs than are lost.
This is easy to demonstrate.
Total nominal spending in America grows at 5.5% per year.
Inflation is 1.5% per year.
That 0.5% is all that is left for job growth, because that's all the job growth required to meet demand given the remarkably strong rate of growth of productivity.
The boost to wealth provided by the "new economy" is exceeding even its most avid boosters' wildest dreams.
What is unexpected is that the new wealth is flowing not to the shareholders of dot-com companies, but to purchasers and users of high-tech capital and the consumers they serve.
But why does this seem so surprising?
At the end of the nineteenth century the huge amount of investment and technological progress in America's railroads appeared to benefit everyone but the stockholders and bondholders of railroad companies, as bust followed boom and ramming worthless securities down the throats of investors became Wall Street's favorite sport.
Yet another part of US productivity growth due to the fact that high-tech capital gives America's firms enormous incentives to make massive but hard to see - and even harder to measure - investments in organization and business processes that are complementary to computerization and networking.
For the US to have a rate of productivity growth of 3.5% per annum rather than the pre-1995 rate of 1.2% is amazing.
That means an annual increment to world income of $250 billion from this source alone.
That's the equivalent of adding productive power equal to a quarter of the economy of India - and adding it every year.
This persistent acceleration in American productivity growth has, however, created a massive political problem for President George W. Bush.
Demand growth at a pace that in any previous decade would have been seen as highly satisfactory is suddenly desperately insufficient, and Bush is being blamed (with some justice) for the slack labor market that has resulted.
But for everyone except Bush - and those left unemployed by the lag in demand - it is an extraordinary opportunity.
The remarkable boosts to productivity that have been within America's grasp will ultimately lead to accelerating growth of real profits and real wages, if only US policy makers resist the temptation to pursue politically expedient, but economically damaging, measures to "protect" output and employment.
As the world's leading-edge economy, America faces the hardest work in ensuring growth, for it must create - not only copy and adapt - new technologies, better forms of capital, and more productive business organizations.
If America can grow as fast as it is now, that is very good news for other, less-developed economies, especially since one powerful effect of ongoing technological revolutions in computers and communications is to make it much easier to participate in the global division of labor now centered in the US.
So the schizophrenic American economy is a sign that the world is entering an economic era of truly wonderful things - if only we properly, and patiently, grasp them.
America’s Scorched Earth Management
Signs of the American economy’s perilous condition are everywhere – from yawning fiscal and current-account deficits to plummeting home prices and a feeble dollar.
But something that shows up in none of the economic indicators may be driving many of them: the deterioration of American management, which is undermining not only many of America’s great enterprises, but also its legendary spirit of enterprise.
Paradoxically, one indicator that has been improving steadily in the US – productivity – may be the clearest sign of the problem.
When it comes to productivity, managers either invest in employee training, more efficient manufacturing processes, and the like, or they take steps that appear to boost productivity in the short run but that erode it in the long run.
Productivity is a measure of output per hour worked.
So a company that fires all its workers and then ships from stock can look very productive – until it runs outs of stock.
Of course, no company can do that, but many US companies have been shedding workers and middle managers in great numbers – the figures for January 2008 were up 19% from a year earlier.
Meanwhile, those employees left behind must work that much harder, often without increased compensation.
Workers’ wages, adjusted for inflation, fell in 2007, continuing a trend throughout this decade.
That, too, is “productive” – until these overworked people quit or burn out.
A sustainable company is not a collection of “human resources.” It is a community of human beings.
Its strength resides in its people, its culture, and the goodwill it has built up among its customers and suppliers.
So, as workers and middle managers have been departing these companies, they have taken with them not only much critical information, but often also the hearts and souls of their enterprises, with profound effects on American competitiveness.
Consider high technology, where America is supposed to excel.
According to a November 2006 report by The Task Force on the Future of American Innovation, made up of prominent universities, think tanks, industry trade associations, and corporations, the high-tech trade deficit widened in 2005, for the third consecutive year.
This is not clothing or cars, but America’s largest, and most renowned, export sector.
This deficit reflects an underlying research deficit.
Of the 25 companies granted the most US patents in 2006, only eight were American; 12 were Japanese.
Perhaps this helps to explain why, in a survey of more than 60,000 people in 29 countries conducted in 2007 by the New York-based Reputation Institute to rank the “world’s most respected companies,” the first US company on the list appeared in 15th place; the second was in 25th place.
No one can determine how much of America’s productivity gains in recent years have resulted from squeezing human capital, because such things are not measured.
But there has clearly been a great deal of reliance on this strategy, with companies shedding employees not only because they must, but often because they have not met Wall Street analysts’ financial expectations.
Managers’ increased focus on maximizing shareholder value won many adherents when the idea was introduced in the 1980’s: the impersonal discipline of financial markets would force companies to become more productive and innovative.
And, in fact, much of the US productivity increase in the 1980’s and 1990’s can likely be attributed to large-scale investment in information and communications technology.
But, as the marginal productivity gains from such investment began to fall, senior managers’ survival and compensation continued to be tied to stock-market performance.
As a result, many simply learned to manage their companies’ short-term share price at the expense of attention to their products and customers.
Moreover, because maximizing shareholder value is a poor incentive for workers and middle managers, companies’ boards have increasingly centralized power around chief executives, thereby encouraging a “heroic” form of leadership that is detached from the rest of the enterprise.
Indeed, in many cases, the CEO – frequently a Wall Street-endorsed “superstar” parachuted in to “shake things up” – now
This shift to “heroic” leadership can be seen in ballooning CEO compensation.
According to a January 2008 report by the Hay Group, the CEO’s of the 50 largest US companies are now paid almost three times what their European counterparts receive ­– which is many hundreds of times more than their own workers.
Until recently, the US asset-price bubble ­– first in the stock market, then in real estate – masked the underlying depreciation of American enterprises.
But the bubble itself resulted from the same management pathologies as those afflicting the real economy.
After all, managing for the short run encouraged mortgage lenders to offer artificially low “teaser” interest rates to lure potential homeowners.
And then those who bought these mortgages never bothered to investigate their underlying value – a spectacular abdication of managerial responsibility.
Now that the bubble has burst, America’s current economic downturn is likely to be far worse than previous ones, because US enterprises will have to be rebuilt, slowly and carefully.
The dramatic weakening of the US dollar may help America to narrow its massive trade deficit, but we should not expect any sustained improvement without drastic changes in American management.
Fortunately, it may be possible to minimize the fallout for the rest of the world.
While American economists, politicians, and business leaders have for years sought to sell their model of management abroad, many companies elsewhere have not been buying it.
As a result, other key economies remain healthier than America’s.
Make no mistake: this problem was made in America, and that is where it will have to be solved.
America’s Self-Defeating Hegemony
When I wrote about the “end of history” almost twenty years ago, one thing that I did not anticipate was the degree to which American behavior and misjudgments would make anti-Americanism one of the chief fault-lines of global politics.
And yet, particularly since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, that is precisely what has happened, owing to four key mistakes made by the Bush administration.
First, the doctrine of “preemption,” which was devised in response to the 2001 attacks, was inappropriately broadened to include Iraq and other so-called “rogue states” that threatened to develop weapons of mass destruction.
To be sure, preemption is fully justified vis-à-vis stateless terrorists wielding such weapons.
But it cannot be the core of a general non-proliferation policy, whereby the United States intervenes militarily everywhere to prevent the development of nuclear weapons.
The cost of executing such a policy simply would be too high (several hundred billion dollars and tens of thousands of casualties in Iraq and still counting).
This is why the Bush administration has shied away from military confrontations with North Korea and Iran, despite its veneration of Israel’s air strike on Iraq’s Osirak reactor in 1981, which set back Saddam Hussein’s nuclear program by several years.
After all, the very success of that attack meant that such limited intervention could never be repeated, because would-be proliferators learned to bury, hide, or duplicate their nascent weapons programs.
The second important miscalculation concerned the likely global reaction to America’s exercise of its hegemonic power.
Many people within the Bush administration believed that even without approval by the UN Security Council or NATO, American power would be legitimized by its successful use.
This had been the pattern for many US initiatives during the Cold War, and in the Balkans during the 1990’s; back then, it was known as “leadership” rather than “unilateralism.”
But, by the time of the Iraq war, conditions had changed: the US had grown so powerful relative to the rest of the world that the lack of reciprocity became an intense source of irritation even to America’s closest allies.
The structural anti-Americanism arising from the global distribution of power was evident well before the Iraq war, in the opposition to American-led globalization during the Clinton years.
But it was exacerbated by the Bush administration’s “in-your-face” disregard for a variety of international institutions as soon it came into office – a pattern that continued through the onset of the Iraq war.
America’s third mistake was to overestimate how effective conventional military power would be in dealing with the weak states and networked transnational organizations that characterize international politics, at least in the broader Middle East.
It is worth pondering why a country with more military power than any other in human history, and that spends as much on its military as virtually the rest of the world combined, cannot bring security to a small country of 24 million people after more than three years of occupation.
At least part of the problem is that it is dealing with complex social forces that are not organized into centralized hierarchies that can enforce rules, and thus be deterred, coerced, or otherwise manipulated through conventional power.
Israel made a similar mistake in thinking that it could use its enormous margin of conventional military power to destroy Hezbollah in last summer’s Lebanon War.
Both Israel and the US are nostalgic for a twentieth-century world of nation-states, which is understandable, since that is the world to which the kind of conventional power they possess is best suited.
But nostalgia has led both states to misinterpret the challenges they now face, whether by linking al-Qaeda to Saddam Hussein’s Iraq, or Hezbollah to Iran and Syria.
This linkage does exist in the case of Hezbollah, but the networked actors have their own social roots and are not simply pawns used by regional powers.
This is why the exercise of conventional power has become frustrating.
Finally, the Bush administration’s use of power has lacked not only a compelling strategy or doctrine, but also simple competence.
In Iraq alone, the administration misestimated the threat of WMD, failed to plan adequately for the occupation, and then proved unable to adjust quickly when things went wrong.
To this day, it has dropped the ball on very straightforward operational issues in Iraq, such as funding democracy promotion efforts.
Incompetence in implementation has strategic consequences.
Many of the voices that called for, and then bungled, military intervention in Iraq are now calling for war with Iran.
Why should the rest of the world think that conflict with a larger and more resolute enemy would be handled any more capably?
But the fundamental problem remains the lopsided distribution of power in the international system.
Any country in the same position as the US, even a democracy, would be tempted to exercise its hegemonic power with less and less restraint.
America’s founding fathers were motivated by a similar belief that unchecked power, even when democratically legitimated, could be dangerous, which is why they created a constitutional system of internally separated powers to limit the executive.
Such a system does not exist on a global scale today, which may explain how America got into such trouble.
A smoother international distribution of power, even in a global system that is less than fully democratic, would pose fewer temptations to abandon the prudent exercise of power.
America’s Self-Inflicted Decline
MELBOURNE – If the broad post-World War II prosperity that has endured for six decades comes to an end, both the United States and Europe will be responsible.
With rare exceptions, politics has become a discredited profession throughout the West.
Tomorrow is always treated as more important than next week, and next week prevails over next year, with no one seeking to secure the long-term future.
Now the West is paying the price.
President Barack Obama’s instincts may be an exception here, but he is fighting powerful hidebound forces in the United States, as well as a demagogic populism, in the form of the Tea Party, that is far worse – and that might defeat him in 2012, seriously damaging America in the process.
America’s friends around the world watched with dismay the recent brawl in over raising the federal government’s debt ceiling, and the US Congress’s inability to come to anything like a balanced and forward-looking compromise.
On the contrary, the outcome represents a significant victory for the Tea Party’s minions, whose purpose seems to be to reduce government obligations and expenditures to a bare minimum (some object even to having a central bank), and to maintain President George W. Bush’s outrageous tax breaks for the wealthy.
America’s current fiscal problems are rooted in a long period of unfunded spending.
Bush’s wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the manner in which he conducted the “global war on terror” made matters much worse, contributing to a totally unsustainable situation.
Indeed, Obama inherited an almost impossible legacy.
In the weeks since the debt ceiling agreement, it has become increasingly clear that good government might be impossible in the US.
The coming months of campaigning for the US presidency will be spent in petty brawling over what should be cut.
The example of recent weeks gives us no cause for optimism that US legislators will rise above partisan politics and ask themselves what is best for America.
In these circumstances, it is not surprising that financial markets have returned to extreme volatility.
The expenditure cuts mandated by the outcome of the debt-ceiling debate will reduce economic activity, thereby undermining growth and making debt reduction even more difficult.
Providing further fiscal stimulus to boost economic growth would carry its own risks, owing to the debt ceiling and another, more ominous factor: America is already overly indebted, and there are signs that major holders of US government securities are finally tired of being repaid in depreciated currency.
Most importantly, China’s call for the introduction of a new reserve currency stems from its frustration with the failure of major governments – whether in the US or Europe – to govern their economic affairs with realism and good sense.
China recognizes that America is in great difficulty (indeed, it recognizes this more clearly than the US itself), and that, given the poisonous political atmosphere prevailing in Washington, there will be no easy return to good government, economic stability, and strong growth.
America’s leadership in world affairs began to weaken with the unilateralism of Bush, and today’s economic problems are reinforcing this tendency.
To reverse America’s decline, Obama needs bipartisan support for his (quite mainstream) policies, but so far the US Congress has shown no stomach for a principled approach to its legislative duties.
If Germany’s half-hearted efforts to stabilize Europe somehow turn out to be successful, America’s position will be further eroded, and central banks around the world will begin to regard the euro once again as a reliable alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency.
The alternative, as China has suggested, would be to develop a new reserve currency.
These realities represent a power shift of a kind that we have not experienced in our lifetimes.
China’s economic power over the US is now substantial, and will limit not only America’s influence in the financial markets, but also its capacity to use military power.
If this forces America back towards what the international-relations scholar Joseph Nye calls “soft power and multilateral diplomacy,” it may well be a good thing.
But such approaches are anathema to the US Republican Party, and to its Tea Party faction in particular, and they might unnerve the many Asians who are nervous at China’s growing military might.
The counter-argument – that any sell-off or failure by China to continue to buy US government securities would hurt China as much as America – is not valid.
As each year passes, China’s markets expand worldwide, and its domestic market comes to represent a greater percentage of its own GDP.
As a result, China will not need a strong dollar in the long term.
Americans need to get their economic house in order before China loses its incentive to support the dollar.
On several occasions in the post-WWII period, the US has learned with great pain that there are limits to the effective use of military power.
American objectives could not be achieved in Vietnam.
The outcome in Iraq will not be determined until the last American troops have been withdrawn.
In Afghanistan, where withdrawal dates have already been set, it is difficult to believe that a cohesive unified state can be established.
As the efficacy of military power is reduced, so the importance of economic power grows.
Recognition of these central realities – and bipartisanship in addressing them – is critical for America’s future, and that of the West.
America’s Socialism for the Rich
With all the talk of “green shoots” of economic recovery, America’s banks are pushing back on efforts to regulate them.
While politicians talk about their commitment to regulatory reform to prevent a recurrence of the crisis, this is one area where the devil really is in the details – and the banks will muster what muscle they have left to ensure that they have ample room to continue as they have in the past.
The old system worked well for the bankers (if not for their shareholders), so why should they embrace change?
Indeed, the efforts to rescue them devoted so little thought to the kind of post-crisis financial system we want that we will end up with a banking system that is less competitive, with the large banks that were too big too fail even larger.
It has long been recognized that those America’s banks that are too big to fail are also too big to be managed.
That is one reason that the performance of several of them has been so dismal.
Because government provides deposit insurance, it plays a large role in restructuring (unlike other sectors).&nbsp; Normally, when a bank fails, the government engineers a financial restructuring; if it has to put in money, it, of course, gains a stake in the future.
Officials know that if they wait too long, zombie or near zombie banks –&nbsp;with little or no net worth, but treated as if they were viable institutions – are likely to “gamble on resurrection.”
If they take big bets and win, they walk away with the proceeds; if they fail, the government picks up the tab.
This is not just theory; it is a lesson we learned, at great expense, during the Savings &amp; Loan crisis of the 1980’s.
When the ATM machine says, “insufficient funds,” the government doesn’t want this to mean that the bank, rather than your account, is out of money, so it intervenes before the till is empty.
In a financial restructuring, shareholders typically get wiped out, and bondholders become the new shareholders.
Sometimes, the government must provide additional funds; sometimes it looks for a new investor to take over the failed bank.
The Obama administration has, however, introduced a new concept: too big to be financially restructured.
The administration argues that all hell would break loose if we tried to play by the usual rules with these big banks.
Markets would panic.
So, not only can’t we touch the bondholders, we can’t even touch the shareholders – even if most of the shares’ existing value merely reflects a bet on a government bailout.
I think this judgment is wrong.
I think the Obama administration has succumbed to political pressure and scare-mongering by the big banks.
As a result, the administration has confused bailing out the bankers and their shareholders with bailing out the banks.
Restructuring gives banks a chance for a new start: new potential investors (whether in equity or debt instruments) will have more confidence, other banks will be more willing to lend to them, and they will be more willing to lend to others.
The bondholders will gain from an orderly restructuring, and if the value of the assets is truly greater than the market (and outside analysts) believe, they will eventually reap the gains.
But what is clear is that the Obama strategy’s current and future costs are very high – and so far, it has not achieved its limited objective of restarting lending.
The taxpayer has had to pony up billions, and has provided billions more in guarantees – bills that are likely to come due in the future.
Rewriting the rules of the market economy – in a way that has benefited those that have caused so much pain to the entire global economy – is worse than financially costly.
Most Americans view it as grossly unjust, especially after they saw the banks divert the billions intended to enable them to revive lending to payments of outsized bonuses and dividends.
Tearing up the social contract is something that should not be done lightly.
But this new form of ersatz capitalism, in which losses are socialized and profits privatized, is doomed to failure.
Incentives are distorted.
There is no market discipline.
The too-big-to-be-restructured banks know that they can gamble with impunity – and, with the Federal Reserve making funds available at near-zero interest rates, there are ample funds to do so.
Some have called this new economic regime “socialism with American characteristics.”
But socialism is concerned about ordinary individuals.
By contrast, the United States has provided little help for the millions of Americans who are losing their homes.
Workers who lose their jobs receive only 39 weeks of limited unemployment benefits, and are then left on their own.
And, when they lose their jobs, most lose their health insurance, too.
America has expanded its corporate safety net in unprecedented ways, from commercial banks to investment banks, then to insurance, and now to automobiles, with no end in sight.
In truth, this is not socialism, but an extension of long standing corporate welfarism.
The rich and powerful turn to the government to help them whenever they can, while needy individuals get little social protection.
We need to break up the too-big-to-fail banks; there is no evidence that these behemoths deliver societal benefits that are commensurate with the costs they have imposed on others.
And, if we don’t break them up, then we have to severely limit what they do.
They can’t be allowed to do what they did in the past – gamble at others’ expenses.
This raises another problem with America’s too-big-to-fail, too-big-to-be-restructured banks: they are too politically powerful.
Their lobbying efforts worked well, first to deregulate, and then to have taxpayers pay for the cleanup.
Their hope is that it will work once again to keep them free to do as they please, regardless of the risks for taxpayers and the economy.
We cannot afford to let that happen.
America’s Sputnik Moment in Beijing
NEW YORK – August 8, 2008, may someday be remembered as the first day of the post-American era.
Or it could be remembered as another “Sputnik moment,” when, as with the Soviet foray into outer space in 1957, the American people realized that the country had lost its footing and decided it was time for the United States to get its act together.
There was no mistaking the power and symbolism of the opening ceremonies for the Beijing Olympic Games on August 8.
That multimedia spectacular did far more than trace China’s 5,000-year history; it was a statement that China is a major civilization that demands and deserves its rightful place in the global hierarchy.
There was also no mistaking the symbolism of seeing President Bush, waving cheerfully from his spot in the bleachers while Chinese President Hu Jintao sat behind what looked more like a throne.
It is hard to imagine that China’s government, which obsesses over every minute issue of diplomatic protocol, had not orchestrated this stark image of America’s decline relative to the country to which it owes $1.4 trillion.
It would be hard to imagine Franklin Roosevelt or Ronald Reagan accepting a similar relative position.
At the very same time that Bush was waving from the stands, Russia was invading Georgia, America’s closest partner in the Caucasus.
Russia’s message to other West-leaning countries in the former Soviet world was clear: America cannot protect you.
Frighteningly, the Russians were likely correct.
While the Iraq quagmire has made it difficult for America to project force around the world, America’s growing debt, conflicts with friends and enemies alike, absence of any perceivable strategy for changing times, and its political system’s seeming inability to take action to address these challenges have combined to turn America into a struggling giant.
Today, from Iran to Darfur to Zimbabwe to Georgia, the world is witnessing the effects of a budding post-American world, and the picture does not look pretty.
As much as we all value the rise of new powers like China and India, it remains to be seen whether these countries will become as benevolent a power as America, however flawed, has been over the past half-century.
Neo-colonialism is returning to Africa, the global project of human rights is in retreat, and the world trade system is becoming far less open.
Brutal dictators go unpunished because their interests are protected by large powers with stakes in their natural resources.
Reversing this trend is not only in America’s interest, but also in the world’s interest.
But America can make it so only by recognizing the great challenges it faces and taking bold steps towards addressing them, at home and with allies abroad.
America’s Perilous Pivot
MADRID – The Pacific or the Middle East?
For the United States, that is now the primary strategic question.
The violence in Gaza, coming as President Barack Obama was meeting Asia’s leaders in Phnom Penh, perfectly encapsulates America’s dilemma.
Instead of being able to focus on US foreign policy’s “pivot” to Asia, Obama was forced to spend many hours in conversation with the leaders of Egypt and Israel, and to dispatch Secretary of State Hillary Clinton from Asia, in order to facilitate a cease-fire in Gaza.
Of the two geopolitical focal points demanding America’s attention, one represents the future and the other the past.
Whereas Asia played an important role in a US presidential election campaign that was marked by often-heated references to China’s rise, the Middle East has kept the US bogged down for decades.
In addition to the eternal Israel-Palestine conflict, Iraq’s instability, the Arab Spring, Syria’s civil war, and the ongoing nuclear standoff with Iran all demand America’s attention.
If the Iran crisis were to boil over, the pivot to Asia would no longer be America’s main foreign-policy priority.
But if the dispute with Iran is resolved diplomatically, the Middle East might, perhaps, be relegated to a position of lesser importance, as Obama clearly desires.
The question, therefore, is whether the US will find itself drawn into another war in a region on which it depends less and less for energy.
Indeed, the revolution in non-conventional hydrocarbons, particularly shale gas and oil, which the International Energy Agency recently predicted would make the US the world’s largest oil producer by 2020, and the top energy producer overall by 2030, will have enormous global repercussions.
For the US, energy self-sufficiency is the perfect excuse for a phased withdrawal from the Middle East; freed from energy dependency, America should be able to concentrate on the Pacific.
Although maintaining stable global energy prices and its alliance with Israel means that the US cannot cut itself off completely from the Middle East’s troubles, the shift in focus to Asia began early in Obama’s first administration, with Clinton announcing America’s strategic reorientation even before US troops began withdrawing from Iraq.
Following his re-election, Obama’s first foreign visit was to Myanmar, Thailand, and Cambodia – a choice that cannot have pleased China, as all three are ASEAN members, while Myanmar was, until it began its democratic transition, a close Chinese ally.
Asia is, of course, experiencing rapid economic growth, but managing the region’s strong nationalist tensions calls for the creation of regional security structures, together with closer economic integration.
Complicating matters even more is what US scholar Kenneth Lieberthal and Wang Jisi, the dean of international studies at Peking University, called in a recent paper for the Brookings Institution “strategic distrust.”
Cultivating strategic trust between the twenty-first century’s leading powers will be fundamental to the international system’s harmonious functioning.
But how can this be achieved?
As China will be importing three-quarters of its oil from the Middle East by 2020, one step forward would be China’s cooperation in finding solutions to the region’s problems.
After the January 2013 Israeli elections, Iran will again move to the top of Obama’s foreign-policy agenda.
Military intervention in Iran – which itself will be holding a presidential election in June – would incite not only regional, but global, instability.
The Arab world, Russia, and China would be forced to take sides, straining global relations between the different poles of power and raising tensions in the Pacific.
So China has a large strategic interest in working with the US to avoid a showdown.
Beyond Iran, the volatile situation throughout the Middle East urgently demands solutions.
The latest eruption of violent conflict between Hamas and Israel underscores the importance of reviving the peace process.
Syria’s civil war, in which a growing number of regional players have become involved, is beginning to look increasingly like a trial run for all-out war between Sunni Muslims (Saudi Arabia and the other Gulf States, Turkey, and Egypt) and Shia Muslims (Iran and Hezbollah) for regional dominance.
Iran’s leaders appear to believe that the US, having incurred extremely high economic and human costs from more than a decade of war, would rather avoid another military intervention.
US public opinion seems to confirm this.
A recent survey by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs indicated that 67% of Americans believe that the Iraq war was not worthwhile.
Moreover, 69% do not believe that the US is safer from terrorism since the war in Afghanistan, and 71% say that the experience in Iraq shows that the US should take greater care in how it uses force.
But, if Americans seem unlikely to be willing to invest billions of dollars in another dead-end foreign adventure, Iran’s leaders, for their part, are increasingly hemmed in by international sanctions, which are beginning to wreak havoc on the country’s economy.
Both sides may believe that their best option – at least for now – is to negotiate.
Peaceful resolution of the Iranian question would help the US to complete its shift toward Asia.
China may not wish for that outcome, but its own vital interest in the security of Middle East energy supplies should compel it to cooperate.
After all, another Middle East conflict would poison and distort relations in the region for decades, which would be the worst of all possible consequences – for the US and China alike.
America’s Suicidal Statecraft
Since its victory in the Cold War, America’s global hegemony has rested on three pillars: economic power, military might, and a vast capacity to export its popular culture.
The recent emergence of additional powers – the European Union, China, India, and a Russia driven to recover its lost status – has eroded America’s capacity to shape events unilaterally.
Even so, America remains by far the world’s most powerful country; its decline has more to do with its incompetent use of power than with the emergence of competitors.
It is American leaders’ “suicidal statecraft,” to use Arnold Toynbee’s pithy phrase for what he considered the ultimate cause of imperial collapse, that is to blame for America’s plight.
Consider the Middle East.
Nothing reveals the decline of the United States in the region better than the contrast between America’s sober use of power in the first Gulf War in 1991 and the hubris and deceit of today’s Iraq war.
In 1991, America forged the most formidable international coalition since World War II, and led it in a fully legitimate war aimed at restoring regional balance after Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait.
In 2003, America went to war without its trans-Atlantic allies after manipulating false assertions.
In doing so, the US embarked on a preposterous grand strategy that aimed no less at simultaneously dismantling Iraq’s tyrannical regime, restructuring the entire Middle East, destroying al-Qaeda, and helping democracy to take root throughout the Arab world.
The result has been utter failure: military defeat and a severe degradation of America’s moral standing.
Rather than undermining radical Islam, the US has legitimized it, in Iraq and beyond.
Indeed, what will now shape the future of the region is not democracy, but the violent divide between Shiites and Sunnis that the Iraq war precipitated.
It is this Muslim civil war that is allowing al-Qaeda to gain a larger pool of recruits.
With Iraq probably becoming the first Arab country to be ruled by Shiites, and hence integrated into an expanding Shiite Iranian empire, America’s Sunni allies in the region now view the US as unreliable.
Indeed, the US is seen as practically complicit in inciting a monumental reversal of Islam’s fortunes, the Shia revival.
Nor is the gospel of democracy especially dear to America’s Arab allies, for the call to democratize has only emboldened the Islamists to challenge the incumbent elites for power.
Admittedly, violent Islamic fundamentalism has deeper roots in the fading promise of Arab nationalism.
But America’s misbegotten democratic message has ended up alienating both its conservative regional allies, as it gave a new lease on life to political Islam, which can use the ballot box as a route to power, and the Islamists, whose electoral gains are then rejected by the US.
America’s biggest strategic blunder in the Middle East arguably concerns the emergence of Iranian power.
By destroying Iraq as a counterbalancing regional force, the US dealt a major blow to its traditional Gulf allies, for whom Iraq served as a barrier against Iran’s ambitions.
America offered Iran on a silver platter strategic assets that Khomeini’s revolution failed to acquire either in eight years of war against Saddam or in its abortive attempts to export the Islamic revolution throughout the region.
Likewise, Iran’s nuclear program gained momentum thanks to its sense of impunity following the colossal failure in Iraq of America’s concept of “preventive war.”
The calamitous US military experience in Iraq has left it strategically diminished.
Iraq has now become God’s playground, and America can hope to achieve a modicum of stability there only with the help of other regional powers.
Nevertheless, the US will remain the most influential external actor in the Middle East, for its failure is one of leadership, not of actual power.
Humbled by military defeat, America can recover its regional relevance only by avoiding the sin of hubris, and learning to lead without attempting to dominate.
This requires engaging revolutionary forces like Iran and Syria; respecting, rather than ostracizing, those Islamist movements that have opted out from jihadism in favor of political participation; and leading an international alliance for an Arab-Israeli peace based on the Arab League initiative.
Indeed, the paradox of America’s pernicious policies in Iraq is that they have created favorable conditions for an Arab-Israeli peace, as the emergence of Iran and the threat of a fundamentalist tsunami have focused Arab minds on the urgency of a settlement with Israel.
The Palestinian issue is not the source of all the Middle East’s ills, but its resolution would dramatically improve America’s standing among Arabs.
More importantly, it would deny Iran the ability to link popular Islamic and Arab causes with its own hegemonic ambitions.