But, in the long term, the greatest boon of all, for both food security and the environment, will likely be the ability of new crop varieties to tolerate periods of drought and other water-related stresses.
Even a small reduction in the amount of water used for irrigation could have huge benefits, especially in drought conditions.
To develop such varieties, plant biologists identified genes that regulate water use and transferred them into important crop plants, enabling them to grow with less or lower-quality water, such as water that has been recycled or is high in natural mineral salts.
Egyptian researchers have shown that by transferring a single gene from barley to wheat, the plants can tolerate reduced watering for a longer period of time.
This new, drought-resistant variety requires only one-eighth as much irrigation as conventional wheat; in some deserts, it can be cultivated with rainfall alone.
Other types of GE crop varieties, such as those that are disease- and pest-resistant, indirectly improve the efficiency of water use.
Because much of the loss to diseases and pests occurs after the plants are fully grown – that is, after most of the water required for their growth has already been supplied – resistance to them means more agricultural output per unit of water invested.
In short, farmers can get more crop for the drop.
Molecular genetic engineering technology can conserve water in other ways as well.
One-third of irrigated land worldwide is not suitable for growing crops because of the presence of salt – the result of repeated fertilization.
To regain the more than 200,000 hectares of irrigated land that is lost to cultivation annually, scientists have enhanced the salt tolerance of crops as diverse as tomatoes and canola.
The transformed plants can grow in salty soil and be irrigated with brackish water, conserving fresh water for other uses.
Given the benefits, one might expect such developments to be universally lauded and encouraged.
But they face major regulatory obstacles.
Europe, for example, largely prohibits GE crops; India has approved insect-resistant cotton but has failed to sanction any food crops.
Even&nbsp;where GE crops are being cultivated, unscientific, excessively burdensome regulation has raised the cost of producing new plant varieties significantly, keeping many potentially important ones from the market.
These measures are irrational, because they are inversely related to risk.
They permit the largely unregulated use of new varieties of plants and microorganisms that have been crafted with less precise and predictable techniques, under the pretense that they are somehow more “natural,” while stringently regulating – or even banning – those based on the most advanced knowledge and methods.
As water scarcity increases, drought-stricken crops wither, and food prices rise, the need for resilient agriculture will become more obvious – and more urgent.
With more rational public policy, we can meet that need now.
How much more preventable misery and death must occur before our policymakers see reason?
The Myth of Organic Agriculture
STANFORD – Organic products – from food to skin-care nostrums to cigarettes – are very much in vogue, with the global market for organic food alone now reportedly exceeding $60 billion annually.
The views of organic devotees seem to be shared by the European Commission, whose official view of organic farming and foods is, “Good for nature, good for you.”
But there is no persuasive evidence of either.
A 2012 meta-analysis of data from 240 studies concluded that organic fruits and vegetables were, on average, no more nutritious than their cheaper conventional counterparts; nor were they less likely to be contaminated by pathogenic bacteria like E. coli or salmonella – a finding that surprised even the researchers.
“When we began this project,” said Dena Bravata, one of the researchers, “we thought that there would likely be some findings that would support the superiority of organics over conventional food.”
Many people purchase organic foods in order to avoid exposure to harmful levels of pesticides.
But that is a poor rationale.
While non-organic fruits and vegetables had more pesticide residue, the levels in more than 99% of cases did not cross the conservative safety thresholds set by regulators.
Moreover, the vast majority of the pesticidal substances found on produce occur “naturally” in people’s diets, through organic and conventional foods.
Ironically, in both Europe and North America, the designation “organic” is itself a synthetic bureaucratic construct – and it makes little sense.
It prohibits the use of synthetic chemical pesticides, with some pragmatic exceptions.
For example, the EU’s policy notes that “foreseen flexibility rules” can compensate for “local climatic, cultural, or structural differences.”
When suitable alternatives are lacking, some (strictly enumerated) synthetic chemicals are allowed.
Similarly, in the US, there is a lengthy list of specific exceptions to the prohibitions.
But most “natural” pesticides – as well as pathogen-laden animal excreta, for use as fertilizer – are permitted.
Another rationale for buying organic is that it is supposedly better for the natural environment.
But the low yields of organic agriculture in real-world settings – typically 20-50% below yields from conventional agriculture – impose various stresses on farmland and increase water consumption substantially.
According to a recent British meta-analysis, ammonia emissions, nitrogen leaching, and nitrous-oxide emissions per unit of output were higher in organic systems than in conventional agriculture, as were land use and the potential for eutrophication – adverse ecosystem responses to the addition of fertilizers and wastes – and acidification.
An anomaly of how “organic” is defined is that the designation does not actually focus on the food’s quality, composition, or safety. Rather, it comprises a set of acceptable practices and procedures that a farmer intends to use.
For example, chemical pesticide or pollen from genetically engineered plants wafting from an adjacent field onto an organic crop does not affect the harvest’s status.
EU rules are clear that food may be labeled as organic as long as “the ingredients containing [genetically modified organisms] entered the products unintentionally” and amount to less than 0.9% of their content.
Finally, many who are seduced by the romance of organic farming ignore its human consequences.
American farmer Blake Hurst offers this reminder: “Weeds continue to grow, even in polycultures with holistic farming methods, and, without pesticides, hand weeding is the only way to protect a crop.”
The backbreaking drudgery of hand weeding often falls to women and children.
Of course, organic products should be available for people who feel that they must have and can afford them.
In developing countries, 200-300 million preschool children are at risk of vitamin A deficiency, which compromises immune systems, increasing the body’s susceptibility to illnesses like measles and diarrheal diseases.
Every year, vitamin A deficiency causes blindness in about a half-million children; some 70% of them die within a year.
In September, an eminent group of scientists called upon the scientific community to “stand together in staunch opposition to the violent destruction of required tests on valuable advances, such as golden rice, that have the potential to save millions” of people from “needless suffering and death.”
But this passionate appeal fails to address the fundamental problem: the unfounded notion that there is a meaningful difference between “genetically modified organisms” and their conventional counterparts.
The fact is that GMOs and their derivatives do not amount to a “category” of food products.
They are neither less safe nor less “natural” than other common foods.
Labeling foods derived from GMOs, as some have proposed, thus implies a meaningful difference where none exists – an issue that even regulators have acknowledged.
Humans have been engaging in “genetic modification” through selection and hybridization for millennia.
Breeders routinely use radiation or chemical mutagens on seeds to scramble a plant’s DNA and generate new traits.
A half-century of “wide cross” hybridizations, which involve the movement of genes from one species or genus to another, has given rise to plants – including everyday varieties of corn, oats, pumpkin, wheat, black currants, tomatoes, and potatoes – that do not and could not exist in nature.
Indeed, with the exception of wild berries, wild game, wild mushrooms, and fish and shellfish, virtually everything in North American and European diets has been genetically improved in some way.
Despite the lack of scientific justification for skepticism about genetically engineered crops – indeed, no cases of harm to humans or disruption to ecosystems have been documented – they have been the most scrutinized foods in human history.
The assumption that “genetically engineered” or “genetically modified” is a meaningful – and dangerous – classification has led not only to vandalism of field trials, but also to destruction of laboratories and assaults on researchers.
Moreover, the GMO classification has encouraged unscientific regulatory approaches that are not commensurate with the level of risk, and that, by discriminating against modern molecular genetic-engineering techniques, inhibit agricultural innovation that could reduce strain on the natural environment and enhance global food security.
Even as study after study – both formal risk assessments and “real-world” observations – has confirmed the technology’s safety, the regulatory burden placed on GMOs has continued to grow.
This trend is making the testing and development of many crops with commercial and humanitarian potential economically unfeasible.
Despite robust laboratory research on plants since the invention of modern genetic-engineering techniques in the early 1970’s, the commercialization of products has lagged.
Unprovoked attention from regulators inevitably stigmatizes any product or technology.
Endless discussion of the “coexistence” of genetically engineered and “conventional” organisms has reinforced the stigma, leading activists to pursue frivolous yet damaging litigation.
For example, in at least four lawsuits brought against regulators in the United States, judges initially ruled that regulators had failed to comply with the procedural requirements of the US National Environmental Policy Act.
And marketing as “natural” products that contain genetically engineered ingredients has led to lawsuits for false labeling.
The discriminatory treatment of GMOs creates widespread mischief.
In many places, the location of field trials now must be identified, even including GPS coordinates – a practice that facilitates vandalism.
(And activists frequently destroy conventional plants inadvertently, because they are difficult to distinguish from genetically engineered varieties.)
In 1936, the Nobel laureate Max Planck observed that scientific innovations rarely spread as a result of their opponents’ conversion; instead, opponents of innovation “gradually die out,” and the next generation accepts the breakthrough.
This was the case with vaccinations and the recognition that DNA is the stuff of heredity – and it will happen eventually with genetic engineering.
Governing a World Out of Order
WASHINGTON, DC – Can we develop an international order that will keep the peace and allow countries to play by agreed rules?
That is the question that Henry Kissinger poses in his new book World Order.
Unfortunately, it is the wrong question.
Kissinger defines “world order” as a concept of just international arrangements that is “thought to be applicable to the entire world.”
Before the advent of the European Union, for example, Europe conceived of world order as a balance of great powers, in which multiple religions and forms of government could coexist.
As a civilization and a religion, Islam envisions the optimal world order very differently – as a caliphate, in which faith and government are united and peace prevails throughout the Dar al-Islam, or house of Islam.
That is certainly not the belief of all Muslims or of the governments of Muslim-majority states, but the radicalism espoused by groups like the Islamic State seeks to spread not just codes of conduct but an entire worldview.
In Kissinger’s view, contending conceptions of world order are emerging not only in the Middle East, but also in Asia.
China is currently playing by the international rules but is increasingly signaling that it expects to be treated as first among equals in the region (as the US has long insisted with respect to its position in the Americas).
But, as China grows stronger and reclaims what it believes to be its historic position in Asia and the world, how long will it wait to insist on reshaping the international rules?
Russia is openly breaking those rules and no longer bothering to justify itself under international law.
Instead, it boasts of reclaiming territories once ruled by the Kremlin and threatens to use force to “protect” ethnic Russians from purported threats.
When Russia annexed Crimea last March, Kadri Liik of the European Council on Foreign Relations pointed out the marked difference in the way it handled its invasion of Georgia in 2008.
The Russian government essentially provoked Georgia into attacking first and then crafted an elaborate justification aimed at rendering its actions compatible with international law.
But this time, Kadri wrote, “Moscow has challenged the whole post-Cold War European order, together with its system of rules.”
Kissinger’s hope is that these countries and rising powers like India and presumably Brazil (he leaves Latin America out of his account of world orders) will be able to forge agreement on a set of rules that all will regard as legitimate, thereby maintaining a stable global balance of power.
The Westphalian principle of multiplicity will be critical, he believes, as it will be necessary to allow different countries and civilizations to operate on very different domestic principles.
An effective world order for the twenty-first century, however, must do much more than keep the peace.
Kissinger focuses on inter-state relations – on how, from one country’s perspective, to avoid war with other countries while deterring them from aggression or other actions likely to upset a regional or global balance of power.
Yet a glance at today’s headlines suggests that what is most likely to kill and displace millions, if not hundreds of millions, of people in the coming decades are global threats such as pandemics, climate change, and terrorist and criminal networks – not inter-state war.
Yes, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has led to more than 3,000 deaths.
But current projections of the spread of the Ebola virus predict a million cases by January.
According to the World Health Organization, the HIV/AIDS epidemic has killed 36 million people, roughly ten million higher than the estimated number of military deaths in World War II, with an additional 35 million people infected.
Many of these global threats are closely intertwined with war, but war that is far more likely to be fought within borders than across them.
Consider that roughly two-thirds of Syria’s population has been displaced by the country’s civil war, with millions living miserably in refugee camps.
The disastrous state of health care in Liberia and Sierra Leone, where Ebola is raging, reflects decades of horrific civil war in both countries.
The ongoing violence in Africa’s Great Lakes region, which has claimed millions of civilian lives, is rooted in the 1994 Rwanda genocide and the resulting flood of Hutu refugees into neighboring states.
The droughts and floods caused by climate change will put millions of people on the move, first into crowded and combustible cities, and then across borders.
Russia and Canada may be happy to receive them as vast new tracts of land open up, but many other parts of the world are already crowded, which spells conflict.
Maintaining peace is mostly a matter of restraint or constraint.
Effective global cooperation requires much more.
Governments must be able to come together, alongside vital actors from both business and civil society, to adopt comprehensive plans of action.
Those plans, in turn, require funding, manpower, collective will, and enforcement capability.
Yet today, faced with a virus that kills half of those it infects and the prospect that it could decimate an entire region of Africa, disrupt air travel, and put people around the world in quarantine, the world has delivered only a fraction of the needed financial and material assistance.
We live in a world of global problems and largely national solutions.
The need for institutions that can respond swiftly and effectively, as domestic government does in well-governed states, is greater than ever.
The post-WWII institutions have become insufficient.
It is time to reform them – and to devise new structures and tools designed to address global problems.
Henry Paulson is Wrong
CHICAGO – When a profitable company is hit by a very large liability, the solution is not to have the government buy its assets at inflated prices.  The solution, instead, is protection under bankruptcy law, which in the United States means Chapter 11.
Under Chapter 11, companies with a solid underlying business generally swap debt for equity.  Old equity holders are wiped out and old debt claims are transformed into equity claims in the new entity which continues operating with a new capital structure.
Alternatively, the debt-holders can agree to reduce the face value of debt, in exchange for some warrants.
So why not use this well-established approach to solve the financial sector’s current problems?
The obvious answer is that we do not have time; Chapter 11 procedures are generally long and complex, and the current crisis has reached a point where time is of the essence.
But we are in extraordinary times, and the government has taken and is prepared to take unprecedented measures.
As if rescuing the big insurer AIG and prohibiting all short selling of financial stocks was not enough, now US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson proposes buying up (with taxpayers’ money) the distressed assets of the financial sector.
But at what price?
If banks and financial institutions find it difficult to recapitalize (i.e., issue new equity), it is because investors are uncertain about the value of the assets in their portfolios and do not want to overpay.
Will government do better at valuing those assets?
In a negotiation between government officials and a banker with a bonus at risk, who will have more clout in determining the price?
Paulson’s plan would create a charitable institution that provides welfare to the rich – at taxpayers’ expense.
If the government subsidy is large enough, it will succeed in stopping the crisis.
But, again, at what price?
Aside from costing billions of taxpayer dollars, Paulson’s plan violates the fundamental capitalist principle that whoever reaps the gains also bears the losses.
Remember that in America’s Savings and Loan crisis of the late 1980’s, the government had to bail out those institutions, because their deposits were federally insured.
But in this case, the government does not have to bail out the debt-holders of Bear Sterns, AIG, or any of the other financial institutions that will benefit from Paulson’s plan.
Since we do not have time for Chapter 11 proceedings and we do not want to bail out all the creditors, the lesser evil is to do what judges do in contentious and overextended bankruptcy processes: impose a restructuring plan on creditors, with part of the debt forgiven in exchange for equity or warrants.
There is precedent for such a bold move.
During the Great Depression, many debt contracts were indexed to gold.
So when the dollar’s convertibility into gold was suspended, the value of that debt soared, threatening many institutions’ survival.
President Roosevelt’s administration declared the clause invalid, forcing debt forgiveness.
My colleague and current Fed Governor Randall Koszner studied this episode and showed that not only stock prices, but also bond prices, soared after the Supreme Court upheld the decision.
How is that possible?
As corporate finance experts have been saying for 30 years, having too much debt and too little equity is costly, so reducing the face value of debt can sometimes benefit not only equity-holders, but also debt-holders.
But, while debt forgiveness benefits holders of both equity and debt, debt-holders don’t voluntarily agree to it for two reasons.
First, even if each individual debt-holder benefits, he or she will benefit even more if everybody else cuts the face value of their debt and he or she does not.
Hence, everybody waits for others to move first, creating obvious delay.
Second, from a debt-holder’s point of view, a government bailout is better.
Even talk of a government bailout reduces the debt-holders’ incentive to act, making the bailout more necessary.
As during the Great Depression and in many debt restructurings, it makes sense in the current contingency to mandate partial debt forgiveness or a debt-for-equity swap in the financial sector.
It is a well-tested strategy, and it leaves taxpayers out of the picture.
Forcing a debt-for-equity swap or debt forgiveness would be no greater a violation of private property rights than a massive bailout.
But, for the major players in the financial sector, it is much more appealing to be bailed out by the taxpayers.
Indeed, for the financial industry, the appeal of Paulson’s proposal is precisely that it taxes the many and benefits the few.
Since the many (taxpayers) are dispersed, we cannot put up a good fight in the US Congress, whereas the financial industry is well represented politically.
For six of the last 13 years, the Treasury Secretary was a Goldman Sachs alumnus.
The decisions that Congress must make now will affect not only the US economy’s short-term prospects, but will shape the type of capitalism that we will have for the next 50 years.
Do we want to live in a system where profits are private, but losses are socialized, where taxpayer money is used to prop up failed firms?
Or do we want to live in a system where people are held accountable for their decisions, where imprudent behavior is penalized and prudent behavior rewarded?
For anyone who believes in free markets, the most serious risk of the current situation is that the interest of a few financiers will undermine the capitalist system’s fundamental workings.
The time has come to save capitalism from the capitalists.
Perubahan Zat-zat Aman menjadi Berbahaya
PALO ALTO – Semenjak perkembangan toksikologi di abad ke-16, prinsip yang mempedomani adalah “the dose makes the poison” (hanya dosis/konsentrasi yang dapat menentukan benda/bahan tersebut bersifat racun atau tidak bagi tubuh mahluk hidup).
Pernyataan ini merupakan aturan yang berlaku bagi obat-obatan yang digunakan pasien di seluruh dunia bahkan jutaan kali dalam sehari.
Dosis aspirin yang tepat bisa menjadi pengobatan yang berharga tapi konsumsi yang terlalu banyak dapat mematikan.
Prinsip ini pun berlaku pada makanan: pala atau akar manis (licorice) dalam jumlah besar sangat beracun.
Risiko yang ditimbulkan dari suatu bahan/zat tergantung pada dua faktor: kapasitas inherennya dalam menciptakan bahaya dan tingkat paparan terhadap seseorang.
Idenya sederhana namun beberapa profesional yang spekulatif nampaknya tidak mampu memahaminya – sebagaimana dibuktikan dengan keputusan International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) atau Badan Internasional untuk Penelitian Kanker, unit di dalam Badan Kesehatan Dunia (WHO) yang mengelompokkan herbisida 2,4D yang lazimnya dipakai sebagai “memiliki potensi karsinogenik pada manusia”.
Bicara mengenai herbisida, IARC terkesan mengalami kekalahan beruntun.
Baru-baru ini lembaga tersebut mengelompokkan glifosat, jenis herbisida lain yang populer, dalam kategori “memiliki potensi karsinogenik”, suatu kesimpulan yang bertentangan dengan badan regulator lain di dunia.
Sejalan dengan itu, belum ada lembaga pemerintahan yang menilai herbisida 2,4D bersifat karsinogenik.
Di awal tahun ini, Environmental Protection Agency di Amerika Serikat (EPA) menyimpulkan bahwa “berdasarkan pertimbangan bobot bukti atas data yang tersedia, herbisida 2,4D dikelompokkan sebagai ‘Kemungkinan Kecil bersifat Karsinogenik pada Manusia’”.
European Food Safety Authority juga baru-baru ini menyimpulkan bahwa “jenis 2,4D yang sekarang diproduksi berkemungkinan rendah menghasilkan potensi genotoksik atau risiko karsinogenik pada manusia”.
Keputusan yang dibuat IARC untuk mengelompokkan bahan-bahan seperti 2,4D dan glifosat sebagai bahan yang berpotensi membahayakan dapat menimbulkan kekhawatiran bagi petani dan pengguna, yang akan mempertanyakan kelayakan untuk meneruskan penggunaan bahan-bahan tersebut pada pertanian komersial atau perkebunan.
Hal ini akan memalukan sebab jenis herbisida ini sangat efektif dan paling banyak digunakan dan saat IARC membuat keputusan itu tidak dilakukan dengan mempertimbangkan apakah bahan-bahan yang dipertanyakan ini betul-betul mungkin menimbulkan kanker.
Panel di IARC tidak mengkaji apakah kimia tersebut akan menyebabkankanker – tapi hanya apakah mampu menyebabkan kanker.
Sebagai akibatnya, AIRC sebelumnya pernah mengelompokkan lidah buaya, senyawa akrilimida (bahan yang dihasilkan dari mengoreng makanan, seperti kentang goreng dan keripik kentang), telepon genggam, kerja shift malam, sayuran yang diasamkan dari Asia, dan kopi sebagai bahan-bahan yang “mungkin” atau “berpotensi” karsinogenik.
Hal ini dikarenakan lembaga tersebut mengabaikan dosis, gagal mempertimbangkan kemungkinan adanya kontak dengan bahan dalam jumlah yang cukup besar hingga dapat menimbulkan bahaya.
Contohnya kopi, seseorang harus lah mengkonsumsi lebih dari 50 cangkir kopi sehari, dalam periode yang cukup lama, sebelum adanya kemungkinan terjadinya efek-efek yang merusak.
Klasifikasi yang dilakukan terhadap 2,4D sebagai bahan berisiko kanker pada manusia telah mengabaikan penelitian dan analisa mendalam yang dilakukan lembaga-lembaga kesehatan di seluruh dunia, termasuk Pertemuan Gabungan WHO/FAO tentang Residu Pestisida (Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residue atau JMPR).
Badan ini mengevaluasi risiko bahan-bahan seperti 2,4D dan mengamati variabel-variabel nyata seperti jumlah zat di dalam tanah dan sumber air terdekat, paparan kepada hewan yang melewati ladang yang telah diberi zat tersebut, dan potensi adanya kontak langsung pada manusia.
Dalam kajian yang dimulai di tahun 1970, JMPR selalu menyimpulkan apabila 2,4D digunakan dengan tepat, maka tidak akan menimbulkan ancaman kesehatan terhadap orang ataupun benda di tanah atau perairan.
Temuan ini dikuatkan oleh beberapa badan pemerintahan, temasuk European Food Safety Authority, EPA, Departemen Pertanian Amerika Serikat, dan Departemen Kesehatan Kanada.
Ketika IARC – lembaga ini membatasi panelnya untuk mempertimbangkan hanya sebagian kecil dari publikasi-publikasi tertentu saja – membuat keputusan yang salah maka konsekuensinya berbahaya.
Keputusan lembaga ini dapat memberi kepercayaan bagi aktivis-akvitis yang memiliki chemophobia yang mencari publisitas dan menambah kemungkinan adanya bahan-bahan yang dicap berbahaya akan digantikan oleh produk-produk lain yang bisa jadi menciptakan risiko lebih besar atau manfaat lebih rendah.
Jika produk-produk seperti glisofat dan 2,4D tidak tersedia, maka petani akan terpaksa beralih ke metode lain guna mengendalikan gulma – walau diantaranya tidak ada yang seefisien itu.
Memang benar, beberapa alternatif yang ada bisa jadi lebih beracun atau membutuhkan lebih banyak tanah yang dikerjakan, berakibat pada erosi tanah yang merusak, menaikkan tingkat emisi karbon dioksida, berkurangnya jumlah hasil panen, tingginya biaya produksi, dan harga yang lebih tinggi bagi konsumen.
Masalahnya pun tidak terbatas pada petani saja.
Terdapat lebih dari 100 penggunaan 2,4D yang disarankan termasuk pengendalian gulma di halaman rumput yang bersifat mengganggu, pemakaian dalam kehutanan, dan peningkatan keselamatan di jalan raya, menara sutet, dan jalur kereta api.
Proses yang diterapkan IARC dalam mencapai kesimpulan tidak hanya salah secara ilmiah, tapi juga berbahaya.
Keputusan yang dibuat, yang mungkin berdampak luas, dapat menciptakan risiko terbesar bagi kehidupan manusia dan hewan – seberapa pun dosisnya.
Overdosing on Heterodoxy Can Kill You
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since the 2008 financial crisis, it has been common to chastise economists for not having predicted the disaster, for having offered the wrong prescriptions to prevent it, or for having failed to fix it after it happened.
The call for new economic thinking has been persistent – and justified.
But all that is new may not be good, and that all that is good may not be new.
The 50th anniversary of China’s Cultural Revolution is a reminder of what can happen when all orthodoxy is tossed out the window.
Venezuela’s current catastrophe is another: A country that should be rich is suffering the world’s deepest recession, highest inflation, and worst deterioration of social indicators.
Its citizens, who live on top of the world’s largest oil reserves, are literally starving and dying for lack of food and medicine.
While this disaster was brewing, Venezuela won accolades from the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization, the Economic Commission for Latin America, British Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn, former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and the US Center for Economic Policy Research, among others.
So what should the world learn from the country’s descent into misery?
In short, Venezuela is the poster child of the perils of rejecting economic fundamentals.
One of those fundamentals is the idea that, to achieve social goals, it is better to use – rather than repress – the market.
After all, the market is essentially just a form of self-organization whereby everyone tries to earn a living by doing things that others find valuable.
In most countries, people buy food, soap, and toilet paper without incurring a national policy nightmare, as has happened in Venezuela.
But suppose you do not like the outcome the market generates.
Standard economic theory suggests that you can affect it by taxing some transactions – such as, say, greenhouse-gas emissions – or giving money to certain groups of people, while letting the market do its thing.
An alternative tradition, going back to Saint Thomas Aquinas, held that prices should be “just.”
Economics has shown that this is a really bad idea, because prices are the information system that creates incentives for suppliers and customers to decide what and how much to make or buy.
Making prices “just” nullifies this function, leaving the economy in perpetual shortage.
In Venezuela, the Law of Just Costs and Prices is one reason why farmers do not plant.
For that reason, agro-processing firms shut down.
More generally, price controls create incentives to flip goods into the black market.
As a result, the country with the world’s most extensive system of price controls also has the highest inflation – as well as an ever-expanding police effort that jails retail managers for holding inventories and even closes the borders to prevent smuggling.
Fixing prices is a short dead-end street.
A longer one is subsidizing goods so that their price remains below cost.
These so-called indirect subsidies can quickly cause an immense economic mess.
In Venezuela, subsidies for gasoline and electricity are larger than the budget for education and health care combined; exchange-rate subsidies are in a class of their own.
With one daily minimum wage in Venezuela, you can buy barely a half-pound (227 grams) of beef or 12 eggs, or 1,000 liters (264 gallons) of gasoline or 5,100 kWh of electricity – enough to power a small town.
With the proceeds of selling a dollar at the black market rate, you can buy over $100 at the strongest official rate.
Under these conditions, you are unlikely to find goods or dollars at official prices.
Moreover, since the government is unable to pay providers the necessary subsidy to keep prices low, output collapses, as has happened with Venezuela’s electricity and health sectors, among others.
Indirect subsidies are also regressive, because the rich consume more than the poor – and hence appropriate more of the subsidy.
This is what underpins the old orthodox wisdom that if you want to change market outcomes, it is better to subsidize people directly with cash.
Another bit of conventional wisdom is that creating the right incentive structure and securing the necessary know-how to run state-owned enterprises is very difficult.
So the state should have only a few firms in strategic sectors or in activities that are rife with market failures.
Venezuela disregarded that wisdom and went on an expropriation binge.
In particular, after former President Hugo Chávez was reelected in 2006, he expropriated farms, supermarkets, banks, telecoms, power companies, oil production and service firms, and manufacturing companies producing steel, cement, coffee, yogurt, detergent, and even glass bottles.
Productivity collapsed in all of them.
Governments often struggle to balance their books, leading to over-indebtedness and financial trouble.
Yet fiscal prudence is one of the most frequently attacked principles of economic orthodoxy.
But Venezuela shows what happens when prudence is frowned upon and fiscal information is treated as a state secret.
Venezuela used the 2004-2013 oil boom to quintuple its external public debt, instead of saving up for a rainy day.
By 2013, Venezuela’s extravagant borrowing led international capital markets to shut it out, leading the authorities to print money.
This caused the currency to lose 98% of its value in the last three years.
By the time oil prices fell in 2014, the country was in no position to take the hit, with collapsing domestic production and capacity to import, leading to the current disaster.
Orthodoxy reflects history’s painfully acquired lessons – the sum of what we regard to be true.
But not all of it is true.
Progress requires identifying errors, which in turn calls for heterodox thinking.
But learning becomes difficult when there are long delays between action and consequences, as when we try to regulate the water temperature while in the shower.
When reaction times are slow, exploring the heterodox is necessary, but should be done with care.
When all orthodoxy is thrown out the window, you get the disaster that was the Chinese Cultural Revolution – and that is today’s Venezuela.
Beban Utang Tersembunyi pada Negara-negara Emerging Market
LIMA – Ketika gubernur bank sentral dan menteri keuangan dari seluruh dunia berkumpul untuk menghadiri pertemuan tahunan Dana Moneter Internasional (IMF) di Peru, negara-negara ekonomi rendah (emerging world) dipenuhi dengan gejala-gejala meningkatnya kerentanan ekonomi.
Hilang sudah hari-hari ketika pertemuan-pertemuan IMF dimonopoli oleh permasalahan negara-negara maju berjuang untuk pulih dari krisis keuangan tahun 2008.
Sekarang, diskusi telah bergeser kembali ke arah negara-negara berkembang, yang menghadapi risiko krisis keuangan mereka sendiri.
Meskipun tidak ada dua krisis keuangan yang identik, semua krisis cenderung memiliki beberapa pertanda yang sama: pertumbuhan ekonomi dan ekspor yang berkurang secara signifikan, meredamnya booming harga aset, membengkaknya defisit neraca berjalan dan fiskal, kenaikan pembiayaan dengan utang (leverage), dan penurunan atau pembalikan aliran modal.
Meskipun tingkatannya berbeda, negara-negara ekonomi rendah memperlihatkan semua pertanda tersebut.
Titik balik terjadi pada tahun 2013, ketika ekspektasi kenaikan suku bunga di Amerika Serikat dan penurunan harga-harga komoditas global mengakhiri bonanza aliran modal tahunan yang selama ini menyokong pertumbuhan di negara-negara ekonomi rendah.
Kemunduran yang dialami Tiongkok akhir-akhir ini, yang memicu turbulensi di pasar modal global dan semakin melemahkan harga-harga komoditas, telah memperburuk kemunduran (downturn) di negara-negara tersebut.
Tantangan-tantangan ini, meskipun sulit untuk diatasi, setidaknya dapat dilihat.
Tapi negara-negara ekonomi rendah juga dapat mengalami gejala umum lainnya dari krisis yang segera terjadi, satu gejala yang jauh lebih sulit dideteksi dan diukur: utang-utang tersembunyi.
Terkadang karena adanya korupsi, utang-utang tersembunyi ini biasanya tidak tercatat di dalam neraca/laporan posisi keuangan atau basis data standar.
Bentuknya berubah dari satu krisis ke krisis lainnya, sebagaimana pelaku yang terlibat dalam penetapannya.
Akibatnya, utang-utang ini sering tidak terdeteksi sampai akhirnya sudah terlambat.
Bahkan, setelah letusan krisis peso selama tahun 1994-1995 terjadi baru akhirnya dunia mengetahui bahwa bank-bank swasta di Meksiko mengawali risiko nilai tukar yang signifikan akibat pinjaman off-balance-sheet (derivatif).
Demikian juga, sebelum krisis keuangan di Asia tahun 1997, IMF dan pasar-pasar keuangan tidak sadar bahwa cadangan devisa bank sentral Thailand hampir habis (jumlah total $33 miliar yang dilaporkan tidak memperhitungkan kontrak serah (forward contract) yang menyisakan cadangan devisa bersih hanya sebesar $1 miliar).
Dan sampai krisis Yunani terjadi di tahun 2010, defisit fiskal dan beban utang Yunani dianggap jauh lebih kecil, berkat penggunaan instrumen keuangan derivatif dan akuntasi kreatif yang diterapkan pemerintahnya.
Jadi pertanyaan terbesarnya adalah di mana tempat persembunyian utang-utang negara-negara ekonomi rendah.
Sayangnya terdapat kendala yang berat untuk mengungkapnya – dimulai dengan tidak transparannya transaksi keuangan Tiongkok dengan negara berkembang lainnya selama satu dekade terakhir.
Selama booming infrastruktur domestiknya, Tiongkok mendanai proyek-proyek besar – umumnya berhubungan dengan pertambangan, energi, dan infrastruktur – di negara berkembang lainnya.
Mengingat bahwa pinjaman tersebut utamanya dalam mata uang dolar AS, maka tunduk pada risiko nilai tukar yang menambah kerentanan pada neraca keuangan negara-negara ekonomi rendah.
Namun jumlah pinjaman ini umumnya tidak diketahui, sebab sebagian besar pinjaman dikeluarkan oleh bank-bank pembangunan di Tiongkok yang tidak termasuk dalam data yang dikumpulkan Bank for International Settlements (sebagai sumber informasi global yang utama).
Karena pinjaman jarang dikeluarkan dalam bentuk surat berharga di pasar modal internasional, maka juga tidak tercatat di basis data misalnya milik Bank Dunia.
Walaupun data tersedia, angka-angka tersebut harus ditafsirkan dengan hati-hati.
Sebagai contoh, data yang dikumpulkan berdasarkan proyek oleh Global Economic Governance Initiative and the Inter-American Dialog dapat memberikan gambaran atas pinjaman Tiongkok kepada Venezuala yang mencapai 18% dari PDB tahunan, dan Ekuador menerima pinjaman dari Tiongkok yang melebihi 10% PDB-nya.
Pinjaman Tiongkok kepada Brasil hampir sebesar 1% PDB-nya, sementara pinjaman yang diterima Meksiko relatif kecil (lihat grafik).
Tapi pencairan dana sebenarnya mungkin gagal memenuhi rencana awal, yang berarti utang negara-negara ini kepada Tiongkok lebih rendah dari jumlah yang diperkirakan.
Sebaliknya – dan kemungkinan besar – data tidak mencakup beberapa proyek, pemberi pinjaman, atau peminjam, yang berarti jumlah utang mungkin lebih besar.
Selain itu, bentuk peminjaman lainnya – seperti pembiayaan transaksi perdagangan, yang cenderung lebih cepat jatuh temponya – tidak termasuk dalam jumlah tersebut.
Perjanjian currency-swap, yang penting bagi Brasil dan Argentina, juga perlu diperhitungkan.
(Hal ini menyoroti pentingnya pelacakan cadangan devisa netto, bukan bruto).
Singkatnya, meskipun utang negara-negara emerging market umumnya terkesan berjumlah sedang berdasarkan nilai historis, sangat mungkin bahwa jumlah utang sebetulnya kurang diperhitungkan, dengan margin besar.
Jika demikian, besarnya pembalikan aliran modal yang tengah dialami oleh negara-negara emerging market mungkin lebih besar dibandingkan yang diyakini secara umum – berpotensi cukup besar memicu krisis.
Dalam konteks ini, melacak financial linkage yang samar dan berubah bentuk menjadi jauh lebih penting dibandingkan sebelumnya.
High Anxiety
CHICAGO – The United States has reached a point where almost half its population is described as being in some way mentally ill, and nearly a quarter of its citizens – 67.5 million – have taken antidepressants.
These eye-popping statistics have sparked a widespread, sometimes rancorous debate about whether people are taking far more medication than is needed for problems that may not even be mental disorders.
Studies indicate that 40% of all patients fall short of the diagnoses that doctors and psychiatrists give them, yet 200 million prescriptions are still written annually in the US to treat depression and anxiety.
Those who defend such widespread use of prescription drugs insist that a significant part of the population is under-treated and, by inference, under-medicated.
Those opposed to such rampant use of drugs note that diagnostic rates for bipolar disorder, in particular, have skyrocketed by 4,000% and that overmedication is impossible without over-diagnosis.
To help settle this long-standing dispute, I studied why the number of recognized psychiatric disorders has ballooned so dramatically in recent decades.
In 1980, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders added 112 new mental disorders to its third edition ( DSM-III ).
Fifty-eight more disorders appeared in the revised third (1987) and fourth (1994) editions.
With over a million copies in print, the manual is known as the bible of American psychiatry; certainly it is an invoked chapter and verse in schools, prisons, courts, and by mental-health professionals around the world.
The addition of even one new diagnostic code has serious practical consequences.
What, then, was the rationale for adding so many in 1980?
After several requests to the American Psychiatric Association, I was granted complete access to the hundreds of unpublished memos, letters, and even votes from the period between 1973 and 1979, when the DSM-III task force debated each new and existing disorder.
Some of the work was meticulous and commendable.
But the overall approval process was more capricious than scientific.
DSM-III grew out of meetings that many participants described as chaotic.
One observer later remarked that the small amount of research drawn upon was “really a hodgepodge –scattered, inconsistent, and ambiguous.”
The interest and expertise of the task force was limited to one branch of psychiatry: neuropsychiatry.
That group met for four years before it occurred to members that such one-sidedness might result in bias.
Incredibly, the lists of symptoms for some disorders were knocked out in minutes.
The field studies used to justify their inclusion sometimes involved a single patient evaluated by the person advocating the new disease.
Experts pressed for the inclusion of illnesses as questionable as “chronic undifferentiated unhappiness disorder” and “chronic complaint disorder,” whose traits included moaning about taxes, the weather, and even sports results.
Social phobia (later dubbed “social anxiety disorder”) was one of seven new anxiety disorders created in 1980.
At first it struck me as a serious condition.
By the 1990’s experts were calling it “the disorder of the decade,” insisting that as many as one in five Americans suffers from it.
Yet the complete story turned out to be rather more complicated.
For starters, the specialist who in the 1960’s originally recognized social anxiety (London-based Isaac Marks, a renowned expert on fear and panic) strongly resisted its inclusion in DSM-III as a separate disease category.
The list of common behaviors associated with the disorder gave him pause: fear of eating alone in restaurants, avoidance of public toilets, and concern about trembling hands.
By the time a revised task force added dislike of public speaking in 1987, the disorder seemed sufficiently elastic to include virtually everyone on the planet.
To counter the impression that it was turning common fears into treatable conditions, DSM-IV added a clause stipulating that social anxiety behaviors had to be “impairing” before a diagnosis was possible.
But who was holding the prescribers to such standards?
Doubtless, their understanding of impairment was looser than that of the task force.
After all, despite the impairment clause, the anxiety disorder mushroomed; by 2000, it was the third most common psychiatric disorder in America, behind only depression and alcoholism.
Over-medication would affect fewer Americans if we could rein in such clear examples of over-diagnosis.
We would have to set the thresholds for psychiatric diagnosis a lot higher, resurrecting the distinction between chronic illness and mild suffering.
But there is fierce resistance to this by those who say they are fighting grave mental disorders, for which medication is the only viable treatment.
Failure to reform psychiatry will be disastrous for public health.
Consider that apathy, excessive shopping, and overuse of the Internet are all serious contenders for inclusion in the next edition of the DSM, due to appear in 2012.
If the history of psychiatry is any guide, a new class of medication will soon be touted to treat them.
Sanity must prevail: if everyone is mentally ill, then no one is.
When Interest Rates Rise
CAMBRIDGE – Long-term interest rates are now unsustainably low, implying bubbles in the prices of bonds and other securities.
When interest rates rise, as they surely will, the bubbles will burst, the prices of those securities will fall, and anyone holding them will be hurt.
To the extent that banks and other highly leveraged financial institutions hold them, the bursting bubbles could cause bankruptcies and financial-market breakdown.
The very low interest rate on long-term United States Treasury bonds is a clear example of the current mispricing of financial assets.
A ten-year Treasury has a nominal interest rate of less than 2%.
Because the inflation rate is also about 2%, this implies a negative real interest rate, which is confirmed by the interest rate of -0.6% on ten-year Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS), which adjust interest and principal payments for inflation.
Historically, the real interest rate on ten-year Treasuries has been above 2%; thus, today’s rate is about two percentage points below its historical average.
But those historical rates prevailed at times when fiscal deficits and federal government debt were much lower than they are today.
With budget deficits that are projected to be 5% of GDP by the end of the coming decade, and a debt/GDP ratio that has roughly doubled in the past five years and is continuing to grow, the real interest rate on Treasuries should be significantly higher than it was in the past.
The reason for today’s unsustainably low long-term rates is not a mystery.
The Federal Reserve’s policy of “long-term asset purchases,” also known as “quantitative easing,” has intentionally kept long-term rates low.
The Fed is buying Treasury bonds and long-term mortgage-backed securities at a rate of $85 billion a month, equivalent to an annual rate of $1,020 billion.
Since that exceeds the size of the government deficit, it implies that private markets do not need to buy any of the newly issued government debt.
The Fed has indicated that it will eventually end its program of long-term asset purchases and allow rates to rise to more normal levels.
Although it has not indicated just when rates will rise or how high they will go, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that the rate on ten-year Treasuries will rise above 5% by 2019 and remain above that level for the next five years.
The interest rates projected by the CBO assume that future inflation will be only 2.2%.
If inflation turns out to be higher (a very likely outcome of the Fed’s recent policy), the interest rate on long-term bonds could be correspondingly higher.
Investors are buying long-term bonds at the current low interest rates because the interest rate on short-term investments is now close to zero.
In other words, buyers are getting an additional 2% current yield in exchange for assuming the risk of holding long-term bonds.
That is likely to be a money-losing strategy unless an investor is sagacious or lucky enough to sell the bond before interest rates rise.
If not, the loss in the price of the bond would more than wipe out the extra interest that he earned, even if rates remain unchanged for five years.
Here is how the arithmetic works for an investor who rolls over ten-year bonds for the next five years, thus earning 2% more each year than he would by investing in Treasury bills or bank deposits.
Assume that the interest rate on ten-year bonds remains unchanged for the next five years and then rises from 2% to 5%.
During those five years, the investor earns an additional 2% each year, for a cumulative gain of 10%.
But when the interest rate on a ten-year bond rises to 5%, the bond’s price falls from $100 to $69.
The investor loses $31 on the price of the bond, or three times more than he had gained in higher interest payments.
The low interest rate on long-term Treasury bonds has also boosted demand for other long-term assets that promise higher yields, including equities, farm land, high-yield corporate bonds, gold, and real estate.
When interest rates rise, the prices of those assets will fall as well.
The Fed has pursued its strategy of low long-term interest rates in the hope of stimulating economic activity.
At this point, the extent of the stimulus seems very small, and the risk of financial bubbles is increasingly worrying.
The US is not the only country with very low or negative real long-term interest rates.
Germany, Britain, and Japan all have similarly low long rates.
And, in each of these countries, it is likely that interest rates will rise during the next few years, imposing losses on holders of long-term bonds and potentially impairing the stability of financial institutions.
Even if the major advanced economies’ current monetary strategies do not lead to rising inflation, we may look back on these years as a time when official policy led to individual losses and overall financial instability.
Reinvigorating Egypt’s Economy
NEWPORT BEACH – Some two years into Egypt’s grass-roots revolution, the country’s economy is in a worrisome downward spiral.
A growing number of people, inside and outside of the country, are starting to blame the revolution itself for derailing an economy that was growing, reducing its external-debt burden, and maintaining a comfortable cushion of international reserves.
Blaming the revolution is the wrong approach to Egypt’s current economic woes.
Yet its appeal to some is understandable, given that the country’s economic situation has continued to worsen over the last few months.
Growth is anemic, unemployment is high, and new investment has fallen off dramatically – all of which complicate already-difficult financial, social, and political conditions.
The result is a growing threat of several vicious circles at once.
Domestic supply disruptions are now fueling inflation and compounding the problems of a subsidy-laden national budget.
They have also aggravated the weakness of external finances, contributing to a sharp drop in international reserves that has been contained only by exceptional loans and deposits from abroad.
Inadequate growth and higher inflation impose a particularly severe burden on Egypt’s most vulnerable.
Public safety nets are overstretched, with too many poor people falling through.
Moreover, other support networks – including income opportunities in tourism, the informal sector, and charitable and family support – are crumbling under the pressure of growing poverty.
This broad set of spiraling difficulties has led credit-rating agencies to slash Egypt’s rating.
It is also discouraging foreign direct investment, as is the discrediting of Egypt’s police forces.
As a result, still more sources of working and investment capital are disrupted, amplifying the impact of domestic capital flight.
None of this facilitates the political reconciliation and national unity that Egypt needs to complete the most difficult of all revolutionary pivots: from dismantling an oppressive past to building a better future.
Indeed, having suffered from post-revolutionary institutional and political dysfunctions, economic decline is now itself fueling these destabilizers.
To be fair, governments – first under the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces and now under the Muslim Brotherhood – have recognized the challenges.
Their responses, however, have fallen short, following a familiar sequence that begins with waiting for an endogenous bounce and aspiring to self-reliance.
When no miracle arrives, they opt for capital controls and consider asset sales and leases while courting those once viewed as having perpetuated the old order.
The post-revolutionary government’s initial narrative characterized Egypt’s economic malaise as temporary and self-correcting.
Having overthrown Hosni Mubarak’s iron-fisted 30-year-old regime in a remarkably quick and relatively peaceful manner, Egypt’s revolutionary masses were to leave the streets and pursue an all-out drive for economic prosperity and social justice.
Their efforts would be supported by the re-orientation of public institutions (and governance more broadly) away from benefiting the privileged few toward an ethos of service to all of the country’s citizens.
This narrative reflected (understandable) revolutionary exuberance rather than realities on the ground.
It takes years to reform institutions.
Economic and financial transmission lines cannot be rerouted quickly. Discredited businesses cannot be replaced overnight.
Credible political parties are not easy to organize on the fly.
And many of those who bravely fought for freedom had little political experience, placing an even greater premium on great leadership to channel Egyptians’ enormous energy – and their demands for greater social justice – into a shared vision and common purpose.
The resulting power vacuums were filled by those whose prior positions in society gave them an inside track at the time of the popular uprising.
They assumed power with a set of ideas and operating procedures that had to catch up with the new Egypt.
As the economy struggled, optimism gave way to a more defensive and insular view that values self-reliance.
Accompanied by creeping economic controls, the narrative became more nationalistic.
Loyalty, rather than merit, drove key appointments, making policy management even more difficult.
With this approach offering no better chance at success, the country has been pushed back to pursuing measures that, at least in the mind of much of the public, are associated with the old regime.
Securing a loan from the International Monetary Fund has become the principal objective of economic management, coupled with other anxious attempts to raise financing.
But, absent a fundamental policy revamp, the most that this can deliver is a few months of relative financial calm, albeit at a cost for the subsequent future.
What Egypt needs today cannot be provided only by IMF loans and asset leases.
That is the bad news.
The good news is that, as someone who has followed similar cases for more than 30 years, I can say with confidence that Egypt has all the components needed to restore economic and financial stability: resources, people, dynamism, entrepreneurship, location, and regional and global linkages.
Egypt also has a powerful secret weapon that is yet to be fully deployed – a generation of young people who, after years of alienation and repression, believe that they can (and should) influence the country’s destiny.
Already, some are making a notable difference on the ground, attracting widespread admiration.
Egypt is not a country where economic sectors and segments of the population can succeed despite the government.
The government must provide the context to restart the engines of economic recovery; and policies should serve as growth accelerators by providing development gateways for the energetic young, the restive poor, and the pressured middle class.
This brings us back to the interactions between economics, politics, and finance, which are now fueling a tailspin that is harming Egypt’s citizens and threatening their children’s future.
Appropriate political reforms must come first; when they do, Egypt’s economic and financial revival will surprise many with its buoyancy and speed.
Think of a car that can and should achieve great performance based on its strong internal engine.
Egypt is capable of speedy economic growth and durable financial health.
Without determined efforts at political progress and unity, however, it will remain stuck in neutral – and could slip into reverse.
Monopoly’s New Era
NEW YORK – For 200 years, there have been two schools of thought about what determines the distribution of income – and how the economy functions.
One, emanating from Adam Smith and nineteenth-century liberal economists, focuses on competitive markets.
The other, cognizant of how Smith’s brand of liberalism leads to rapid concentration of wealth and income, takes as its starting point unfettered markets’ tendency toward monopoly.
It is important to understand both, because our views about government policies and existing inequalities are shaped by which of the two schools of thought one believes provides a better description of reality.
For the nineteenth-century liberals and their latter-day acolytes, because markets are competitive, individuals’ returns are related to their social contributions – their “marginal product,” in the language of economists.
Capitalists are rewarded for saving rather than consuming – for their abstinence, in the words of Nassau Senior, one of my predecessors in the Drummond Professorship of Political Economy at Oxford.
Differences in income were then related to their ownership of “assets” – human and financial capital.
Scholars of inequality thus focused on the determinants of the distribution of assets, including how they are passed on across generations.
The second school of thought takes as its starting point “power,” including the ability to exercise monopoly control or, in labor markets, to assert authority over workers.
Scholars in this area have focused on what gives rise to power, how it is maintained and strengthened, and other features that may prevent markets from being competitive.
Work on exploitation arising from asymmetries of information is an important example.
In the West in the post-World War II era, the liberal school of thought has dominated.
Yet, as inequality has widened and concerns about it have grown, the competitive school, viewing individual returns in terms of marginal product, has become increasingly unable to explain how the economy works.
So, today, the second school of thought is ascendant.
After all, the large bonuses paid to banks’ CEOs as they led their firms to ruin and the economy to the brink of collapse are hard to reconcile with the belief that individuals’ pay has anything to do with their social contributions.
Of course, historically, the oppression of large groups – slaves, women, and minorities of various types – are obvious instances where inequalities are the result of power relationships, not marginal returns.
In today’s economy, many sectors – telecoms, cable TV, digital branches from social media to Internet search, health insurance, pharmaceuticals, agro-business, and many more – cannot be understood through the lens of competition.
In these sectors, what competition exists is oligopolistic, not the “pure” competition depicted in textbooks.
A few sectors can be defined as “price taking”; firms are so small that they have no effect on market price.
Agriculture is the clearest example, but government intervention in the sector is massive, and prices are not set primarily by market forces.
US President Barack Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers, led by Jason Furman, has attempted to tally the extent of the increase in market concentration and some of its implications.
In most industries, according to the CEA, standard metrics show large – and in some cases, dramatic – increases in market concentration.
The top ten banks’ share of the deposit market, for example, increased from about 20% to 50% in just 30 years, from 1980 to 2010.
Some of the increase in market power is the result of changes in technology and economic structure: consider network economies and the growth of locally provided service-sector industries.
Some is because firms – Microsoft and drug companies are good examples – have learned better how to erect and maintain entry barriers, often assisted by conservative political forces that justify lax anti-trust enforcement and the failure to limit market power on the grounds that markets are “naturally” competitive.
And some of it reflects the naked abuse and leveraging of market power through the political process: Large banks, for example, lobbied the US Congress to amend or repeal legislation separating commercial banking from other areas of finance.
The consequences are evident in the data, with inequality rising at every level, not only across individuals, but also across firms.
The CEA report noted that the “90th percentile firm sees returns on investments in capital that are more than five times the median.
This ratio was closer to two just a quarter of a century ago.”
Joseph Schumpeter, one of the great economists of the twentieth century, argued that one shouldn’t be worried by monopoly power: monopolies would only be temporary.
There would be fierce competition for the market and this would replace competition in the market and ensure that prices remained competitive.
My own theoretical work long ago showed the flaws in Schumpeter’s analysis, and now empirical results provide strong confirmation.
Today’s markets are characterized by the persistence of high monopoly profits.
The implications of this are profound.
Many of the assumptions about market economies are based on acceptance of the competitive model, with marginal returns commensurate with social contributions.
This view has led to hesitancy about official intervention: If markets are fundamentally efficient and fair, there is little that even the best of governments could do to improve matters.
But if markets are based on exploitation, the rationale for laissez-faire disappears.
Indeed, in that case, the battle against entrenched power is not only a battle for democracy; it is also a battle for efficiency and shared prosperity.
High Noon at the IMF
This month’s International Monetary Fund (IMF) meetings in Washington will bring together the world’s top finance ministers and central bankers at a critical juncture for the global economy.
For starters, the roof is starting to collapse on the global housing bubble, as housing markets begin to freeze up not only in the United States, but also in many other countries, such as high-flying Spain.
Moreover, money markets, especially in Europe, remain traumatized by the festering global credit crunch.
Record-high food and energy prices, combined with sharply rising wages in China, are pushing up inflation in much of the world.
Last, but not least, the US productivity boom is decelerating.
These combined pressures will make it far more difficult for central banks to sustain the so-called “Goldilocks” economy (“just right” inflation and growth).
At the same time, the outside world will be looking especially carefully at what, if anything, officials plan to do if the dollar continues to sink.
Though exchange rates are notoriously unpredictable, the best guess is that a slow unwinding of the massive US trade deficit will keep the dollar on a path of gradual long-term decline.
But the fact that several Asian and emerging-market countries are resisting this decline by buying dollars is putting inordinate pressures on the more flexible currencies, such as the euro and the Canadian dollar, which are trading at record levels.
(What are the Chinese planning to do with all their ever-growing $1.4 trillion in reserves?
Do they intend to give foreign athletes paper bags stuffed with dollars as a welcoming present at the Olympic village?)
European leaders are arguing, with some justification, that their exporters are paying the price for America’s huge trade imbalance with Asian and oil-exporting countries.
If the US goes into recession, the acrimony will get a lot worse.
The IMF’s leadership tried to broker a deal over currencies at its April meeting, but without tangible results.
Given that China’s ruling Communists are holding their Party Congress at the same time as the current IMF meetings, a deal seems unlikely now, too.
Yet, given clear inflationary pressures in countries like Saudi Arabia, Argentina, and Russia, and notable price spikes in China, the world just might have reached a moment when agreement can be reached.
Let’s hope so.
There could be a real disaster if US growth woes turn today’s mild downward pressures into something much more serious.
The Federal Reserve would be forced to lower interest rates further, making the dollar even less attractive, and the concomitant shift in global demand away from the US, marked by a sharp decline in the US trade balance, would put still more pressure on the dollar.
According to my own calculations in a series of research papers with Maurice Obstfeld, the trade-weighted dollar would likely fall by 20% if a global demand shift (say, due to a US housing recession) were to cut the US trade deficit in half.
Fortunately, the IMF recently asserted the right to take action if countries engage in sustained one-way currency intervention.
But will incoming IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn be able to exercise this new power quickly enough to avert a crisis?
The IMF itself, of course, is in a deep crisis, with many questioning its mission and legitimacy.
For better or for worse, however, current circumstances offer an opportunity.
It would be unfortunate if the finance ministers merely sit around and beg Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke and European Central Bank head Jean-Claude Trichet to rescue them with rate cuts.
It would be even worse if European ministers, frustrated with gridlock over exchange rates, started sharing ideas for creatively managing their budgets to stimulate short-term demand, rather than long-term growth.
For the past couple of years, finance ministers and central bank heads have had the luxury of using the IMF meetings to congratulate themselves on rapid global growth, regardless of how much they actually contributed to it.
(Globalization and China were the biggest part of the story.)
This time needs to be different.
High Tensions In the Low Countries
Belgium and the Netherlands, two founding members of the European Union, are increasingly divided about what that project now means.
The EU’s Reform Treaty is now the focus of that dispute, but its roots go deeper.
At one point, according to press reports, the row became so serious that French President Nicolas Sarkozy had to intervene.
Europe cannot afford a dogfight between these two founding member states, so it’s high time to put emotions aside and review their differences on the future course of European integration.
As a former Dutch State Secretary for European Affairs and Benelux Coordinator, I believe that the Netherlands and Belgium can once again play complementary roles.
From the very beginning, these countries have represented the different aspects of Europe’s identity: Belgium, as an industrial country, continentally oriented, bilingual, and an intermediary with southern Europe, and the Netherlands with its strong agricultural and trading tradition and its Anglo-Saxon and Atlantic orientation.
Of the two, Belgium tends to be more uncritically supportive of the EU.
Polls show that more than 80% of Belgians want yet more integration, whereas roughly 50% of the Dutch describing themselves as Euroskeptics.
They value the Union for its economic benefits, but are wary of its politics.
Belgian-Dutch cooperation has in years past been essential in helping Europe to move forward.
The Benelux Economic Union treaty of 1944 was an early testing ground for the Europe of the Six, and it was the joint Benelux Memorandum, fathered by the far-sighted J. W. Beyen and presented in Messina in 1955, that gave the impetus to the creation of the common market.
Indeed, it was the basis on which Belgian Foreign Minister Paul-Henri Spaak and his colleagues worked when setting the scene for the Treaty of Rome and the European Economic Community.
The Spaak committee devised a system that balanced the voting power of states of varying size.
Clearly, a system of one vote per member state would have meant domination by Europe’s smaller states.
Conversely, a system based on population would have gone too far in favoring the big ones.
Balance was achieved partly by a system of weighting of votes in the Council of Ministers, where most decisions are taken.
With each enlargement of the Union, this system of decision-making has been largely maintained.
The equilibrium in voting rights between small and large member states was also secured by vesting exclusive authority to propose regulation in the Commission, which expresses the common interests of the Community.
The Dutch proposed bringing all European decision-making − economic, foreign policy, justice, and home affairs − into a single framework.
The proposal turned out to be a step too far and subsequently went down in Dutch history as “black Monday,” named after the day on which the then foreign minister, Hans Van den Broek, faced near-unanimous opposition in the European Council of Ministers.
Belgium, though, was the one member state that supported the Dutch in this brave venture.
But the Belgians and Dutch have also been less than cooperative at times.
When it came to voting rights in the European Parliament and in the Council, the Dutch fought doggedly to get one extra vote in Amsterdam in 1991 and another in Nice in 2000.
Belgium and the Netherlands need to resuscitate their cooperative efforts within the Benelux framework. The Benelux economy is the EU’s fourth largest.
Belgium will be serving on the United Nations Security Council for the next two years, and has indicated that it wants to give its mandate a European dimension. The coming period could thus be used in both countries to review traditional positions and reflect on how European policy can best serve their common needs.
Traditionally, the Netherlands has thought of itself as the smallest of the EU’s large member states. But others generally see it as the largest of the small.
Accepting this view could have a healthy impact on its behavior in the EU.
After all, the three largest EU states – Germany, Britain, and France – can be expected to seek agreements among themselves about the Union’s future shape, so the Benelux countries’ common goal should be to influence their actions and ensure that their thinking is acceptable to the whole community.
Three Encounters with Hillary
PARIS – It is Boston, July 2004.
The setting is a downtown restaurant to which the editor Tina Brown has invited Hillary Clinton and a handful of notables, including Caroline Kennedy, filmmaker Michael Moore, and former Senator George McGovern.
What is immediately striking is Clinton’s youthful appearance, bright laugh, and blue eyes that appear a little too round when she gazes at us with curiosity.
Sometimes her expression is briefly clouded by a streak of stifled pain, obstinate and not wholly contained.
Five years earlier, she was the most humiliated wife in America, a woman whose private life was thrown open – fully and relentlessly – to public scrutiny.
So she can talk national and international politics until she is blue in the face.
She can sing the praises of John Kerry, whom her party has just nominated in an effort to deny George W. Bush a second term.
And she can expound on her role as the junior senator from New York.
Still, there persists an idea that I cannot push out of my head, and that I enter into the travel journal that I am writing for The Atlantic.
The idea is this: to avenge her husband and to take revenge on him, to wash away the stain on the family and show what an unblemished Clinton administration might look like, this woman will sooner or later be a candidate for the presidency of the United States.