Time magazine was wrong to name Trump its person of the year.
Clearly, this was Russian President Vladimir Putin’s year.
The attack on the US may have been a precursor to further electoral meddling in Europe, where officials are now racing to counter Russian cyber operations before a series of major elections in 2017, including in the Netherlands, Germany, and France.
Past cyber attacks in Europe bear an uncanny resemblance to the alleged Russian-sponsored hack on the Democratic National Committee in the US.
In early 2015, a group with ties to the Russian government hacked into the German Bundestag, stole confidential files, and gave them to WikiLeaks, which published them.
Germany’s Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution has accused Russia of orchestrating similar attacks on German government computer systems.
Meanwhile, in November, the European Commission also suffered a large-scale cyber attack, and while the culprit remains unknown, very few people or organizations are capable of carrying out such an operation.
Cyber attacks are just one element in a broader hybrid war that Russia is waging against the West.
Russia has also assisted far-right nationalist organizations and populist movements across Europe, such as by extending loans to Marine Le Pen’s National Front in France, and furnishing UK Independence Party politicians with prime-time media slots on the Russian state-funded television network Russia Today.
US President Barack Obama has finally vowed to respond to Putin’s assault on American democracy, but he should have done more – and acted much sooner.
Europeans would be foolish to expect assistance from the incoming Trump administration.
Trump’s chief strategist, Stephen Bannon – a former executive chairman of the American “alt-right” disinformation website Breitbart News – has openly offered to help Le Pen win the French presidential election next spring.
Official Russian sources admit that they spent €1.2 billion ($1.25 billion) on foreign media campaigns just this year.
In the EU, thousands of fake-news websites have appeared, many of them with unclear ownership: the number of disinformation websites in Hungary doubled in 2014; and in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, some 42 new websites are now polluting the EU’s information ecosystem.
And, less surreptitiously, the Kremlin has spent hundreds of millions of dollars funding propaganda outfits – such as the Sputnik “news” agency – even as the Russian economy implodes.
Russia’s disinformation campaigns are complex and multifaceted, but the mission they share is to undermine trust in Western democratic authorities.
Social-media trolling is one method.
And social media is also a key vector for a Russian strategy that relies on historical revisionism (the claim that Russia alone won World War II is a staple of this approach); on conspiracy theories, promoted among European and American nationalist movements, which blame the West for, say, inciting the war in Ukraine; and denial of reality, such as the presence of Russian troops in Crimea and Ukraine.
To defend against this onslaught, the West should promote media freedom, reward accountability, and provide legal avenues to shut down systemic disinformation channels.
It bodes well that the EU recently amended its 2017 budget to reinforce the European External Action Service’s StratCom team, which had been badly underfunded, despite its critical mission of uncovering and debunking disinformation.
But the EU and NATO should also take a lesson from the US election, by bolstering collective European cyber defenses, and pressuring member states to expand their own cyber capabilities.
On the political front, Putin must be told that foreign interference in national elections will have severe negative consequences for Russian economic interests.
Beyond government action, the private sector and civil-society organizations should step up their efforts to verify whether online news stories are accurate, balanced, and credible.
Organizations working together can make a difference.
For example, Russia terminated its Swedish-language edition of Sputnik, because Swedish media organizations were not using its products.
But while Facebook has indicated that it will improve the vetting process for its content, voluntary measures may not be enough: some German lawmakers have suggested that legislation may be needed to clean up social-media platforms.
Still, Europe’s strongest defense is its free press, together with nongovernmental organizations working to expose lies.
Europeans must not become complacent about the current state of their free press.
After all, Breitbart News is already in Britain and is planning to expand across the EU.
Within days of Trump’s election, the New York Times reported, “Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, Marine Le Pen’s niece and a rising force in the National Front, tweeted, ‘I answer yes to the invitation of Stephen Bannon… to work together.”
Western democracies have entered a period of volatility, and Russia is no longer playing by the rules of the game that applied even during the darkest days of the Cold War.
Putin is actively waging a hybrid war against the West, one that we are only just beginning to comprehend, let alone confront.
It is time to defend our values.
This year made us fully aware of the scale of the challenge Putin is posing to Western democracy.
In 2017, we must confront – and defeat – his tactics head-on.
Let Russia Be Russia
TEL AVIV – In his famous “X” article, published in 1947, George F. Kennan argued that the Soviet Union’s hostility toward the United States was virtually inexorable, given that it was rooted not in a classic conflict of interest between great powers, but in a deep-seated nationalism and insecurity.
The same could be said of the current conflict between Vladimir Putin’s Russia and the West: It is, at root, a collision between the West’s supposedly universal values and Russia’s quest for a distinct identity.
A country’s struggle for identity can shape its strategic behavior.
The missionary ethos of American civilization helps to explain its conduct as a global power.
The resurgence of Islamism is essentially a quest for a fulfilling identity by an ancient civilization overwhelmed by the challenges of modernity.
And Israel’s emphasis on its Jewish identity has become a formidable obstacle to peace with the Palestinians.
Putin’s defiant foreign policy is a response – mediated by an authoritarian political tradition, the reactionary tenets of Orthodox Christianity, and pride in Russia’s vast geography and natural wealth – to the humiliating loss of an empire.
Seeing in Russia’s Cold War defeat the need to extol the non-Western roots of Russian history and tradition, Putin has fallen back on the same conservative values that emerged in response to the Napoleonic invasion of 1812, frustrating Peter the Great’s modernization efforts.
When the deputy head of the presidential administration, Vyacheslav Volodin, said during a recent Valdai Discussion Club meeting in Sochi that “Putin is Russia and Russia is Putin,” he was expressing a profound Russian reality.
In no other country has the ruler’s persona – from Catherine the Great and Ivan the Terrible to Lenin and Stalin – made such a deep mark on national history.
But Putinism cannot be reduced to sheer lust for power.
Putin knows that Russia’s reemergence on the global stage must be underpinned by a counterpoint to American exceptionalism, a national identity based on a distinct conception of history and distinct ideals.
As Putin declared last year, the Soviet Union’s collapse dealt a “devastating blow” to Russia’s “cultural and spiritual codes,” and subsequent “attempts to civilize Russia from abroad” amounted to “primitive borrowing.”
Instead of expecting a new national ideology to emerge on its own, Russia must pursue and develop its unique identity – with Putin leading the way.
Securing a place for Russia in a new world order is integral to establishing such an identity.
To this end, Putin has maximized the foreign-policy value of Russia’s vast oil and gas reserves, enabling the Kremlin to build partnerships with rising Asian powers, especially China.
If, as some Russian officials have proposed, Russia begins an identity-defining large-scale project to develop its immense territory east of the Ural Mountains, including Siberia and the Far East, it would have a unique opportunity to deepen these connections further.
More broadly, Putin’s defiance of US hegemony could attract support from countries and peoples worldwide that resent American-imposed values and norms.
Indeed, for many international actors, Western notions of tolerance and political correctness – for example, acceptance of “non-traditional lifestyles,” such as homosexuality – are, in Putin’s words, an affront to the world’s “God-given diversity.”
But Putin is not merely preaching values.
The annexation of Crimea and continuing destabilization of Ukraine advance his broader ambition of resurrecting Russia’s cultural and political dominance in Eurasia and much of the former Soviet space.
In Putin’s view, the 1945 Yalta Agreement, which divided Europe into Soviet and Western spheres of influence, did not die; its borders simply moved eastward.
Tellingly, following a discussion of numerous global challenges at the recent Valdai meeting, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov identified a demonstration by ethnic Russians in Chișinău (Kishinev), Moldova’s capital, as the “most important question” to be addressed.
Putin’s Russia is anything but shy when it comes to ethnic unity.
Of course, the West – particularly the US – bears its share of responsibility for the failure to find a diplomatic solution to the current showdown with Russia.
Before a lasting peace can be achieved, the US will need to reflect on the mistakes that characterized its post-Cold War period of hegemony, when its unilateral military adventures and neo-imperial ambitions left it overstretched, highly indebted, and locked in perpetual war.
Without such introspection, the US and its European allies will probably continue to depend on economic sanctions to deter Russian aggression.
But, though this approach could weaken Putin’s legitimacy by limiting his ability to deliver economic prosperity, it could also result in an anti-Western nationalist backlash.
Moreover, as Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov has shown, sanctions can be presented as a blessing, forcing the Kremlin to diversify Russia’s commodities-based economy.
National identities cannot be negotiated away; but diplomacy can dilute their aggressive manifestations.
It is time for Russian and Western leaders to devise a grand bargain for peace in eastern Ukraine, one that goes beyond the Minsk Protocol to address the questions of global security and arms control that have impeded cooperation on issues like Syria’s civil war and Iran’s nuclear program.
Russia does not need to upend the existing global order; it simply needs to find its place.
And the US must let it.
Closer inspection, however, reveals a different Russia.
Much of its wealth reflects the increased value of energy, not productive economic activity.
Russia’s armed forces are able to project little in the way of usable military might.
The country’s population now numbers less than Pakistan’s and is declining by 500,000 people per year, leaving large portions of its vast landmass mostly uninhabited.
Male life expectancy is now less than 60 years, owing to alcoholism, crime, drugs, disease, and a dreadful public health system.
All this adds up to a Russia that, if not quite a Potemkin state, is anything but great.
There are limits to what Russia can accomplish in the world in any positive sense, although its capacity to be a spoiler or create problems is considerable.
Decisions made in Moscow can affect world energy prices, the future of the Iranian and North Korean nuclear programs, and the success of terrorists.
For better and for worse, Russia still matters.
But how much will it matter?
One question concerns political stability.
In order to remain intact and functional, the country needs a political system and a society that persuade talented young people to stay in Russia – and that provides them with the education to develop their talent.
There also must be limits on the power of the central government and the presidency, a degree of regions autonomy, and rule of law – in short, the rudiments of a modern state and democracy.
Alas, Russia is moving more in the opposite direction; political power is becoming more, not less, concentrated.
The economic picture is similarly uncertain.
High energy prices are a boon to Russia’s economy, but, as is often the case in the Middle East and other oil- and gas-rich regions, they can be a burden as well, feeding corruption and discouraging real economic activity.
The challenge for Russia’s leaders is to use its oil wealth to educate Russia’s people and rebuild Russia’s infrastructure, thereby ensuring global competitiveness and employment growth.
Russia also needs a national security strategy to complement its political and economic renewal.
All stick and little carrot has failed to quell Chechen nationalism, and President Vladimir Putin’s similarly heavy-handed attempts to control Russia’s so-called “near abroad” – as in Ukraine during the Orange Revolution – have proven no more successful.
Nor will any posture succeed that seeks to put Russia forward as a geopolitical counterweight to the United States.
Such a strategy might be politically satisfying to some, but Russia lacks the resources to compete with the US and needs good bilateral relations in order to proceed with its own internal transformation.
At the same time, the best way to help bring about a more liberal Russia – one that promises to be more stable at home and more responsible abroad – is by working with it.
The outside world can and should support the strengthening of civil society, independent media, and a true transfer of political power in 2008.
Isolating Russia makes no sense.
Russian membership in the World Trade Organization has the potential to strengthen the rule of law, combat corruption, and give Russia a stake in better relations with the outside world.
Closer ties between Russia and the European Union make sense for similar reasons.
There should also be some understanding for what Russia and the Russian people have gone through over the past two decades.
Losing a country and a special place in the world is the sort of trauma that could lead to the emergence of extreme and potentially violent nationalism.
Russia should be treated as a major power, which means consultations on important global issues.
Its voice should be heard on matters ranging from terrorism and weapons proliferation to global climate change and energy policy.
Next year’s G-8 meeting in Russia provides an opportunity to do all of this and more.
Amid all the attention being devoted to China and the potential for competition or even conflict with the US, it should not be forgotten that Russia’s future hangs in the balance, for history suggests that declining powers can pose as great a challenge to world order as rising ones.
One need only consider Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey at the start of the twentieth century or the former Yugoslavia at its end.
So far, the decline of what was the Soviet Union has proceeded relatively well; Russia, the principal successor state, has avoided all-out civil war and war with its neighbors.
But the challenge of integrating Russia remains.
At best, Russia is a potential partner in the effort to manage globalization’s challenges; at worst, it is a potential problem.
What is certain is that how Russia develops will be a key factor determining the character of this century, no less than the last.
The Russian Threat Runs Out of Fuel
BRUSSELS – For Europe, the defining event of 2014 was Russia’s annexation of Crimea and military intervention in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region.
The Kremlin’s actions directly challenged key principles that have guided Europe for more than six decades, particularly the renunciation of the use of force to alter national borders.
But Russia is in no position to sustain its aggressive foreign policy.
It has often been argued that Russia was reacting to the perceived encroachment on its “near abroad” by the European Union and NATO.
But history suggests a simpler explanation: A decade of steadily rising oil prices had emboldened Russia, leaving it ready to seize any opportunity to deploy its military power.
Indeed, the Soviet Union had a similar experience 40 years ago, when a protracted period of rising oil revenues fueled an increasingly assertive foreign policy, which culminated in the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan.
Oil prices quadrupled following the first oil embargo in 1973, and the discovery of large reserves in the 1970s underpinned a massive increase in Soviet output.
As a result, from 1965 to 1980, the value of Soviet oil production soared by a factor of almost 20.
Burgeoning oil wealth bolstered the regime’s credibility – not least by enabling a significant increase in military spending – and rising economic and military strength gave the Soviet Union’s geriatric leadership a rejuvenated sense of invulnerability.
The invasion of Afghanistan was not merely an improvised response to a local development (a putsch in Kabul); it was also a direct result of this trend.
Putin’s reaction to the Euromaidan demonstrations in Ukraine followed a similar pattern.
In both cases, a seemingly low-cost opportunity was viewed as yielding a large strategic gain – at least in the short run.
Indeed, while the devastating consequences of the Soviet Union’s Afghan adventure are now well known, at the time the invasion was viewed as a major defeat for the West.
The Soviet army’s retreat in 1988 is usually ascribed to the Afghan insurgency, led by Pakistan-trained mujahedeen with support from the United States.
But the decline in oil prices during the 1980s, which cut the value of Soviet output to one-third of its peak level, undoubtedly played a role.
Indeed, it led to a period of extreme economic weakness – a key factor in the Soviet Union’s dissolution just three years after its withdrawal from Afghanistan.
During the 1990s, Russia was too preoccupied with its own post-Soviet political turmoil to object to EU or NATO enlargement to the east.
Nor did it have the wherewithal, as its own production and oil prices continued to decline, hitting a trough of $10 per barrel in 1999-2000.
Russia’s stance changed gradually during the early 2000s, as world oil prices – and Russian output – recovered, reinvigorating the country’s economic base at a time when its leadership was becoming increasingly autocratic.
Only then did Russia start to claim that the US and its European allies had offered some implicit pledge not to expand NATO eastward.
With oil prices steadily rising, the value of Russian oil production reached a new peak, roughly ten times the 1999 level, in 2008; Russia invaded Georgia the same year.
Though prices collapsed during the Great Recession of 2009, they quickly recovered, with the value of Russian output reaching another peak in 2012-2013 – precisely when Russia’s position on the EU-Ukraine association agreement hardened.
Given that the EU and Ukraine had already been negotiating the deal for more than two years, without much reaction from Russia, the EU was blindsided by the Kremlin’s sudden sharp objections.
Clearly, Russia’s attitude toward its near abroad is not quite as erratic as it may seem.
When oil prices rise, Russia expresses its latent resentments more aggressively, often employing its military.
Moreover, at higher prices, the oil industry crowds out other export sectors that support open markets and a less aggressive foreign policy.
The Soviet war in Afghanistan was followed by a long-term decline in oil prices.
The recent price slide – to $50-60 per barrel, halving the value of Russia’s oil production – suggests that history is about to repeat itself.
And oil prices are not Russia’s only problem.
Western sanctions, which seemed to constitute only a pinprick a few months ago, appear to have inflicted serious damage, with the ruble having lost nearly half its value against the US dollar last year.
Though financial markets will calm down when the ruble’s exchange rate settles into its new equilibrium, Russia’s economy will remain weak, forcing the country’s leaders to make tough choices.
Against this background, a stalemate in the Donbas seems more likely than an outright offensive aimed at occupying the remainder of the region and establishing a land corridor to Crimea – the outcome that many in the West initially feared.
President Vladimir Putin’s new Novorossya project simply cannot progress with oil prices at their current level.
To be sure, Russia will continue to challenge Europe.
But no amount of posturing can offset the disintegration of the economy’s material base caused by the new equilibrium in the oil market.
In this sense, the US has come to Europe’s rescue in a different way: Its production of shale oil and gas is likely to play a greater role in keeping Russia at bay than NATO troops on Europe’s eastern borders.
Russia’s Bo-Toxic President Returns
MOSCOW – When a tsar is treated with mockery, rather than regarded with awe, it is time for him to consider retirement, or to prepare for a palace coup.
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, who intends to stage a glorious return to the Kremlin as President in the election scheduled for March next year, should reflect on that choice.
This year began with a vigorous (by Russian standards) Internet petition urging Putin to take the first option.
Then the whole country laughed when, during his customary visit to a patriotic summer camp run by Nashi (a pro-Putin youth movement), he demonstrated his physical prowess by scaling a rock-climbing wall, only to find that he couldn’t climb down.
Now Russians wonder what has happened to their leader’s face.
His new smooth-faced appearance has sparked rumors of Botox, or even plastic surgery.
Vampire jokes abound.
Recently, during a dive in the waters at Krasnodar, in southern Russia, Putin miraculously salvaged two ancient Greek urns.
Russians’ laughter turned Homeric when Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, inexplicably announced that the urns had been placed there to give Putin a sense of importance.
If I didn’t take the incompetence of the Russian state at face value, I might suspect a conspiracy to discredit Putin.
For, make no mistake: Putin has been discredited.
After a recent martial-arts match between an American and a Russian, Putin, a judo enthusiast, stepped into the ring to congratulate the Russian victor, a member of his United Russia party.
The audience screamed wildly, “Putin, go home!” until he did.
Politics, the crowd seemed to say, should be taken out of sports – and Putin out of politics.
Putin thinks that his stunts are essential to governance.
He has kissed dolphins and babies, saved tigers and journalists, and posed bare-chested on horseback and on foot in the Siberian wilderness.
But Putin the performer cannot abide a bad review.
Embarrassed by the judo fiasco, he canceled all of his subsequent unscripted public appearances.
In fact, since that incident, Putin has attended just one event – the Congress of United Russia – where 600 delegates voted unanimously for his nomination as the party’s presidential candidate in 2012.
But the parliamentary elections held on December 4, which gave barely 50% to United Russia (Putin used to be able to guarantee about 70%), had to be fiercely controlled, with an overwhelming police presence.
Observers were harassed and obstructed, and monitoring Web sites were shut down or hacked by the government.
An elections-observing mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe noted that “most parties have expressed a lack of trust in the fairness of the electoral process.”
Putin’s extravagant vanity has severely undermined the strongman image that he has spent the last 12 years building.
After all, narcissistic publicity stunts and facelifts – which worked well for his friend Silvio Berlusconi in Italy (until they didn’t) – don’t inspire fear, or even respect, among Russians, where an iron-fisted ruler is always the preferred choice.
So now Putin’s image as the hard man of politics has been lost forever.
It is difficult to assume a despotic countenance when you can’t move your eyebrows.
Indeed, Russians heckle Putin not because he has turned Russia into an industrial banana republic, where exports of oil and other commodities sustain a quasi-authoritarian state, but because he no longer inhabits his role convincingly.
All the same, the origin of discontent with Putin is irrelevant; the desire for freedom has to start somewhere.
So long as Russians feel empowered to confront the regime, even if only with contempt and laughter, there is hope for change.
And now, with the election results inciting the largest protests since the collapse of the Soviet Union, that hope is growing.
When a tsar loses his image of omnipotence, he eventually loses his grip on authority.
After Putin’s long-running melodrama, the Kremlin’s options for a sequel are quite limited.
Everyone expects that the current president, the puppet Dmitry Medvedev, to switch roles with Putin after the March elections.
But waiting in the wings is former Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin, who could replace Medvedev should Russia need a factotum of sincerity about economic reform.
Kudrin’s reputation for placid competence might just buy Putin some extra time.
But, in Putin’s eyes, this is an unlikely scenario.
The once and future president argues that he has already made Russia stronger, and that, as financial uncertainty grips much of the developed world in 2012, the country has become an island of stability envied by many.
Perhaps, but it is difficult to be a heroic leader and the butt of popular jokes simultaneously.
Putin is often compared to Joseph Stalin, but nowadays, as the 20th anniversary of the Soviet Union’s collapse at the end of 1991 approaches, he looks increasingly like Leonid Brezhnev – the symbol of a political system that is well past its expiry date.
All that is missing are the jowls.
Russia\u0027s Coming Financial Crash
WASHINGTON, DC – Today, the whole world is being hit by a tremendous financial crisis, but Russia is facing a perfect storm.
The Russian stock market is in free fall, plummeting by 60% since May 19, a loss of $900 billion.
And the plunge is accelerating.
As a result, Russia’s economic growth is likely to fall sharply and suddenly.
One problem is that, after a long period of fiscal prudence, Russia’s government has shown extraordinary ineptitude.
Russia has enjoyed average annual economic growth of 7% since 1999.
With huge current-account and budget surpluses, it had accumulated international reserves of $600 billion by July.
Its public debt was almost eliminated.
But the open economy that has bred Russia’s economic success requires the maintenance of sensible policies to succeed.
The initial American financial crisis barely touched Russia, but the global economic slowdown brought about a decline in oil and other commodity prices by more than one-third since July, which was a big blow.
All the other hits, however, have been self-inflicted.
The Russian financial crisis is high drama, best described as a tragedy in five acts.
On July 24, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin initiated the first act by fiercely attacking, without evidence, the timid owner of the giant coal and steel company Mechel for price-gouging and tax evasion.
In three days, Mechel’s shares lost half their value, triggering the Russian stock market’s decline.
Then, on August 8, Putin launched the second act of this Russian tragedy, his long-planned attack on Georgia.
Shockingly, Russia argued that it had the right to attack a country that harbored people to whom it had just issued passports, scaring all countries with Russian minorities.
By recognizing the “independence” of the two occupied territories, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Russia turned the whole world against it.
Russia’s leaders have earned a reputation for being unreliable, quixotic, and unpredictable, but markets like trustworthiness, stability, and predictability.
Not surprisingly, foreign investors no longer favor Putin’s Russia.
Within a week of its attack on Georgia, Russia recorded a capital outflow of $16 billion, which has since increased to $30 billion.
This is a small sum relative to Russia’s currency reserves, but plenty for the underdeveloped banking system, which experienced a severe credit squeeze.
Putin continues to deny that Russia’s financial problems were caused by his war in Georgia, and it took the Central Bank more than a month to provide substantial liquidity injections.
But it was already too late, as the liquidity problem had become a matter of solidity.
Overtly, Russian stock valuations look attractive, but by heaping abuse on foreigners, Putin has scared them away, while Russian investors have no money at hand.
With every statement, Putin erodes Russia’s political risk profile.
As is customary, many Russian businessmen pledged their shares to borrow money for stock purchases.
As the stock market dives, they receive margin calls and are being forced to sell their shares at ever-lower prices, causing the stock market’s downward spiral to accelerate.
In Soviet fashion, the Moscow stock exchanges closed for four days in a row in the week of September 15, because stocks plunged too fast.
By denying the problem, the authorities have aggravated the lack of confidence.
On international financial markets, the war in Georgia has rendered Russian debt and bonds toxic.
Interest rates on Russia’s bonds have risen by 2-3 percentage points, and many Russian creditors no longer have access to international capital markets.
Russia is just about to enter the third act of this tragedy, a banking crisis.
Numerous medium-sized banks, and some large ones, are set to go under in the stock-market turmoil.
Too many big investors can no longer meet their margin calls, while borrowing costs have risen sharply.
The recent appreciation of the dollar adds to their hardship.
In the fourth act, the real estate bubble will burst.
A reasonable guess would be that Moscow’s astronomic real-estate prices will fall by at least two-thirds.
That will exacerbate the banking crisis.
In the fifth act, investment will seize up.
Why continue building when you can neither finance your investment nor sell real estate?
Russian consumers are already scared and will cut their consumption, causing aggregate demand to contract.
In the end, real economic growth will come to a screeching halt, perhaps as early as next year.
Other factors are likely to aggravate the situation.
High-level corruption is so rampant that Russia appears unable to build major public infrastructure projects.
Oil and other commodity prices are likely to fall further, and oil and gas production have already stagnated.
How long Russia can afford such an expensive prime minister?
Russia\u0027s Culture of Contempt
Once again, everyone wants to know, where is Russia heading?
The trial of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the possible bankruptcy of his company Yukos, Russia's biggest company, have incited cries that President Putin is returning the country to the bad old days of dictatorship.
But in assessing where Russia is heading, political and economic analysis are of little help.
It is Russia's social culture that is determining the country's fate.
Russia's political system, indeed, is not what prevents the country from moving forward, and it never has been.
Whether Russians live under monarchy, communism, Yeltsin's cowboy market economy or Putin's supposed dictatorship of law, the result is always the same - the system despises its citizens, eliciting an equal and opposite reaction of derision and distrust.
Russian capitalism hates the consumer as much as Russian communism did.
Russia's people, whether they are waiters or waiting for service, are convinced that they will be ripped off and treated rudely, and so steel themselves with indifference.
Neither the system nor the people are to blame for this state of affairs.
It arises partly from the fact that Russia is an "imitation" culture.
Russia's first rulers were Nordic princes in the 860's, men invited to bring order to the country - even then, or so it seems, Russians didn't trust themselves to rule themselves effectively.
Sometimes, Russian imitation produces works of genius.
After all, Pushkin and Gogol originally grew out of German and French models, although their sheer originality left the mimicry far behind.
But Russia is simply not as good at copying practical things like laws and economic models as it is at transforming cultural impulses into works of art with a Russian soul.
Its practical borrowings are invariably stillborn, mostly because of the country's ingrained culture of contempt.
Consider Moscow, a highly seasoned imitator (though nowhere in the league of St. Petersburg, that baroque Italianate city on the Neva, as an urban mimic).
Moscow nowadays has all the trappings of high-end capitalism: Prada, Fouchon, Rolls Royce.
Its Café des Artistes is as wonderful a French bistro as you will find.
But something is missing in the usual Russian way - proper utensils.
Ask a waiter for a steak knife and you will draw a look that suggests you've asked for a sword.
Some restaurants greet their customers with a guard who brusquely asks what they want, as if they came to buy stamps, not to have dinner.
Of course, the guards know that their job is to ensure that everyone is safe and comfortable, but the Gulag-type notion of what a guard does is too embedded to be removed.
Their real job is to be "against" - and this time, it is the customers they are to be against.
The very existence of other people breeds suspicion in Russian guards, and who is to say that they are completely wrong?
After all, contract killings and random shootings in restaurants are common affairs, and the idea of excessive protection from everyone goes back to Soviet days, when social contempt was cloaked in the guise of public safety.
Small wonder, then, that Russians always cut corners, jump over fences, and never follow a path designated for walking - these paths were built not to make life easier for people, but to control them.
Indeed, fences and barriers in Russia are usually built where there should be a footpath.
But perhaps the authorities are right to want to keep us in line.
Anyone who has ever flown into Russia will know this scene: the moment the captain requests the passengers to remain seated until the plane comes to a complete stop, all the Russians on board will respond by immediately standing up and piling into the aisles as if it's their last chance to get out.
They know in their bones that the system is out to get them, even if the system is represented by a commercial airliner from a foreign country.
The simplest things are complicated, and then destroyed, by this culture of suspicion and contempt.
I once went for lunch to a Swedish-style buffet in Moscow.
The choice of food was great, a sort of post-modern typical Russian kasha: sushi, salad, borsht, meat, and cabbage.
But customers received only a small saucer for this feast, and the principle of the smorgasbord - all you can eat - was jettisoned.
You were allowed to use the buffet only once.
Customers - who know what a smorgasbord is - understandably try to stuff as much food as they can onto the tiny saucer, sushi on top of roast beef.
If you dare to ask for a bigger plate or an extra helping, the waitress gives you that withering Soviet look - you want too much.
Soviet socialism thought its citizens unworthy of any form of service altogether; Russian capitalism doubts that you can control your appetites, so it wants to control them for you.
In the end, there is very little difference.
And so Russia goes on, undertaking revolutionary changes and not changing at all.
Incurable suspicion, mutual fear, ubiquitous contempt - confirmed everyday in large and small ways - are our immutable social condition.
Russia’s Economic Imperialism
Russia’s use of natural gas to exert economic and political pressure on Ukraine has caused grave concern in the West.
But Russia’s pressure on Georgia has been even heavier – and has scarcely been noticed.
In Georgia, as in Ukraine, Russian President Vladimir Putin seeks to implement the doctrine of a “liberal empire” put forward in October 2003 by Anatoli Chubais, the chairman of United Energy System (RAO UES), Russia’s energy monopoly.
According to Chubais, Russia will never find a place in either NATO or the European Union, so it must create an alternativeto both, a new empire of its own.
It can do this by using its huge and rich public-private monopolies to take over the key industries and economic institutions of former Soviet republics, thereby laying the groundwork for political domination.
The resulting empire will be liberal, according to Chubais’s definition, because it can be built with money rather than tanks.
Russia’s first step in fulfilling this plan in the South Caucasus was directed against Armenia, its strategic partner in the region.
Seizing on a $93 million debt that Armenia owed to Russia, the Putin administration demanded payment in either cash or equity in Armenia’s major industries.
Cash-strapped Armenia had no alternative but to hand over the shares, which it did in a 2002 treaty candidly titled “Possessions in Exchange for Debt” – a reminder of the infamous “debt-for-equity” swaps of the Yeltsin years (another Chubais invention), which spawned Russia’s oligarchs.
Russia’s second step in rebuilding its empire in the Caucasus is to unite itself and Armenia in a single economic zone.
Because Georgia stands directly in the geographical path to realizing this goal, Russia had to deal with it first.
In the 1990’s, it used crude political pressure to bring Georgia into line, but it shifted to economic leverage in 2003.
When US-based AES Silk Road failed to transform Georgia’s energy system, Chubais’s RAO UES bought AES’s holdings and other assets that amounted to 75% of the country’s electricity network.
Then came Georgia’s “Rose Revolution.”
Many state-owned firms were privatized for ten times the sums yielded in asset sales under the previous government of Edvard Shevardnadze.
But an utter lack of transparency allowed Russian companies, and their subsidiaries registered in third countries, to snap up most of the new offerings.
Typical was the Russian holding company Promyslennye investory (Industrial Investors), which managed to get a major gold mine and then half of a plant producing gold alloys.
Russia’s main foreign policy instrument in Georgia is Gazprom, the state-controlled gas monopoly.
Gazprom’s aim is to control not only the gas industry in Georgia, but also the only pipeline that feeds Russian gas to both Georgia and Armenia.
Had the US not intervened in 2005 with $49.5 million to rehabilitate the pipeline, it would have ended up in Gazprom’s hands.
Even then, pressure from Moscow may result in joint Russian-Georgian control of the pipeline, if not its outright sale to Gazprom.
The Georgian government, without clear support from the West, may yet agree to such a deal, something that Moldova, which saw its gas cut off on January 1st, has just done.
Gazprom is not the only state entity carrying out Russian policy in the South Caucasus.
In 2004, Russia’s state-owned Vneshtorgbank acquired a controlling stake in Armenia’s Armsberbank.
The following year, Vneshtorgbank purchased a controlling stake in the privatized United Georgian Bank, Georgia’s third largest.
In effect, Vneshtorgbank renationalized United Georgian Bank, but the new owner was the Russian state.
Recently, Chubais’s RAO UES has had the lead role in integrating Georgia into Russia’s “liberal empire.”
When the Georgian authorities announced plans to privatize the Inguri Power Plant and renew construction of the long-stalled Khudoni Power Plant, slated to become Georgia’s largest, RAO UES immediately began staking out a dominant role for itself in both projects.
The combination of massive pressure from the Russian side and silence from the West could leave Georgia’s entire power system – both gas and electricity – in Russian hands.
Russia’s scheme to rehabilitate the rail line from its territory into the secessionist Georgian province of Abkhazia similarly mixes economics with neo-imperial aspirations.
Even though it is focused on land that the United Nations recognizes as part of Georgia, the main beneficiaries of this project would be Russia and Armenia.
If the international community allows this scheme to go forward, it will have endorsed Russia’s effort to separate Abkhazia from Georgia.
Parallel with this, Russia and Armenia are planning a new rail link to Iran.
Besides its obvious benefits to Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s retrograde government, this will deftly weaken the South Caucasus’s links with the West, which the US and Europe have spent a decade fostering.
Thus, Russia’s effort to entrap Georgia and its neighbors in the nets of its new “liberal empire” is part of a well coordinated attempt to reorient the South Caucasus as a whole towards the anti-Western coalition of Russia and Iran.
Western countries, and the US in particular, must provide firm backing and support to the South Caucasus to prevent Russia from realizing its destabilizing and dangerous neo-imperial dream.
Russia’s Eternal Inflation
In eternal Russia, nothing changes when it comes to monetary management.
Year after year, the Russian Central Bank (RCB) blames the weather, the poor harvest, or other non-monetary factors for its feeble performance in lowering the inflation rate.
Unlike many emerging-market and transition economies in the 1990’s, Russia did not abandon a fixed-exchange rate anchor in favor of an inflation-targeting regime as its guide to monetary-policy.
As a result, the period since the financial crisis of 1998 has generated serious problems for monetary and exchange-rate policies.
Faced with a balance-of-payments surplus – largely thanks to high oil prices – the RCB’s 2005 Monetary Program fudges: reducing inflation is a priority, but so is exchange-rate targeting in order to support growth.
This “just-do-it” approach works fine in the United States, for example, where the Federal Reserve has established its anti-inflationary credibility.
But the RCB’s track record since 1992 has done little to stabilize inflation expectations and to persuade businessmen, investors, government officials and ordinary Russians that it is genuinely focused on reining in price growth.
During the early transition years, the lack of an effective monetary-policy framework reflected the challenge of establishing new institutions and regulations, as well as the difficulty of overcoming the legacy of central planning, under which budget and credit financing were indistinguishable.
Sometimes the RCB acted as the government’s banker, providing liquidity without considering the financial markets; at other times, it focused on the financial markets, providing liquidity to banks.
In both cases, there is no link between inflation and interest rates.
To be sure, the muted impact of inflation on interest rates is not surprising in transition economies, where the mechanisms of monetary-policy transmission and financial intermediation took long periods to put in place and still need reform and regulation.
It is inevitably a long road from a starting point where credits are channeled to state-owned enterprises through state-owned banks to an economic environment in which interest rates are a proper indicator of monetary policy.
Moreover, Russia’s default and devaluation in 1998 undermined the progress that was accomplished – starting in 1996 – in the banking sector and the capital markets in general.
But that excuse has worn thin.
In recent years, slowing the pace of real exchange-rate appreciation to shelter domestic producers and employment from import competition seems to have gained clear precedence over disinflation.
Of course, many central banks around the world pursue both price stability and growth.
But in Russia, there is no trade-off between the two, at least not using the exchange rate.
As the IMF’s latest annual report on Russia’s economy points out, if the RCB continues to restrain the ruble’s appreciation for the sake of growth, the result will merely be higher inflation, which implies that the ruble would still strengthen in real terms, thereby damaging growth.
Russian macroeconomic performance has greatly improved since the 1998 financial crisis, and this success can be attributed in part to improved monetary policy.
But the RCB’s lack of resolve in adopting a framework where low inflation is clearly stated as the priority now threatens to undermine what has been achieved.
As a starting point, the RCB should be charged with projecting inflation, formulate policies to stabilize prices, and either implement those polices or explain why it cannot and who could do so.
The correct answer to the latter question – as the IMF suggests – may be the Ministry of Finance: the only sure way for Russia to reduce inflation and sustain growth is to maintain a sound fiscal policy.
The reality is the opposite.
Rather than using the oil windfall to pay for long-overdue reforms in health care, education, and utilities – and thus helping to ensure the macroeconomic stability needed to sustain rapid long-term growth – President Vladimir Putin has chosen large spending increases for public wages and pensions.
As a result, Putin’s Russia appears headed for the Latin American model of self-inflicted stagflation.
Russia’s Fascist Temptation
Today’s Kremlin thinks that democracy was being built too quickly in Russia.
The government does not say that it is against democracy, only that it is untimely and needs to be delayed – a logic that manifests itself in most official decisions.
Thus, at the beginning of the current decade, the democratic system of political checks and balances that had been created in the 1990’s began to be dismantled.
Before 2000, there was an influential, independent press and a parliament loyal to the president, but still independent.
The Federation Council (the upper chamber of the Duma), too, was generally loyal to the president, as were regional governors, while remaining independent.
There were also influential entrepreneurs and business organizations that were actively involved in the decision-making process.
As a result of the disappearance of these checks and balances, the quality of the government’s decisions has fallen sharply.
The notorious law on monetization of social benefits, which transforms in-kind benefits into cash, is a typical example.
Despite the fundamental soundness of the step, it was poorly prepared and implemented, and the government seriously miscalculated its effects on the national budget.
Moreover, it generated mass social protests, which the government evidently had not envisaged.
Never would the law in its current form have passed through the old State Duma.
MP’s would have read and analyzed it attentively, asked ministers many questions, and, if necessary, insisted on re-writing various tables presented in the draft.
They would have understood that the calculations provided were at complete odds with reality, and they would have considered what to do about it.
If there is no independent press able to caution against mistakes and a parliament that can do the same, then the mistakes will eventually manifest themselves on the streets.
Democracy was not invented by fools.
Experience tells us that if you don’t let the steam out of a pot, the pot will explode.
But when we stifle, step by step, all that remains of a free press, when even small television channels that provide uncensored information seem dangerous, we are keeping the lid firmly on the pot.
I would say that this is worse than a crime.
It’s a mistake.
As someone with some background in politics, I understand the strategy of today’s government: create an extreme threat, first and foremost through shadowy associations with fascist organizations, and then say to citizens, “You can’t deal with this threat on your own, so you should trust us to figure out what to do with it.”
The message is then constantly reinforced by the view of the world formed by the media.
I understand the reality of the fascist threat, but I also understand what the government wants us to take from it.
I firmly believe that we should not allow ourselves to participate in these games, nor that we should believe that Russia’s fascist organizations don’t have anything to do with the government.
I think that when the authorities conceive such strategies, they assume that the outcome will be manageable.
In reality, this is not always the case.
When you open a Pandora’s box, nobody can predict what will happen.
It is very risky to create a dangerous situation for political ends, because, more often than not, it is likely that the situation will become uncontrollable.
Indeed, the threat of fascism is real.
But the more people who don’t accept the fascist alternative are mobilized politically, the smaller the threat will be.
The most important question of the day is not the government’s perspective, that is, its desire to instill fear and eliminate checks and balances on its power.
What matters are the actions of those who don’t want fascism in Russia and instead simply want Russia to be free.
There are many such people, tens of millions, but they are not always politically engaged and united.
The good news, then, is that there are far fewer people who seriously want to see a fascist regime in Russia than the government claims.
We should not lose heart, but we do need to be politically active and united.
After all, the Soviet Union was a totalitarian state that could rely on a powerful and ubiquitous secret police.
And look how it ended up.
Russia’s Fragile Power
Russia sent an impressive delegation to the World Economic Forum at Davos this year.
After strong representation under Boris Yeltsin, the level of Russia’s participants had slipped since Vladimir Putin became president.
This year, however, the Russians sent their “A” team, and a well-attended session focused on “Russia’s More Muscular Foreign Policy.”
With higher energy prices, many Russian officials are enjoying their renewed power.
I was asked to comment on United States-Russian relations at a dinner with top officials from the government and Gazprom, the giant energy company.
I said that America and Europe had too many illusions about democracy in Russia in the 1990’s, and were now going through a stage of disillusionment.
There is concern about Russia’s future, how it will use its newfound power, and how the West should respond.
One view is that Russian politics is like a pendulum.
It had swung too far in the direction of chaos under Yeltsin, and has now swung too far in the direction of order and state control under Putin.
It has not swung back to Stalinism; Czarism might be a better historical metaphor.
Observers debate whether it will eventually reach a new equilibrium.
The optimistic view is that property rights are becoming more deeply anchored than they were in the past, and that Russia’s future will depend on how fast a middle class with a stake in law-based government can be created.
But others are not so sure.
Sometimes pendulums continue to oscillate wildly unless there is some friction to slow them down, and sometimes they get stuck.
Pessimistic observers foresee a continual decline of freedom rather than a liberal equilibrium.
Faced with this uncertainty about the future of liberal democracy in Russia, how should western countries respond?
This question is particularly difficult for the Bush administration, which is torn between the president’s early endorsement of Putin and his pro-democracy agenda.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice declared in 2005 that “the fundamental character of regimes matters more today than the international distribution of power,” and Senator John McCain, a US presidential candidate, has urged removing Russia from the Group of Eight advanced countries.
Yet, in addition to its democracy agenda, the West has a realist agenda based on very tangible interests.
The West needs Russian cooperation in dealing with issues like nuclear proliferation in Iran and North Korea, the control of nuclear materials and weapons, combating the current wave of radical Islamist terrorism, and energy production and security.
Moreover, Russia possesses talented people, technology, and resources that can help to meet new challenges like climate change or the spread of pandemic diseases.
There may not be as much conflict between these two agendas as first appears.
If the West were to turn its back on Russia, such isolation would reinforce the xenophobic and statist tendencies present in Russian political culture and make the liberal cause more difficult.
A better approach would be to look to the long run, use the soft power of attraction, expand exchanges and contacts with Russia’s new generation, support its participation in the World Trade Organization and other market-oriented institutions, and address deficiencies with specific criticisms rather than general harangues or isolation.
In any case, the sources of political change in Russia will remain largely rooted in Russia, and Western influence will inevitably be limited.
But advocating engagement over isolation should not prevent friendly criticism, and in Davos I offered four reasons why Russia will not remain a major power in 2020 unless it changes its current behavior and policies.
First, Russia is failing to diversify its economy rapidly enough.
Oil is a mixed blessing.
Riding on record-high energy prices and raw material exports, in January 2007 Russia became the world’s tenth-largest economy.
But energy exports finance about 30% of a government budget that is based on forecasts that oil remains at $61 per barrel.
Russian industrial exports primarily consist of armaments, with advanced aircraft accounting for more than half of sales.
That leaves Russia vulnerable.
A related problem is that Russia lacks a rule of law that protects and encourages entrepreneurs.
These are precisely the people needed to help foster a vibrant middle class – the bedrock of a stable democratic market economy.
Instead, corruption is rampant.
Moreover, Russia’s demographic crisis continues, sustained by poor public health and inadequate investment in a social safety net.
Most demographers expect Russia’s population to shrink significantly over the coming decades.
Adult male mortality is much higher than in the rest of Europe, and it has not been improving.
Finally, while one can understand a former superpower’s temptation to seize its opportunity to return to a muscular foreign policy, Russia’s bullying in the energy area is destroying trust and undercutting Russia’s soft power in other countries.
Both Russia’s neighbors and Western Europe have become more wary of depending upon Russia.
Most Russian participants at the Davos dinner seemed to ignore these criticisms, but it was interesting to hear one important official admit that reform might progress faster if oil prices dropped somewhat, and another accept the point that criticism should be welcomed as long as it is offered in a friendly spirit.
The mere fact that high-level Russians reappeared in Davos to defend themselves may be a small but healthy sign.
Russia’s Future and the West
Russia is again seeking a role as a global power and is therefore flexing its muscles.
Signs of change in Russian foreign policy have been mounting ever since President Vladimir Putin delivered a confrontational speech in Munich last February.
High oil and gas prices, America’s self-inflicted global weakening due to its misadventure in Iraq, and the rise of China and India obviously have prompted Moscow to change its foreign policy.
Yet none of this amounts to a fundamental change in Russia’s strategy, because Russia continues to adhere to its fundamental decision, made in the early 1990’s, to open itself to the West.
Still, the style of Russian politics has changed from cooperation to confrontation.
And, as history has shown, a change of style in foreign policy may quickly lead to a change in strategy.
Currently, Russia is undergoing a restoration.
Such periods always follow revolutions and times of far-reaching change.
The power of the center is being restored, following its partial disintegration after the end of the Soviet Union.
But, ever since the sixteenth century, the center has played the main role in shaping Russian history, and now looks to be no different.
The restoration of central authority has been going on for some time.
Indeed, today the center almost completely dictates Russian internal politics and economics, though not within a totalitarian or autocratic framework, but in a democratic and market-based fashion.
Democracy has, of course, degenerated into what is sometimes called “managed democracy.”
Theoretically, there remain different parties, elections, a pluralistic society, an independent judiciary, and a market economy.
But in practice, the entire system is subject to control by the president.
The people will still be allowed to vote for the president, but the real decision about who he will be will have been made beforehand.
Even if its annual GDP approximates that of Italy, Russia still is a global power and too important to isolate, or even forget about.
It retains enormous strategic weight.
Russia’s future will be determined by whether it is successful in comprehensively modernizing its economy, which today is largely based on exports of oil, gas, and other natural resources.
If Russia remains dependent on a natural-resource economy, it will again become a colossus with feet of clay.
Indeed, it will not be nearly as powerful as the old Soviet Union.
Only if Russia succeeds in productively reinvesting the gains from its petro-economy will it achieve sustainable modernization.
But this also will require successful political modernization, which means nothing less than constraining the power of the center.
The most important aspect of this will be to secure real judicial independence.
Moreover, Russia needs a system of checks and balances compatible with its own culture and tradition, because this, together with the rule of law, is an indispensable precondition of a functioning democracy.
Finally, Russia will need to build a functioning party system, capable of sustaining Russian democracy.
Considering the country’s vast size, a two-party system seems to be the most appropriate.
All these transformations will take time, and they will not come easily or be free of conflict.
So, for the foreseeable future, the West will have to deal with a Russia that yearns for its lost imperial power and shapes its foreign policy to this end.
In international politics, one side’s strength often reflects the other side’s weakness.
The weakness of the US and Europe today is an open invitation for Russia to return to its old imperial politics.
This development is anything but safe, particularly for Europe.
Europe thus has a strategic interest in Russia’s successful modernization and in good bilateral relations.
Above all, the European Union and its member states cannot allow Russia to recapture its imperial spheres of influence without severely damaging its own central interests.
It is for this reason that securing the independence of Ukraine is so important, as is assuring Turkey’s European orientation.
So, while Russia’s modernization and democratization are in Europe’s interest, its return to an imperial foreign policy and barely veiled authoritarianism at home is not.
Most Russians look westward.
In the next few years, Russia will offer Europe a great opportunity for closer cooperation, but it will also pose a risk of increased intrusion in European affairs.
The right responses to these opportunities and risks require a united, strong Europe.
Indeed, a strong and united Europe will also make an important contribution to Russia’s sustainable modernization.
A weak and divided Europe will tempt Russia to pursue dangerous paths into the future.
Russia’s Illiberal “Liberal Empire”
Across the West, many people are questioning whether Russia will continue using natural gas as a means of putting economic and political pressure on Ukraine, Georgia, and other countries in what the Kremlin regards as its “near abroad.”
Using the “energy weapon,” however, is not just a tactic: it is at the heart of the prevailing doctrine guiding Russian foreign policy.
Russia’s policy toward the post-Soviet countries is based on the doctrine of a “liberal empire,” according to which Russia’s major government-owned and private companies should assume control of key economic entities across the territories of the former Soviet republics by acquiring their assets.
In this context, the word “liberal” should be understood to suggest that the empire of the “new Russian dream” should be built by purely economic means, excluding all forcible action against other nations.
Naturally, the key role in this model is given to the supply of energy to the post-Soviet countries.
In particular, the Russian utility giant Gazprom uses increases in gas prices as a means to punish “disobedient” neighbors.
Ukraine was punished in this way for its eagerness to integrate with the West following the Orange Revolution.
However, after the return of the pro-Russian Victor Yanukovych to the position of Ukrainian prime minister, the country’s pro-Western orientation has been significantly weakened.
So it should be no surprise that Ukraine under Yanukovych has faced no further problems with the supply of Russian gas.
But Georgia remains a major Kremlin-Gazprom target.
Russia’s attempt to drag Georgia into its imperial net started in the summer of 2003, when the Russian power monopoly United Energy System took control of 75% of Georgia’s electricity network.
After the Rose Revolution of November 2003, Russian companies turned out to be the most avid purchasers of Georgian enterprises and their assets.
The first significant obstacle in the way of Russia’s designs on Georgia was intervention by the US, which demanded that the Georgian government drop negotiations with Gazprom and banned Georgia from selling the gas pipeline that connects Russia and Armenia through Georgian territory.
Russia punished Georgia almost immediately, banning the import of Georgian wines and mineral waters – both of which are key export goods.
As Georgia’s prospects of joining NATO seemed to increase, Russian actions became more illiberal.
Ethnic Georgians living in Russia, including those who are Russian citizens, became targets of persecution.
Russia’s actions are aimed at fomenting an anti-government backlash in Georgia, thereby paving the way for pro-Russian political forces to come to power.
But the illiberalism inherent in Russian imperialism is not limited to recent behavior, and, more disturbingly, it extends to the question of Georgia’s territorial integrity, as Russian troops continue to prop up secessionist regions.
By provoking ethnic conflicts in the territories of former Soviet republics, Moscow hopes to keep them under its control and influence.
Ironically, the Russian troops deployed in the renegade Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have been accorded the status of “peacekeepers.”
But they are really illegal occupiers, as Russia’s decision to give Russian passports to these regions’ residents attests.
Now Russia is threatening to recognize the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia if the West recognizes the Serbian province of Kosovo as an independent nation.
To the extent that most of the residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have already been given Russian citizenship, the recognition of those two regions’ sovereignty would be entirely fictitious and, in fact, an interim measure on the way to their full annexation by Russia.
To strengthen Russia’s political influence over Georgia’s separatist regions, Gazprom, without taking the trouble to ask for permission from Georgia’s democratically elected leaders, has begun constructing a gas pipeline connecting Russia and South Ossetia directly.
Although there was no interruption of gas supply from Tbilisi to South Ossetia, this step is necessary for the Kremlin to ensure even greater integration of this Georgian region into Russia’s economic system.
With Gazprom having already doubled gas tariffs for Georgia, the energy noose is tightening.
But, thanks to gas supplies from neighboring Azerbaijan, Georgia has not yet been strangled.
A revived Russian empire, whether it is constructed by force or through economic coercion, is not in anyone’s interests.
Reigning in Russia’s illiberal “liberal empire” is the central question of European security today.
Russia\u0027s Incompetent War on Terror
In response to the recent wave of terrorist attacks, Vladimir Putin has demanded that even more power be vested in him.
As leading Russian military expert Alexander Golts argues, the problem in Russia is not a lack of central power, but of power exercised incompetently and without individual initiative.
The slaughter by terrorists of hundreds of Russian children in Beslan was final proof - if more was needed - of the utter incompetence of Russia's military and security services.
In Beslan, camouflaged men representing four ministries fussed uselessly, with no clear leader or goals, losing precious minutes when the violence erupted.
Meanwhile, Nikolai Patrushev, the director of the Federal Security Service (FSB, the former KGB) and Rashid Nurgaliev, the head of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), both sent to Beslan by President Vladimir Putin, were invisible as the tragedy unfolded.
So once again Russians must face how ineffective their military is.
Indeed, none of Russia's power structures, including the military, the FSB, and the MVD, are capable of performing effective anti-terrorist operations.
Most Russians reached this conclusion long before the Beslan attack.
In 2002, after terrorists took 800 theatergoers hostage, Putin ordered that an anti-terrorist component be added to Russia's military strategic plan.
Some military analysts saw this as the beginning, at long last, of serious reforms, as the army was capable only of executing military operations in Russia's traditional way, i.e., using overwhelming force, as in WWII.
Russia's traditional army cannot fight terrorists effectively because it disdains the ability of soldiers to work in small groups, and does not encourage individual initiative on the part of officers.