Developing countries have lagged behind in this process, but, with the common threat of global warming, there is now growing pressure to adopt conservation policies.
Africa's mineral-rich countries must exploit their abundant natural resources.
They must use coal to advance their economic development.
Failure to do so would be a missed opportunity at a time when African countries must avail themselves of all available resources for poverty reduction.
Africa’s Immunity
ACCRA – The United States suffers rising job losses.
Britain nationalizes its banks.
Once high-flying small economies like Ireland, Hungary, and Iceland break down.
Even robust China and India are experiencing slower growth, curtailed ambitions, and broken dreams.
Yet, in sub-Saharan Africa, there are few hints of the global financial crisis that is consuming the capitalist world.
In fashionable African cities, residential home prices remain stratospheric.
A typical Western-style house in Kampala or Accra, for example, now costs an astonishing two to three times the price of a comparable home in, say, Cleveland or other cities in the American heartland.
While home prices are crashing from Madrid to Dublin and Miami to Los Angeles, African prices remain near or at record-high levels.
African banks, meanwhile, are rock-solid compared to their debt-heavy counterparts in the US and Europe.
While international bankers went bust by making legions of bad loans, African bankers stuck to earning profits the old-fashioned way: paying very little to depositors, and earning a big “spread” by buying guaranteed government debt, which yielded healthy returns.
Even government deficit spending – long the bane of Africa – seems positively puny compared to the massive debts that the US and some European countries face.
The new Obama administration is proposing spending plans that would create a record US deficit of more than one trillion dollars – and this coming on top of the outgoing Bush administration’s record deficit.
And yet there are good reasons to believe that it is just a matter of time before Africa and its peoples experience the ill effects of the global crisis.
From Ghana to Kenya, governments are having increased difficulty in raising money for infrastructure projects and selling official debt.
Foreign investment in sub-Saharan Africa, which reached record levels in recent years, is retreating, which is evidence of investor caution, not any underlying lack of optimism about the region.
And exports of raw materials to China, India, Europe, and the US – a key factor in Africa’s recent growth surge – may suffer simply because the global slowdown means less consumption everywhere.
All of these factors suggest that an African financial bust is possible.
Popular equity investments, such as shares in Safaricom, are already trading at unexpectedly low levels.
If real estate prices were to fall dramatically, a chain reaction could occur, taking down big and small investors alike, and over time causing wide suffering to ordinary Africans.
Even assuming stability in real estate prices, the global crisis surely will cause a fall in remittances by Africans working good jobs in Europe, the US, Canada, Australia, and the Middle East.
Remittances are already believed to be falling, which makes sense: immigrants in rich countries are and will be disproportionately hurt by slowing economic activity.
Immigration itself may even slow dramatically, depending on the length and depth of the economic slowdown.
Fewer Africans working in rich countries will automatically translate into less money circulating in African countries.
The decline in remittances, however, cuts both ways.
Remittances have long spurred inflation in many parts of Africa.
A Ugandan doctor working in Norway, for instance, cares little about the cost of a beer in Kampala.
He is also willing – and able – to pay more than a local doctor for services and, of course, a home in Uganda.
Fewer remittances flowing into Uganda could mean less economic activity – or simply lower prices.
The financial meltdown in the US, which incubated the global crisis, is either coming under control or threatening to mutate into a new, more virulent form that could destroy not only America’s paper economy of trading and brokering, but also its real economy of goods and services.
President Barack Obama, acting as if the latter scenario remains likely, is betting on large-scale government spending to prop up the real economy.
If his administration succeeds, the chances that Africa will remain relatively unscathed will grow.
Even if Obama fails, however, Africans should escape the worst of the global crisis, for both good reasons and bad.
The good reasons have to do with African self-reliance and a growing awareness among scholars and policymakers that trade within the region – especially between urban and rural Africa – will ultimately deliver enormous benefits.
Another factor working in Africa’s favor is its private companies’ and consumers’ low dependence on borrowed money.
People tend to pay cash for goods and services, however costly.
In the US, loans for cars and homes – loans that now aren’t being paid back – are the major factor behind the financial crisis.
In Africa, very few people borrow money for such purchases.
Africa’s cash-based economy has in the past constrained development.
After all, by allowing people to spend more than they have, borrowed money can fuel growth.
But today, Africa’s pay-as-you-go practices are a powerful defense against financial contagion.
Another way of looking at Africa’s paradoxical economic position is to admit that the region’s historical marginalization within the international financial system – so costly in times of global plenty – is proving to be an unexpected benefit when the wealthiest of the world are sick unto death.
Menjamin Keberlanjutan Pertumbuhan di Afrika
LAGOS – Pertumbuhan di Afrika terancam melemah.
Setelah bertahun-tahun benua ini memperoleh rata-rata pertumbuhan ekonomi tahunan sebanyak 5%, ketidakpastian global, merosotnya harga komoditas, dan kondisi eksternal yang sulit mulai mengancam kemajuan selama beberapa dekade yang sangat dibutuhkan di Afrika.
Menjamin kesejahteraan dan penghidupan penduduk di benua tidak mudah tapi banyak tindakan yang bisa diambil pembuat kebijakan untuk memulihkan pembangunan di Afrika.
Pertama dan terpenting, pembuat kebijakan harus menjamin adanya dana yang diperlukan untuk pembangunan berkelanjutan di tengah situasi global yang tidak menentu.
Bank Dunia memperkirakan Afrika membutuhkan setidaknya $93 miliar per tahun untuk membiayai kebutuhan infrastrukturnya saja.
Infrastruktur ramah iklim dan berkelanjutan memerlukan biaya lebih besar.
Selama pertumbuhan global masih lemah, penduduk Afrika tidak bisa tergantung pada negara-negara maju untuk sepenuhnya memenuhi komitmen mereka dalam membantu Afrika mewujudkan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDGs).
Afrika harus segera mengembangkan sumber dayanya sendiri, dimulai dengan melipatgandakan pendapatan dari pajak.
Di Afrika Sub-Sahara, pendapatan yang berasal dari pajak hanya menyumbangkan kurang dari seperlima PDB, dibandingkan di negara-negara OECD yang rasionya sepertiga PDB.
Hal ini berarti banyak ruang perbaikan.
Sejak tahun 1990 hingga 2004, misalnya, Ghana mengubah sistem pajak dan menambah pendapatan dari 11% menjadi 22% PDB-nya.
Tentu keberhasilan ini tidak mudah; di Nigeria kami melihat adanya peluang meningkatkan penerimaan pajak non-minyak namun ini sulit diraih.
Sumber daya lain bagi kawasan adalah aset dana pensiun sekitar $380 miliar yang saat ini dikelola oleh 10 negara Afrika saja.
Pembuat kebijakan harus lebih mengoptimalkan penggunaan dana ini.
Di saat yang sama, negara-negara Afrika perlu mencari cara untuk diversifikasi ekonomi.
Diversifikasi ini membutuhkan adanya investasi di masa depan dalam bentuk pendidikan dan infrastruktur yang solid, termasuk telekomunikasi, listrik, pembangunan jalan, kereta api, dan air.
Terdapat beberapa model yang bisa diteladani: Dubai, Singapura, Thailand, Malaysia, Meksiko, Indonesia, dan Korea Selatan adalah contoh yang dikagumi negara-negara Afrika sebagai negara yang berhasil melakukan transformasi.
Dubai, misalnya, sejak tiga tahun lalu mulai menyiapkan masa depan tanpa penerimaan minyak.
Pemerintah menerapkan transformasi bertahap menuju perekonomian sektor jasa, membangun infrastruktur dan insentif yang diperlukan untuk mengembangkan jasa keuangan, pariwisata, pelayanan medis, real estate, media, seni, dan budaya.
Korea Selatan dan Singapura, kedua negara dengan sumber daya alam yang terbatas, juga mengilhami kita.
Rahasia di balik kesuksesan negara-negara ini adalah pemimpin yang fokus dan tidak kenal lelah, baik itu diktator baik hati (benevolent) atau politisi yang dipilih secara demokratis yang memiliki visi bersama tentang ekonomi yang broad-based.
Afrika Sub-Sahara memiliki potensi pembangunan terdiversifikasi yang bahkan tidak dimiliki negara-negara pelopor: industri pertanian dan agroindustri yang bernilai tambah, pemrosesan sumber daya mineral, kompleks petrokimia, manufaktur barang konsumsi dan tahan lama, pariwisata dan hiburan, serta sektor teknologi informasi yang berkembang.
Seiring dengan diterapkannya langkah-langkah diversifikasi, pembuat kebijakan harus memastikan bahwa pertumbuhan ekonomi akan menciptakan lapangan kerja.
Sayangnya, tujuan ini tidak selalu berhasil diwujudkan.
Sebagian besar pertumbuhan yang dicapai akhir-akhir ini hanya menguntungkan segelintir orang sementara mayoritas masih tertinggal – terutama pemuda dan perempuan.
Sejak tahun 2006 hingga 2013, ketimpangan meluas di sejumlah negara besar di Afrika, termasuk Afrika Selatan, Nigeria, Ghana, Tanzania, dan Rwanda.
Ini adalah sejumlah tantangan yang mulai dipecahkan di Nigeria ketika saya menjabat sebagai menteri keuangan.
Kami tahu bahwa kita harus lebih dari sekedar mempertahankan pertumbuhan, tapi juga meningkatkan kualitas pertumbuhan tersebut.
Dengan demikian, pembuat kebijakan harus memastikan agar pertumbuhan disalurkan ke sektor-sektor yang akan menghasilkan lapangan kerja, seperrti pertanian, manufaktur, dan jasa.
Pembuat kebijakan harus mendistribusikan ulang pendapatan dan menguatkan jaring pengaman sosial agar bisa lebih melindungi kelompok terbawah.
Mencocokkan keterampilan dengan kesempatan kerja juga sangat penting.
Sekitar 70% penduduk Afrika berusia di bawah 30 tahun dan di benua ini terdapat setengah anak-anak usia sekolah di seluruh dunia yang kehilangan kesempatan belajar.
Mengajarkan keterampilan dasar membaca, menulis, dan teknologi bagi anak-anak, serta pelatihan kejuruan, teknis, dan kewirausahaan harus menjadi prioritas utama.
Sistem pelayanan kesehatan yang lemah juga harus diperkuat guna mengatasi penyakit endemik yang menyerang produktivitas, seperti malaria, serta meningkatkan kesiapan menghadapi wabah atau epidemi yang mematikan.
Memang betul risikonya tinggi.
Bank Dunia memperkirakan wabah ebola melemahkan perekonomian Sierra Leone, Guinea, dan Liberia hingga 16%.
Seiring dengan ekonomi dunia yang mulai ramai, negara-negara Afrika harus mengembangkan perdagangan dengan sesama negara di kawasan Afrika.
Pada tahun 2013, barang dan jasa dari Afrika hanya menyumbangkan 16% perdagangan di dalam kawasan dan hanya 3% perdagangan dunia.
Salah satu permasalahannya adalah mayoritas negara-negara Afrika memproduksi komoditas yang sama dan menjualnya dengan sedikit nilai tambah.
Pembuat kebijakan harus mendorong spesialisasi; pembedaan barang dan jasa akan menciptakan nilai tambah dan meningkatkan volume perdagangan.
Proyek jalur kereta api Rift Valley, yang pada akhirnya akan menghubungkan Mombassa di pesisir Kenya ke Kampala di Uganda, merupakan contoh bagus yang menunjukkan manfaat yang bisa diperoleh dari investasi di bidang transportasi.
Bank Pembangunan Afrika memperkirakan proyek ini akan melipatgandakan volume perdagangan antar kedua negara sekaligus mengurangi biaya marginal sebanyak 30%.
Bersamaan dengan investasi ini, pembuat kebijakan tidak boleh lupa bahwa sebagian besar pertumbuhan di Afrika baru-baru ini dimungkinkan berkat kebijakan-kebijakan makro ekonomi yang baik dan pengelolaan ekonomi yang solid.
Perluasan pertumbuhan di benua Afrika mengharuskan adanya penguatan pokok-pokok perekonomian kawasan.
Ini berarti memastikan harga-harga dalam perekonomian diberlakukan dengan benar, dimulai dengan nilai tukar.
Beberapa negara mungkin memerlukan batasan-batasan sementara untuk meredam aliran modal keluar, tapi pembuat kebijakan harus mengupayakan nilai tukar berdasarkan pasar dan rencana yang kuat untuk mengendalikan inflasi, utang, cadangan devisa, neraca transaksi berjalan, dan cadangan fiskal.
Afrika memiliki potensi yang luar biasa besar.
Benua ini berpotensi mengembangkan diversifikasi ekonomi berdasarkan infrastruktur rendah karbon dan berkelanjutan.
Tetapi pembuat kebijakan tidak bisa terus berasumsi bahwa pertumbuhan ini akan berlangsung terus-menerus, mereka harus mengambil langkah yang tepat untuk memastikannya.
Africa’s Urban Farmers
NAIROBI – When I met Eunice Wangari at a Nairobi coffee shop recently, I was surprised to hear her on her mobile phone, insistently asking her mother about the progress of a corn field in her home village, hours away from the big city.
A nurse, Wangari counts on income from farming to raise money to buy more land – for more farming.
Even though Wangari lives in Kenya’s capital, she is able to reap hundreds of dollars a year in profit from cash crops grown with the help of relatives.
Her initial stake – drawn from her nursing wages of about $350 a month – has long since been recovered.
Wangari is one of thousands of urban workers in Kenya – and one of hundreds of thousands, even millions, across Africa – who are increasing their incomes through absentee agriculture.
With prices for basic foodstuffs at their highest levels in decades, many urbanites feel well rewarded by farming.
In Uganda, Vice President Gilbert Bukenya routinely travels the country, promoting higher-value farming, such as dairy production.
Perhaps the most visible political support for absentee agriculture is in Liberia, a small West African country where civil war destroyed agriculture, rendering the population dependent on food imports, even today.
President Johnson-Sirleaf, recognizing that educated people could contribute much to an agriculture revival, launched her “Back to the Soil” campaign in June 2008 in large part to encourage urban dwellers to farm.
To be sure, absentee farming by elites and educated urban workers can’t solve all of Africa’s urgent food needs.
Moreover, absentee farmers face unexpected problems.
Because they don’t visit their fields often, they rely heavily on relatives and friends.  When I decided to farm wheat for the first time this spring on leased land in my childhood village, my mother agreed to supervise plowing, planting, and harvesting.
Without her help, I might not have farmed at all.
Even with mother’s help, I have worries.
Although I grew up around wheat fields, my knowledge of farming is thin.
Fertilizer and spraying were both more expensive than I thought.
While my wheat stalks are sprouting on schedule, I now fear that at harvest time – in November – prices will fall and I won’t recoup my costs.
One key tool is the mobile phone.
My hopes for success are buoyed by my ability to call my mother inexpensively and discuss the farm.
We even decided over the phone what kind of pesticide to use and which tractor company to hire.
Because they know both the tastes of fellow city dwellers and rural conditions, many urban farmers are succeeding.
In fact, some city dwellers don’t even bother with acquiring land or gaining distant help. Certain crops can be grown in their own homes.
James Memusi, an accountant, grows mushrooms in a spare bedroom, selling them to nearby hotels and supermarkets.
Nevertheless, most people living in Africa’s cities have access to land in the countryside, which is why Liberia’s government rightly highlights the potential for farm expansion.
In a new advertising campaign rolled out this summer, the authorities declared, “The soil is a bank; invest in it.”
In Liberia, the main push is to reduce imports of staples such as rice and tomatoes.
In more prosperous countries, African elites are motivated by a complex interplay of national pride, dietary concerns, and the pursuit of profit.
In Zambia, for example, Sylva Banda ignited a craze for authentic traditional meals two decades ago with a chain of popular restaurants.
Now, ordinary Lusakans want to cook similar meals in their own homes, driving demand for farmers who produce such delicacies as dried pumpkin, “black jack” leaves, and fresh Okra.
Similarly, in Nairobi, Miringo Kinyanjui, another woman entrepreneur, is supplying unrefined – and more nutritious – maize and wheat flour.
In another move to distinguish her ingredients from Western versions, Kinyanjui also sells through grocery stores flour flavored with Amarathan, a green vegetable that grows around Kenya.
The revival of traditional foods has attracted the attention of large multinational corporations.
Last year, Unilever’s Kenyan branch ran a “taste our culture” campaign in support of its line of traditional East African herbs and spices.
Such campaigns go hand-in-hand with expanded farming, because sellers of these foods prefer nearby growers – even if these growers increasingly live in the city.
After Assimilation
Human migration is as old as history. Even migration to distant places and remote cultures is nothing new.
In the nineteenth century, millions of Europeans sought liberty and prosperity in the Americas, notably in the United States.
What is new today is the scale of migration, often across huge cultural divides - and often without a definite aim.
The African boat people in the Mediterranean are often not even sure whether they want to be in Italy, Germany, or Britain.
Even those who are certain, like North Africans in Spain and France, or Turks in Germany, had as their priority escaping the hopelessness of their home countries, not arriving at a particular destination.
This modern form of migration raises massive problems for countries on the receiving end. In Europe, it is probably the most serious social issue today, because no one has a clear idea about how to manage the resulting clash of cultures.
Once upon a time, North America, notably the US, seemed to provide the answer.
Even in Israel, the last true immigration country - at least for Jews - assimilation is no longer so easy.
Recent newcomers from Russia have their own political party, and old Europeans have become a distinct minority.
Israel and America continue to have mechanisms to integrate new migrants.
Language is an important underlying factor, and in Israel, there is the army, while in America, the values embodied in the Constitution still represent a shared secular faith.
But these mechanisms are weakening everywhere, and are virtually non-existent in European countries.
Modern societies are characterized by acute problems of belonging.
They don't offer the implicit, unconscious ties of community that citizens felt in the past. As a result, people have begun to cling to other, more primordial group identities.
They resist assimilation, fearing that it will rob them of their identity without offering a new one.
What then is the alternative to assimilation?
The "salad bowl" of so-called multiculturalism is no real alternative, because it does not provide the necessary glue that binds communities together.
All the ingredients remain separate from the outset.
The only viable alternative for which there are examples is probably that of London or New York. The main characteristic of this alternative is the coexistence of a common public sphere shared by all and a considerable degree of cultural separation in the "private" sphere, notably in residential areas.
The public space is multicultural in terms of people's backgrounds, but is governed by agreed values, even a common language, whereas the people's private lives are - to use an ugly word - ghettoized.
In theory, this is a distinctly second-best solution to the cultural consequences of migration; in practice it is the best answer we have.
But it cannot be had for nothing.
Even the necessary minimum of a common language requires a deliberate effort, to say nothing of certain rules of behavior.
Living in London, I marvel at the way in which we Londoners have come to terms with Indian family shops and West Indian-run public transport, while not asking many questions about whole districts that are Bangladeshi or Chinese.
No one has yet found a name for this new version of the "separate but equal" doctrine that some of us fought so hard against in the 1960's: separate private lives in a common public space that is equal for all.
This is clearly easier in London and New York than it is in smaller towns or even in the capitals of countries where the world language of English is not spoken.
Berlin's Turkish community and the North African communities around Paris seem increasingly separate, with their own public sphere and often language.
Where this happens, an explosive condition can arise, a kind of separatism within, not by historically separate groups but by newcomers against natives.
If we are forced to abandon the hope of assimilation, our efforts should concentrate on creating a public space to which all contribute and that all enjoy.
Ideally, this should be an expanding public space, for in the end, the element of unity in a modern society is the guarantee of its citizens' liberty.
After Austerity
NEW YORK – This year’s annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund made clear that Europe and the international community remain rudderless when it comes to economic policy.
Financial leaders, from finance ministers to leaders of private financial institutions, reiterated the current mantra: the crisis countries have to get their houses in order, reduce their deficits, bring down their national debts, undertake structural reforms, and promote growth.
Confidence, it was repeatedly said, needs to be restored.
It is a little precious to hear such pontifications from those who, at the helm of central banks, finance ministries, and private banks, steered the global financial system to the brink of ruin – and created the ongoing mess.
Worse, seldom is it explained how to square the circle.
How can confidence be restored as the crisis economies plunge into recession?
How can growth be revived when austerity will almost surely mean a further decrease in aggregate demand, sending output and employment even lower?
This we should know by now: markets on their own are not stable.
Not only do they repeatedly generate destabilizing asset bubbles, but, when demand weakens, forces that exacerbate the downturn come into play.
Unemployment, and fear that it will spread, drives down wages, incomes, and consumption – and thus total demand.
Decreased rates of household formation – young Americans, for example, are increasingly moving back in with their parents – depress housing prices, leading to still more foreclosures.
States with balanced-budget frameworks are forced to cut spending as tax revenues fall – an automatic destabilizer that Europe seems mindlessly bent on adopting.
There are alternative strategies.
Some countries, like Germany, have room for fiscal maneuver. Using it for investment would enhance long-term growth, with positive spillovers to the rest of Europe.
A long-recognized principle is that balanced expansion of taxes and spending stimulates the economy; if the program is well designed (taxes at the top, combined with spending on education), the increase in GDP and employment can be significant.
Europe as a whole is not in bad fiscal shape; its debt-to-GDP ratio compares favorably with that of the United States.
If each US state were totally responsible for its own budget, including paying all unemployment benefits, America, too, would be in fiscal crisis.
The lesson is obvious:&#160; the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
If Europe – particularly the European Central Bank – were to borrow, and re-lend the proceeds, the costs of servicing Europe’s debt would fall, creating room for the kinds of expenditure that would promote growth and employment.
There are already institutions within Europe, such as the European Investment Bank, that could help finance needed investments in the cash-starved economies.
The EIB should expand its lending.
There need to be increased funds available to support small and medium-size enterprises – the main source of job creation in all economies – which is especially important, given that credit contraction by banks hits these enterprises especially hard.
Europe’s single-minded focus on austerity is a result of a misdiagnosis of its problems.
Greece overspent, but Spain and Ireland had fiscal surpluses and low debt-to-GDP ratios before the crisis.
Giving lectures about fiscal prudence is beside the point.
Taking the lectures seriously – &#160;even adopting tight budget frameworks –&#160;can be counterproductive.
Regardless of whether Europe’s problems are temporary or fundamental – the eurozone, for example, is far from an “optimal” currency area, and tax competition in a free-trade and free-migration area can erode a viable state – austerity will make matters worse.
The consequences of Europe’s rush to austerity will be long-lasting and possibly severe.
If the euro survives, it will come at the price of high unemployment and enormous suffering, especially in the crisis countries.
And the crisis itself almost surely will spread.
Firewalls won’t work, if kerosene is simultaneously thrown on the fire, as Europe seems committed to doing: there is no example of a large economy – and Europe is the world’s largest – recovering as a result of austerity.
As a result, society’s most valuable asset, its human capital, is being wasted and even destroyed.
Young people who are long deprived of a decent job – and youth unemployment in some countries is approaching or exceeding 50%, and has been unacceptably high since 2008 – become alienated.
When they eventually find work, it will be at a much lower wage.
Normally, youth is a time when skills get built up; now, it is a time when they atrophy.
So many economies are vulnerable to natural disasters – earthquakes, floods, typhoons, hurricanes, tsunamis –&#160;that adding a man-made disaster is all the more tragic.
But that is what Europe is doing.
Indeed, its leaders’ willful ignorance of the lessons of the past is criminal.
The pain that Europe, especially its poor and young, is suffering is unnecessary.
Fortunately, there is an alternative.
But delay in grasping it will be very costly, and Europe is running out of time.
After Kyoto
The Kyoto Protocol treaty has now entered into force for the 126 nations who have joined it so far.
Now is the time to start thinking about how to engage all nations, including large emitters, in conversations about what to do after the treaty’s expiration in 2012.
This is exactly what the European Commission did recently by providing its first strategy for a post-Kyoto era, which will be discussed by the European Council next March.
While the Kyoto Protocol represents only a modest reduction of carbon emissions in industrialized countries – 5.2% between 2008-2012 relative to 1990 levels, with varying targets for individual countries – real progress can be made in sustaining development efforts and preserving our planet.
But first, all countries must integrate climate concerns into policy planning, and improve their governance in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure, and transport.
In other words, we must act in accordance with the recognition that climate change and its effects on people in both rich and poor countries remains a threat to global security.
At the end of the day, the long-term approach is likely to include a rules-based system, an incentives system, and investments in technology change.
Increasingly, adaptation at the national level will be recognized as a major issue that will require appropriate funding.
Dealing with the impacts of climate change and with emission reductions should not be mutually exclusive, but complementary.
Looking ahead to the post-Kyoto world offers us the chance to start a new dialogue and to look at new options on climate change.
Nations could set the more ambitious goal of limiting the long-term change in the earth’s temperature, and then assign emissions rights among countries in such a way that will eventually limit temperature increases to an acceptable level.
This would require increasing investments in energy research and development for new and improved technologies – a process that needs to be supported by stronger public-private partnerships.
Up to now, with only 15% of the world’s population, rich countries have been responsible for more than 75% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and thus most of the environmental damage.
However, it is the developing countries – and thus the world’s poor – who are most vulnerable.
It is unrealistic to ask poor countries, where more than 1.6 billion people do not have access to clean energy and technologies, to bear the costs associated with the much needed technological change.
Working with partners, the World Bank is supporting financial strategies to assist developing countries in meeting the costs caused by climate change.
To date, over $1 billion dollars in Global Environment Facility (GEF) grants, together with about $8 billion in co-financing, have been committed to programs related to climate change.
While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future.
Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007.
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context.
Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions.
Therefore, projects need to be operational at the latest by 2007.
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market.
The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities.
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector – vital to the market’s success – is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way.
According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions.
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community – with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities – in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction.
Selepas Serangan di Paris
NEW YORK – Sejumlah serangan di Paris yang dilakukan oleh beberapa pelaku yang terkait dengan Islamic State atau ISIS (Negara Islam Irak dan Suriah), yang terjadi setelah dua bom meledak di Beirut dan jatuhnya pesawat Rusia di Semenanjung Sinai, kembali menegaskan fakta bahwa ancaman teroris telah memasuki fase baru dan semakin berbahaya.
Alasan mengapa ISIS memutuskan untuk melakukan serangannya sekarang masih berupa dugaan; barangkali ISIS memperluas terornya ke tingkat global untuk mengimbangi kehilangan wilayah mereka di Irak.
Tetapi, apapun alasannya, wajib bagi kita untuk memberi respon jelas.
Sebetulnya, tantangan yang ditimbulkan ISIS justru menjadi seruan bagi kita untuk menerapkan beberapa tindakan, sebab tidak ada kebijakan tunggal yang memadai.
Berbagai upaya perlu diterapkan di berbagai bidang.
Pertama, militer.
Serangan udara yang lebih kuat untuk melemahkan aset-aset militer, fasilitas minyak dan gas, dan para pemimpin ISIS sangat penting.
Meskipun demikian, serangan udara saja tidak akan cukup.
Unsur militer yang kuat di darat juga diperlukan jika ingin mengambil alih dan mempertahankan wilayah darat.
Sayangnya, kita tidak punya cukup waktu untuk membangun kekuatan gabungan di darat dari nol.
Upaya ini sudah dicoba namun gagal, dan negara-negara Arab tidak mampu atau tidak mau membentuk armadanya.
Tentara Irak pun gagal memenuhi harapan.
Kelompok milisi yang didukung Iran justru memperburuk keadaan.
Pilihan terbaik adalah bekerja sama lebih erat dengan tentara Kurdi dan memilih warga dari suku Sunni di Irak dan Suriah.
Hal ini berarti menyediakan intelijen, senjata, dan kemauan untuk menugaskan lebih banyak tentara – lebih dari 3.500 tentara Amerika sudah bertugas disana dan kemungkinan akan ada penambahan 10.000 tentara – untuk melatih, memberi masukan, dan membantu mengarahkan tindakan militer.
Upaya seperti ini harus bersifat kolektif.
Bentuknya bisa informal – “koalisi negara-negara yang bersedia” (coalition of the willing) yang meliputi Amerika Serikat, Perancis, Britania Raya, negara-negara Arab, dan bahkan Rusia dalam kondisi yang tepat – atau dilaksanakan di bawah naungan NATO atau PBB.
Tidak masalah apapun bentuk atau kemasannya, yang penting adalah hasilnya.
Tetapi, deklarasi perang secara simbolis haruslah dipertimbangkan dengan penuh kehati-hatian, jangan sampai ISIS terkesan memenangi perang ini.
Komponen diplomasi pun tidak kalah penting dibanding tindakan lainnya.
Presiden Suriah, Bashar al-Assad, adalah sosok yang layaknya menjadi recruiting tools bagi ISIS dan harus dicopot dari jabatannya.
Siapapun yang meneruskan jabatan beliau harus mampu menjaga ketertiban dan melarang ISIS memanfaatkan kekosongan kekuasaan, seperti yang terjadi di Libya.
Selain itu, perubahan politik yang teratur hanya akan dimungkinkan melalui dukungan Rusia dan Iran.
Satu opsi jangka pendek yang patut dicoba adalah pembentukan pemerintah koalisi yang masih dipimpin oleh perwakilan dari kelompok minoritas Alawite, suatu persetujuan yang sepadan dengan mencopot jabatan Assad.
Secara prinsip, dan seiring berjalannya waktu, pemerintah pusat yang lebih representatif akan terbentuk, walaupun pembahasan mengenai rencana pemilihan umum dalam waktu 18 bulan ke depan nampaknya terlalu bermuluk-muluk.
Mencapai suatu kompromi dalam pembentukan pemerintah hampir mustahil.
Itulah sebabnya penguatan upaya militer diperlukan untuk menjadikan daerah-daerah kantong lebih aman dan luas sehingga mampu melindungi penduduk sipil dan memerangi ISIS.
Suriah bukanlah negara yang hidup dalam kondisi layak dan normal, bahkan mungkin tidak akan bisa kembali ke kondisi normal.
Negara Suriah yang terdiri dari daerah-daerah kantong dan canton-canton adalah bentuk yang lebih realistis di masa mendatang.
Elemen lainnya yang sangat diperlukan dalam strategi efektif apapun harus meliputi bantuan tambahan atau memberi tekanan kepada Turki untuk mengambil lebih banyak tindakan demi membendung rekrutmen ISIS.
Turki, bersama dengan Yordania dan Lebanon, memerlukan bantuan finansial lebih besar sebab mereka memikul sebagian besar beban karena persoalan  pengungsi.
Pemimpin Arab dan Muslim dapat berperan dengan menyampaikan pesan untuk menantang visi ISIS dan mendelegitimasi perilaku mereka.
Aspek domestik dalam kebijakan juga diperlukan.
Keamanan dalam negeri dan penegakan hukum – meningkatkan perlindungan baik di wilayah perbatasan dan dalam negeri – harus disesuaikan dengan kenaikan tingkat ancaman.
Retail terrorists – individu atau kelompok melakukan serangan bersenjata ke kelompok rentan di masyarakat – sangat sulit diatasi.
Ancaman dan terjadinya beberapa serangan mengharuskan ketahanan sosial yang lebih kuat dan sedapat mungkin menyeimbangkan ulang antara privasi individu dan keamanan kolektif.
Kita juga perlu menerima fakta dan kenyataan yang ada.
Perjuangan melawan Negara Islam bukanlah perang konvensional.
Kita tidak bisa memberantas atau menghancurkannya dalam waktu dekat, sebab ISIS merupakan jaringan dan gagasan, serta suatu organisasi dan negara de facto yang mengendalikan wilayah dan sumber daya.
Memang, terorisme masih dan terus menjadi salah satu momok di era ini.
Meskipun demikian, kabar baiknya adalah ancaman yang diakibatkan ISIS ke Timur Tengah dan seluruh dunia dapat dikurangi secara signifikan melalui tindakan terpadu dan berkelanjutan.
Pembelajaran utama dari serangan di Paris adalah kita harus siap bertindak kapan pun dan dimanapun.
After Pax Americana?
NEW YORK – It has become popular to suggest that when the dust settles from the global financial crisis, it may become clear that the United States-led post-war world has come to an end.
If so, the global system that has secured peace, security, openness, and economic growth over the past six decades could be in grave danger.
Inspired by American leadership since World War II’s end, Europe, then Japan, then much of Asia and the world rose to new levels of prosperity; the world economy globalized upon the foundation of international institutions, norms, and standards; and foreign students educated in American universities returned home with new ideas about free markets, entrepreneurship, and democracy.
For much of the past 60 years, it would have been impossible to hold such a fundamental dialogue without US participation. Today, it is almost becoming a new global norm that neither the international committee nor the US is prepared for.
Despite talk about American decline, the world is not prepared for a post-American era.
As irksome as some of America’s actions have been, particularly over the past eight years, America remains the world’s most critical champion of the progressive values that have lifted hundreds of millions of people out of abject poverty and political repression.
If the US were to play a relatively smaller role in world affairs, and no other system was created to pick up the slack, these values could be at risk.
Although many states now hide behind an alleged universal principle of inviolable state sovereignty, for example, would the international community really want to go back to the old model where states did whatever they wanted to their citizens within the confines of their own borders?
Do countries around the world believe that they will be better off if the global trade system breaks down or international shipping lanes become less secure?
Are countries like China willing to step up and pay their fair share of dues to keep the UN running (China currently pays 2.1% of UN dues, compared to more than 25% for the US), or to capitalize revised international financial institutions or the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria in a meaningful way?
Unless other countries become more willing to step forward for the common good, a post-American world could quickly become a far more frightening environment than what it would replace.
To make its case for a continued global leadership role, America must, however, step up to the plate.  While the go-it-alone impulse of the Bush administration has been discredited by its consequences, the inverse lessons regarding how important collaborative action is in today’s interconnected world are still being learned.
Even at the apex of American power, America’s greatness was always based on inspiring others, and the opportunities for building market share in that particular category remain unlimited.
It is impossible to overestimate how significant a step Barack Obama’s election is in this direction, but America’s actions over the coming years will be the ultimate determinant of whether the power of America’s model can be restored.
America can and should, for example, become the global leader combating climate change through major investments in alternative energy, conservation, and energy efficiency, and by taking strong actions at home to reduce America’s greenhouse gas emissions.  It should transform its immigration policy to recruit the best and brightest people from around the world to move to the US and become citizens, and remain the world’s leading champion of open markets, especially during the current financial crisis.
Closing the prison at Guantánamo and reaffirming America’s commitment to international law and human rights will also be an important step in this direction.
The world wants to believe in an America that lives up to its own best values.
The prospect of a truly global community of nations working together to achieve the greater good for all is indeed exciting.
But, although America has been far from perfect over the last six decades, the end of the pax Americana has the potential to create a dangerous void in international affairs.
If the world is going to shift in the direction of a new and more globally democratic system, other nations will need to meaningfully step forward to assume new responsibilities.
It is in America’s and the world’s interest that they do so.  The evidence of this will be seen not only in global institutions but also in places like Darfur, Zimbabwe, and Burma.
Until this happens, let us all hope that America can get back on track as the global champion of collaborative action to address the world’s greatest challenges and work with as many other countries  as possible to move collectively in the right direction.
After the Guns of August
The Middle East is a place where the dust hardly ever settles.
When it occasionally does, even for a short interval – as UN Resolution 1701 for cessation of hostilities in Lebanon seems to be holding – it is time to take stock of events in the hopes that a responsible debate may influence those in power.
Let’s start with the United States.
President George W. Bush has been short on neither initiatives nor catchy slogans and acronyms.
Recent years are littered with them: “Global War on Terror” (GWOT), “Road Map,” “Middle East Partnership Initiative “ (MEPI), “Broader Middle East and North Africa” (BMENA) – originally “Greater Middle East Initiative (GMEI) – Democracy Assisted Dialogue (DAD), and so on.
His latest reverie, envisioned in the thick of the recent fighting between Israel and Hezbollah, was the New Middle East (NME), with US clients Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia serving as the pillars of regional order.
But like all his previous initiatives since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington almost five years ago now, the NME ran into trouble from the outset.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice announced its birth while rejecting an immediate ceasefire in Lebanon.
Her poor timing made the initiative appear heartless, as thousands of civilians were being uprooted, killed, or maimed by Israel’s efficient but ruthless artillery and air force.
This so embarrassed the three Arab NME partners that each raced to distance itself from the US-sponsored initiative.
Saudi Arabia, which had remained silent for nearly two weeks, did so with a $500 million contribution to rebuilding devastated areas of Lebanon and another billion to support Lebanon’s threatened currency.
Egypt’s heir apparent Gamal Mubarak followed suit in the fourth week of the fighting by heading a 70-member delegation on a solidarity visit to Beirut.
But, rather than earning him the respect of an outraged Egyptian public, revelations in the opposition press that his plane had to obtain a safe passage and authority to land from the Israelis garnered only howls of derision.
As for America, anything it touches in the Middle East has become radioactive, even for longstanding clients and friends.
In the course of maneuvering to delay the UN ceasefire, Bush and Rice continually reiterated the need for a Security Council resolution that deals forcefully with “the roots of the problem.”
Of course, for them and for Israel, this was Hezbollah and the need to eradicate or at a minimum disarm it and force its fighters to a safe distance from settlements and towns in northern Israel.
While this is a reasonable demand, the rest of the Middle East – and, indeed, much of the world, including Europe – regard the root cause of the conflict as Israeli intransigence and arrogance, together with America’s blind support for it.
Both America and Israel have cited foot-dragging in implementing UN Resolution 1559, which calls for disarming all non-state actors in Lebanon and the deployment of government forces all the way to the southern border.
But for years the US and Israel have not uttered a word about the dozens of UN resolutions, going back as far as Resolution 49 on partition in 1947, which called for the establishment of distinct Arab and Jewish states on roughly half of Mandated Palestine.
This and numerous other resolutions seeking redress for injustices toward Palestinians have been ignored by the US.
Thus, for 300 million Arabs and more than one billion Muslims the “root cause” of the Middle East conflict is not Hezbollah.
As its leader, Hassan Nasrallah aptly put it, “We are just a reaction to chronic injustice.”
It may well be that there is more than one root cause – every party to the conflict has a favorite one.
There is no point in belaboring whose pain is greater or whose root cause is deeper.
In fact, arguing over grievances merely drives the sides further apart.
The long overdue UN Resolution 1701 may, with its adoption, indicate that all parties are fatigued, or could no longer withstand international pressure.
This is good news for all concerned and provides an opportunity to tackle each party’s “root cause.”
Seizing the opportunity requires that humility rather than moral supremacy prevails.
Empathy, not ethnocentrism, should be the order of the day now that the guns are falling silent and we have rediscovered the limits of military force.
But if we have learned anything at all from the tragic assassinations of the region’s greatest peacemakers, Anwar Sadat and Yitzhak Rabin, it is that the guns do not remain silent for long.
During any lull, a fanatic from either side could jump to center stage and, through an act of utter madness, kick up the settling dust and dash the hopes of the many on both sides who still long for a lasting peace.
After the Millennium Development Goals
CAMBRIDGE – In 2000, 189 countries collectively adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration, which evolved into a set of concrete targets called the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
These ambitious targets – ranging from halving extreme poverty and reducing maternal mortality by three-quarters to achieving universal primary schooling and halting (and beginning to reverse) the spread of HIV/AIDS – are supposed to be met by the end of 2015.
As the deadline approaches, development experts are debating a new question: What comes next?
It is virtually certain that many of the MDGs will not have been met by the end of 2015, but there have been striking successes in some areas.
For example, the goal of halving extreme poverty (measured by the number of people living on less than $1.25 a day) will likely be achieved ahead of time, largely thanks to China’s phenomenal growth.
At the same time, there is little evidence to suggest that those successes were the result of the MDGs themselves.
China implemented the policies that engineered history’s greatest poverty eradication program prior to, and independently from, the Millennium Declaration and the MDGs.
Clearly, however, the MDGs were a public-relations triumph, which is not to belittle their contribution.
Like all worthwhile PR efforts, the MDGs served to raise awareness, galvanize attention, and mobilize action – all for a good cause.
They amplified the global conversation about development and defined its terms.
And there is evidence that they got advanced countries to pay more attention to poor nations.
Indeed, the MDGs possibly had their clearest impact on aid flows from rich to poor countries.
A study by Charles Kenny and Andy Sumner for the Center for Global Development in Washington, DC, suggests that the MDGs not only boosted aid flows, but also redirected them toward smaller, poorer countries, and toward targeted areas like education and public health.
However, aid was not directly linked to performance and results, and it is much more difficult to know whether it had the desired impact overall.
The MDGs encompass eight goals, 21 targets, and 60 indicators.
Much criticism has focused on the use of these numerical targets and indicators, which, skeptics argue, are misspecified, mismeasured, and divert attention from equally important areas.
But these complaints miss the point.
Any effort that is concrete and implementable needs to monitor the results, and setting clear numerical targets is the best way to do so.
Still, a central paradox plagues the MDGs.
The Millennium Declaration was meant to be a compact between the world’s rich and poor countries.
Poor countries promised to refocus their development efforts while rich countries pledged to support them with finance, technology, and access to their markets.
But, oddly, of the eight goals, only the last one deals with “global partnership,” or what rich countries can and should do.
Even here, the MDGs contain no numerical target for financial aid or any other aspect of rich countries’ assistance, in contrast to the highly specific poverty-related targets set for developing countries.
It is perhaps telling that the “progress charts” prepared by the United Nations Development Program, the agency charged with reporting on progress toward achieving the MDGs, track only Internet usage under that goal.
Why we need a global effort to convince developing countries to do what is good for them is not clear.
Poverty reduction and human development should be the first order of business for governments in these countries, with or without the MDGs.
It is true, of course, that these governments often pursue different goals, for political, military, and other reasons.
But it is wishful thinking to believe that they can be persuaded to act otherwise by international declarations that lack enforcement mechanisms.
If we have learned one thing in the development business, it is that real reform cannot be bought with donors’ money, let alone with vague promises of money.
Equally problematic, the MDGs implicitly assume that we know how to achieve development targets, and that only resources and political will are missing.
But it is doubtful that even well-intentioned policymakers have a good handle on, say, how to raise secondary-school completion rates sustainably or reduce maternal mortality.
Many development economists would argue that significant improvements in governance and political institutions are required before such goals can be achieved.
The most that rich countries can do is to provide an enabling environment for the benefit of developing countries that are willing and able to take advantage of it.
These considerations suggest an obvious direction for the next iteration of the MDGs.
First, a new global compact should focus more directly on rich countries’ responsibilities.
Second, it should emphasize policies beyond aid and trade that have an equal, if not greater, impact on poor countries’ development prospects.
A short list of such policies would include: carbon taxes and other measures to ameliorate climate change; more work visas to allow larger temporary migration flows from poor countries; strict controls on arms sales to developing nations; reduced support for repressive regimes; and improved sharing of financial information to reduce money laundering and tax avoidance.
Notice that most of these measures are actually aimed at reducing damage – for example, climate change, military conflict, and financial crime – that otherwise results from rich countries’ conduct.
“Do no harm” is as good a principle here as it is in medicine.
This kind of reorientation will not be easy.
Advanced countries are certain to resist any new commitments.
But most of these measures do not cost money, and, as the MDGs have shown, setting targets can be used to mobilize action from rich-country governments.
If the international community is going to invest in a bold new public-relations initiative, it might as well focus on areas where the potential payoffs are the greatest.
After the Promised Land
LONDON – At the height of the Arab uprisings last spring, many Europeans were gripped by nightmare visions of a tsunami of migrants crashing against the continent’s shores.
The wave never hit, but its specter fed a tenacious anti-immigrant populism that has concealed an important new trend: migration to Europe – and to the United States – has largely stalled.
In many countries, more immigrants are leaving than are arriving, owing mainly to the economic crisis that has drained jobs in the West.
That reversal is one of the great under-reported stories of 2011 (and of the preceding two years), and the numbers are startling.
Consider Spain, which is on track to lose more than a half-million residents by 2020.
By contrast, between 2002 and 2008, Spain’s population grew by 700,000 a year, driven largely by immigration.
The trends are similar elsewhere in Europe.
While this fact alone will not quiet opponents of immigration, it does give countries more breathing room to repair and strengthen badly broken systems for receiving and integrating newcomers.
Although rapidly aging Western countries are unable to attract the immigrants they need, they allow millions who are already there to suffer discrimination and abuse.
Detentions and deportations take place under sometimes terrible conditions.
Meanwhile, the international community collectively fails to protect vast populations of vulnerable migrants, such as the millions stranded by the recent conflicts in North Africa.
Undoubtedly, rising anti-immigrant populism must be confronted.
While polling suggests that attitudes are influenced more by ethnicity than religion, both help to define identities and mindsets.
Political parties in France, Switzerland, and the Netherlands (to name a few) have run successful campaigns that scapegoat immigrants.
Moreover, governments from Alabama to Hungary are passing laws that undermine what should be migrants’ rights.
Italy recently adopted harsh “emergency” decrees that target migrants by making undocumented entry and residence a criminal offense.
Anti-immigrant rhetoric from the political extremes has fed into mainstream political discourse.
European leaders trip over themselves to declare, one more forcefully than the next, that multiculturalism is dead.
Dutch politician Geert Wilders, whose Freedom Party is informally part of the governing coalition, did them one better by being charged with incitement to anti-Muslim hatred.
In the US, alligator-filled moats and electrified border fences have featured in the current presidential campaign.
Such attacks on immigration might offer some instant political gratification, but their net result is to cleave societies whose cohesion is already seriously challenged by the economic crisis.
Growing discrimination in employment, housing, and education affects not just immigrants and their children; it harms our societies as a whole.
With the lull in net immigration, we now have a window of opportunity to address these shortcomings.
Debunking the myths about migration – that most immigrants enter unlawfully, for example, or that immigration displaces existing workers – would be a good place to start.
It would also be useful to explain that immigration is necessary for prosperity and growth in almost all OECD countries.
If aging societies in the West and elsewhere (like Japan) fail to get immigration right, they will be woefully unprepared when they confront the real tidal wave: the retirement of baby boomers in the coming two decades.
The gaps in these countries’ labor markets – from software specialists to physicians to home health aides – will be immense.
The European Union’s labor force will decline by almost 70 million workers in the next 40 years; in the absence of significant net immigration (combined with a much higher retirement age), European economies and social safety nets will shrivel.
The priorities are clear.
We need to understand better how our economies will evolve in the coming decades, and to redesign our educational systems to produce workers with usable skills.
And, where it is clear that immigrants will be needed, we must be able to identify, welcome, integrate, and protect them.
Meanwhile, our most fundamental institutions – schools, police, and the courts – must be re-engineered to reflect and respond to the diversity of our communities, which is now a fact of life.
Countries must learn to work together to achieve these goals, few of which can be reached by going it alone.
If our toolbox were empty, our inaction might be understandable.
But examples of smart migration practices abound.
Canada and the Philippines, for instance, have a well-functioning accord that protects the rights of temporary workers.
Sweden has developed legislation that minimizes bureaucracy for companies that need foreign workers.
And important advances have been made in ensuring that immigrant children receive the education that they need to become full members of society.
Progress is being made on the global level as well, despite the economic crisis and populist headwinds.
In June, the International Labor Organization’s member states overwhelmingly approved the Domestic Workers Convention, which will significantly increase protections for a vulnerable group of workers –&nbsp;the majority of whom are migrants.
Meanwhile, the Global Forum on Migration and Development, established in 2007, has quickly become an important means of fostering knowledge and partnerships.
The reason for growing international cooperation is simple: countries everywhere are affected by migration, and, increasingly, they are experiencing immigration and emigration simultaneously.
Indeed, roughly one-third of migrants nowadays move between developed countries; one-third move between developing countries; and only one-third move from the developing to the developed world.
Highly skilled workers, such as bankers and engineers, are flocking to China.
Mexico, known primarily as a country of emigration, is home to millions of migrants from Central America.
Millions of people in Southeast Asia venture to the Middle East to work, but millions more cross borders within the region.
The list goes on.
When it comes to migration, we are all in the same boat – and that boat is leaking.
Starting in 2012, countries should redouble their efforts to fix it.
A Future without Precedent
JERUSALEM – In my nearly nine decades of life, I cannot recall a time in which the past was so irrelevant to policymaking.
All of today’s significant developments went unpredicted by anyone.
Experts studied the past, but, constrained by old paradigms, they could not discern the future.
Today’s dynamic complexity, in which a science-based, fast-changing global economy makes so many more phenomena interdependent, prevents us from foreseeing the future through linear extrapolations of the past.
The only certainty is that the future will be defined by scientific progress and innovation, which cannot be known ahead of time.
As a result, the traditional power of states and leaders is declining; in today’s global economy, innovators, not politicians, wield the most influence.
The globalized economy affects every state, yet no single state can determine the outcomes, because science and technology are borderless.
Global companies wish to do business worldwide, eroding not just sovereignty, but also racism and prejudice, as well as significantly weakening nationalism.
This transformation has placed the world in the hands of a younger generation, more technologically savvy than their parents and connected to one another through social networks that are not confined by territory, language, or government.
The young leaders who created Facebook and Google have had a greater global impact than many statesmen and generals.
These young people are also the leaders of erupting political protest movements.
The “Arab Spring,” the tent demonstrations in Israel, Occupy Wall Street, and the protests in Russia reveal not a clash of civilizations, but a battle of generations.
The young generation understands that the way states and economies are currently run is unfit for the new era.
Yet there are political “hitchhikers” who want to exploit the recent awakening, not by promoting an agenda of freedom, but by imposing a different type of coercion.
In the Arab world, it is mainly extreme Islamists who are hijacking the young generation’s wave, stealing their revolution.
Israel has reacted positively to the will of the young generation, but it cannot and should not intervene in events in the Arab world.
Our hearts are with the rebelling youngsters and their legitimate yearning for freedom and basic rights to express themselves, choose their leaders, and earn their own living.
Israelis wait for the day when our country will no longer be the region’s only democracy, because being an island of prosperity in a sea of poverty is unnatural.
Yet there is a real concern that the extremists, who are politically well organized, are seeking to gain control by the ballot over less-organized liberals, thus preventing peace and stability.
Fundamentalist radicals cannot provide real solutions to the region’s basic problems.
The social changes now underway threaten their way of life, which includes discrimination against women and a ban on modern education.
But only profound reforms of traditional authority can pave the way towards freedom and growth.
Israel can serve as an example to others striving to reach economic prosperity and social freedom, because its success is due to the fact that the country had absolutely nothing at the start.
We returned to our homeland, rich with history, but devoid of natural resources.
Israel was left with only one resource: its human capital.
So we invested in education and science, and today we have the world’s highest percentage of scientists and patents per capita.
Roughly 95% of our agriculture is hi-tech.
We use less water and yield more crops per acre than any other country in the world.
What Israel can do, others can do as well.
We will gladly offer a helping hand to whoever is willing to reach for it.
Together, in peace with our neighbors, we can create a region of hope, development, and success.
In particular, we must do everything in our power to end the conflict with the Palestinians.
Israel was not born, and it is not Israel’s destiny, to govern another people.
We are sincerely interested in the establishment of a Palestinian state living peacefully side-by-side with Israel, the democratic state of the Jewish people.
For us, peace is both a moral imperative and a national-security strategy, because resolving the conflict would help to stabilize the region by neutralizing the extremists who seek to manipulate today’s popular movements to advance their radical agenda.
The international community can support these efforts by providing incentives to countries that choose freedom and progress.
At the same time, determined and decisive policies must be taken against extremists.
In particular, Iran is a fount of moral corruption that spearheads extremism and halts reform, crushing the legitimate protest of its own citizens and acting against the brave Syrians now fighting for their freedom.
Iran also uses proxies to instigate terror against moderate forces in the Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, and Iraq.
If Iran is successful in its plan to acquire nuclear weapons, its leaders could shake the Middle East and encourage more extremism and violence.
Israel will defend itself if Iran continues to call for its destruction.
However, the threat is not to Israel alone; Iran is a danger to the peace and stability of the entire world.
The world’s democracies have declared that they will not allow Iran to possess nuclear arms; it is their duty to follow through on that commitment, before doing so becomes impossible.
Beyond the short-term challenges ahead, we all have a duty to profoundly change the way we prepare our children to cope with today’s new world.
In an era where yesterday has become almost irrelevant and we can hardly predict tomorrow, the role of education must allow all children to reach their highest potential.
Today’s educators should inspire our children towards creativity and innovation.
Self-expression is as important as free expression.
I write this in the 88th year of my life, but not because I have learned from experience.
On the contrary, experience is overrated, often constraining the courage needed to face tomorrow and build an unprecedented new world.
The future is already here; there is no point in looking back.
Against Simplification
NEW YORK – It is said that Americans have a genius for simplification.
Gradually, however, the quest for it has become a global trend, one that continues to conquer new territories, just as blue jeans once did.
The speed of our daily life is visibly increased – and not for the better – by this unstoppable evolution.
The tyranny of pragmatism seems to mark all of the complex dilemmas of our time.
Too many valid choices are ignored or skirted through the routine of short-cuts.
Nowhere is this trend more damaging than in today’s mercantile approach to art.
Even the much-praised notion of competition seems fake and cynically manipulated by the “corporate” mentality that now pervades the world of culture – by the financial pre-selection that determines what publishers, producers, and other impresarios will support.
Just imagine what might have happened with the works of, say, Proust, Kafka, Musil, Faulkner, or Borges had they been subjected to mass-market competition like shoes or cosmetics.
Culture is a necessary pause from the daily rat race, from our chaotic and often vulgar political surroundings, and it is a chance to recover our spiritual energy.
Great books, music, and paintings are not only an extraordinary school of beauty, truth, and good, but also a way of discovering our own beauty, truth, and good – the potential for change, of bettering ourselves and even some of our interlocutors.
If this respite and refuge is gradually narrowed and invaded by the same kind of “products” as those that dominate the mass market, we are condemned to be perpetual captives of the same stunted universe of “practicalities,” the ordinary agglomeration of clichés packaged in advertisements.
I was thinking again about these old and seemingly unsolvable questions during my re-reading of a quite challenging novel by a close friend and a great writer, not very present in the vivid landscape of American letters of today.
The theme, style, and echo of his work says a lot, I think, about our simplified world.
The novel is Blinding, by Claudio Magris.
Hailed in Europe as one of the great novels of the twentieth century, Blinding arrived in America only after a great delay, and never received the attention that it deserved.
Unfortunately, that is no surprise.
The number of literary translations done nowadays in the United States is, according to a United Nations report, equal to that of Greece, a country one-tenth the size.
Imported books are thought to be too “complicated,” which is another way of saying that literature should deal with simple issues in a simple way, obeying the rules of the mass market, with its tricks of packaging, accessibility, advertisement, and comfort.
At the core of Magris’ book is the destiny of a group of Italian communists who travel to Yugoslavia after the Second World War to contribute to the construction of a socialist society, only to be caught in the conflict between Stalin and Tito.
They are imprisoned for their Stalinist allegiance; when they are finally allowed to return to Italy, their old comrades refuse to accept them.
The book’s plot spans two centuries of revolution.
Then, suddenly,
“the party vanished, overnight, as if all of a sudden a giant sponge had drained the entire sea, Adriatic and Austral, leaving litter and clots of mud, and all the boats stranded.
How can you go home again if the sea has been sucked down a vast drain that opened up beneath it, emptying it who knows where, into a void?