Although fiscal deficits are temporarily down, the combination of population aging and higher future interest rates will cause the national debt to rise faster than GDP by the end of the decade.
And debt and equity markets may not continue to respond benignly to the Fed’s wind-down of quantitative easing.
So there is still much to worry about.
But the US economy has a better chance of achieving a significantly higher real growth rate in the coming year than at any time since the downturn began.
Why the Fed Will Go Faster
CAMBRIDGE – The US Federal Reserve has emphasized that its monetary policy will be determined by what economic indicators show.
But it would require some extremely unlikely data to change the Fed’s implicit plan to end its purchases of long-term assets (so-called quantitative easing) in October 2014 and to start raising the federal funds rate from its current near-zero level sometime in the first half of 2015.
The financial markets are obsessed with anticipating whether rates will rise in March or June.
Although my own best guess is that the Fed will start to raise rates in March, the starting date is less important than the pace of the rate increase and where the rate will be by the end of 2015.
There is a substantial range of views among the members of the rate-setting Federal Open Market Committee.
The midpoint of the opinions recorded at most recent FOMC meeting implies a federal funds rate of 1.25-1.5% at the end of 2015.
Even by the end of 2016, the midpoint of the range is less than 3%.
In my judgment, such rates would be too low.
At a time when inflation is already close to 2% or higher, depending on how it is measured, the real federal funds rate would be at zero at the end of 2015.
Instead of ensuring price stability, monetary policy would be feeding a further increase in the inflation rate.
Although it is possible to argue about the precise appropriate level of the fed funds rate, the Fed’s own analysis points to a long-term rate of about 4% when the long-term inflation rate is 2%.
The most recent value of the consumer price index was up 1.7% year on year, and the 12-month figure would have been even higher but for the anomalous decline in the most recent month.
In the second quarter of this year, the annualized inflation rate was 4%.
The Fed prefers to measure inflation by the price index for personal consumption expenditure.
Its relaxed attitude about inflation reflects its focus on the longer-term past, with PCE inflation at just 1.5% for the 12 months to August of this year, the same as the “core” PCE inflation rate, which excludes food and energy.
But PCE inflation has also been rising, with the most recent quarterly value at 2.3% year on year in the April-June period.
So if price stability were the Fed’s only goal, the federal funds rate should now be close to 4%.
The Fed’s rationale for continuing its ultra-easy monetary policy is that its “dual mandate” requires it to be concerned with employment as well.
Its monthly statements emphasize that there is still “a significant underutilization of labor resources,” reflecting not only the 6.1% unemployment rate, but also the millions of part-time employees seeking a full-time job and those who are not officially counted as unemployed because they are not actively looking for work.
The Fed is certainly correct that current labor-market conditions imply significant economic waste and personal hardship.
But economists debate the extent to which these conditions reflect a cyclical demand shortfall or more structural problems that a monetary stimulus cannot remedy.
A recent study by a team of Fed economists concluded that nearly all of the current decline in the labor-force participation rate reflects the aging of the population and other structural causes.
Recent research also indicates that increases in demand that would cause a further reduction in the current unemployment rate would boost the inflation rate.
An important study co-authored by Alan Krueger of Princeton University, who served as Chairman of President Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers until last year, showed that the inflation rate reflects the level of short-term unemployment (lasting less than six months), rather than the overall unemployment rate.
Longer-term unemployment implies a waste of potential output and a source of personal suffering, but it does not have an impact on the rate of inflation.
Krueger’s analysis indicates that the rate of inflation begins to increase when the short-term unemployment rate falls to 4-4.5%.
With short-term unemployment currently at 4.2%, the inflation rate is indeed rising, and Krueger’s research suggests that it will increase further in the months ahead.
Similar studies by Robert Gordon of Northwestern University and by Glenn Rudebusch and John Williams of the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank point to the same conclusion about the role of short-term unemployment and the irrelevance of long-term unemployment in the inflation process.
While not all researchers agree with this analysis, I think the evidence is strong enough to represent a warning to the Fed and to market participants.
Indeed, I would not be surprised by a continued rise in the inflation rate in 2015.
In that case, the Fed is likely to raise the federal funds rate more rapidly and to a higher year-end level than its recent statements imply.
America’s Move to Faster Growth
CAMBRIDGE – Last December, I speculated that GDP growth in the United States would rise in 2014 from the subpar 2% annual rate of the previous four years to about 3%, effectively doubling the per capita growth rate.
Now that the US economy is past the impact of the terrible weather during the first months of the year, output appears to be on track to grow at a healthy pace.
The primary driver of this year’s faster GDP growth is the $10 trillion rise in household wealth that occurred in 2013.
According to the Federal Reserve, that increase reflected a $2 trillion increase in the value of homes and an $8 trillion rise in the value of shares, unincorporated businesses, and other net financial assets.
As former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke explained when he launched large-scale asset purchases, or quantitative easing, that increase in wealth – and the resulting rise in consumer spending – was the intended result.
Past experience suggests that each $100 increase in household wealth leads to a gradual rise in consumer spending until the spending level has increased by about $4.
That implies that the $10 trillion wealth gain will raise the annual level of consumer spending by some $400 billion, or roughly 2.5% of GDP.
Even if less than half of that increase occurs in 2014, it will be enough to raise the total GDP growth rate by one percentage point.
The data show that a significant increase in consumption already is happening.
Another indication of the role of wealth in fueling higher consumer spending is the decline in the household saving rate.
Total household saving as a percentage of disposable income fell from about 6% in 2011 and 2012 to just 3.8% in the most recent quarter.
Housing starts are also responding to the increase in wealth.
The number of housing starts and the value of residential construction fell after the Fed’s announced withdrawal from quantitative easing caused interest rates on mortgages to rise.
But that has turned around, with housing starts in April up 26% year on year.
And sales of both new and existing homes have recently been rising more rapidly as well.
Higher consumer spending and increased residential investment boosted demand for labor, resulting in a rise in payroll employment of 288,000 in April, up from a monthly average of less than 200,000 earlier in the year.
If that continues, it will lead to a faster rate of increase in household incomes and spending.
The favorable effect of the increase in household wealth is being reinforced this year by the improved fiscal position.
The economy in 2013 was held back by tax increases, government spending cuts mandated by the sequester process, the temporary government shutdown, and the possibility that a binding debt ceiling would require further cuts in government outlays.
Though the prospect of a rising deficit and national debt in the longer term remains, the two-year budget agreement enacted by the US Congress means that the economy will not be subject to such negative fiscal shocks in 2014 or 2015.
The key challenge confronting the economy in the next two years will be faced by the Fed, which must control the inflationary pressures that could emerge as commercial banks respond to a healthier economy by increasing lending to businesses and households.
The commercial banks have a great deal of liquidity, in the form of excess reserve deposits at the Fed, which could make inflationary lending a significant risk.
The banks are now content to leave those funds at the Fed, where they earn a mere 0.25% because they are risk-free, completely liquid, and unburdened by capital requirements.
The alternative is to lend commercially at relatively low interest rates, with less liquidity, more risk, and the need to provide capital.
But the time will come when the banks will want to use their excess reserves to support more profitable lending.
The Fed will then need to raise the interest rate that it pays on excess reserves to limit the extent to which the commercial banks can draw down those reserves to create additional lending and deposits.
That will be a difficult balancing act.
If the interest rate is raised too little, banks will use more reserves to support lending, leading to higher inflation.
If the interest rate is raised too much, economic activity will be constrained and growth could fizzle.
The situation now has diverged from the traditional scenario in which the Fed controlled the banks’ use of reserves by adjusting the federal funds rate (the rate at which banks lend their reserves to one another).
The principle difference is that the Fed will now have to pay the interest on the nearly $2.5 trillion of excess reserves that it holds.  
The US economy is now on a favorable path of expansion.
But keeping it there will be a major challenge for the Fed in the year ahead.
A New Model for New Europe
WARSAW – Five years ago, Central and Eastern Europe was home to one of the world’s most impressive growth stories.
Annual GDP growth was close to 5%, just behind China and India.
Foreign direct investment poured into Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia at a rate of more than $40 billion per year.
One in six cars sold in greater Europe was being exported from factories in the region.
Productivity and per capita GDP were rising briskly, narrowing the gap with Western Europe.
But the region has struggled to regain momentum since the global financial crisis and subsequent recession.
Economic-growth rates have fallen to less than a third of their pre-crisis levels.
Foreign direct investment, which plunged 75% from 2008 to 2009, has only partly recovered.
Indeed, the region appears to have dropped off the radar of global businesses and investors.
Yet our new research finds that the attributes that had made the region so attractive remain intact.
Growth and FDI inflows are still depressed, but, overall, the region has weathered the crisis in relatively good shape.
In most countries, public debt as a share of GDP has not exceeded 60% since 2004 – in stark contrast to many of the 15 countries that were members of the European Union prior to that year.
And it remains the case that these countries collectively boast a highly educated labor force and wage levels that are 75% lower, on average, than in the EU-15 economies.
At the same time, the region shared in some of the same excesses – notably in the property market – that helped to bring about the crisis.
In Romania, real-estate prices rose 23% annually from 2004 to 2007.
And, despite substantial improvement in the business environment throughout the region, these economies rank behind their EU-15 neighbors on corruption (though they are doing better than other emerging economies, including China, India, Brazil, and Russia).
More important, the crisis exposed significant weaknesses in the region’s economic model: over-reliance on exports to Western Europe and a high level of consumption relative to other developing regions, fueled by borrowing and heavy reliance on FDI to fund capital investment.
But Central and Eastern Europe can fashion a new model that we believe would enable a return to GDP growth rates of 4-5%.
This model has three major components: expanding and upgrading exports; raising productivity in sectors where it is weak; and reviving FDI while developing ways for the region’s economies to fund more of their own growth through higher domestic saving.
The region has a major opportunity to raise the value of its exports of goods and services.
For example, it is well-positioned to become a regional food-processing hub for greater Europe and beyond.
The region’s wage rates are still sufficiently low that sausages made in Poland and sold in Berlin cost about 40% less than those made in Hamburg.
The region is already a net exporter of “knowledge-intensive” goods such as automobiles and aerospace products.
It could move into even more sophisticated areas with additional investment in education and further development of industry clusters such as Dolina Lotnicza (Aviation Valley) in southeastern Poland.
One promising opportunity lies in knowledge-intensive services.
Led by Poland, the region is an increasingly important location for outsourcing and offshoring work.
Its outsourcing industry is growing twice as fast as India’s.
But there could be even greater scope for growth, given two trends in Asia: rising wage costs and increasing concern among Western outsourcing customers about persistent cultural and language issues.
Central and Eastern Europe is well placed to benefit from these trends, given its strong language skills and cultural familiarity with European and North American clients.
The region is also many time zones closer to European and US clients than firms in Asia.
Several sectors are also ripe for productivity improvement.
In construction, which is a highly informal sector, productivity is 31% below EU-15 levels.
Productivity is also low in agriculture, owing to the predominance of small farms that are not highly mechanized.
Opening up the agricultural sector to foreign investment would help to scale up average farm sizes and introduce more modern methods.
“Network” industries, such as electric utilities and rail systems, have been partly privatized in most of the region.
Opening them more fully to competition and market incentives would help to raise productivity in these industries.
To reduce reliance on borrowing for consumption and the vagaries of FDI inflows, the region’s domestic saving rates must be raised once demand picks up.
Pension reform and further development of financial markets would help.
Implementing the components of this growth model for Central and Eastern Europe will require further reforms aimed at making it easier to do business and strengthening protections for investors.
The region’s economies should also invest significantly more in infrastructure and address the effects of aging, which could clip 0.7% from annual growth rates in the coming decade.
Getting more women into the work force would be one way to raise labor-force participation to EU-15 levels and avoid soaring dependency ratios.
Central and Eastern Europe will inevitably be in the global spotlight this year.
The 25th anniversary of the fall of the Iron Curtain and the 10th anniversary of the accession to the EU of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia provide an opportunity for the region to showcase how far it has come in the last quarter-century.
But realizing the region’s considerable potential for further success will require a fresh approach to growth.
Lebanon’s Model of Moderation
BEIRUT – Global debate in recent weeks has centered on US President Barack Obama’s initiative to prevent the advance of the Islamic State.
But another force has emerged as an unlikely rampart against the barbaric and delusional leaders of the self-proclaimed caliphate: Lebanese pluralism.
Indeed, despite the shortcomings of its political system, Lebanon can provide a template for managing cultural diversity and rejecting radicalism in an unstable and fragmented setting.
Last month, the Lebanese army showed considerable fortitude as it fought Islamic State militants in the village of Arsal, near the border with Syria.
Though the army has sustained heavy losses – including two soldiers that were beheaded – it has managed to compel the militants, who were operating inside a Syrian refugee camp, largely to withdraw.
And it continues to fight when the need arises.
International aid is now flowing toward the army, with Saudi Arabia alone pledging more than $3 billion.
But the international community should move beyond military aid to support Lebanon’s real strengths: its moderate, pluralist, and vibrant society.
After all, that is what has enabled the country, against all odds, to avoid all-out conflict, making it a beacon – however faint – of hope in a crisis-ravaged region.
Lebanon’s resilience has confounded expectations, given its lack of a shared national identity – a result of deep social divisions that resemble, to some extent, those besetting Iraq – and notoriously weak state institutions.
In fact, Lebanon’s political system has been paralyzed by disagreements over Syria’s civil war, the consequences of which have been pouring over the Lebanese border.
The country has not had a president since May; the parliament is not functioning; and the cabinet is practically powerless.
When the Islamic State arrived at the border, however, most of Lebanon’s political parties, media, and civil society rallied together.
Billboards were erected appealing to Sunnis to preserve moderation.
Media outlets informally agreed not to provide a platform to radical militants.
And performing-arts festivals featuring international figures went ahead – signaling the Lebanese people’s refusal to give in to radicalism and violence.
Moreover, the army received an outpouring of public support, which is understandable, given the lack of any other unifying institution.
Even the Shia militant group Hezbollah, which caused deep fissures in Lebanon by helping to shore up Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s forces, supported the army’s campaign (though the desire to allow others to die fighting Assad’s opponents was undoubtedly a key motivation).
Ironically, the weakness of the Lebanese state may be contributing to the strength of its civil society.
In Lebanon, unlike in other Arab countries, no single religious group enjoys a majority.
Shias and Sunnis compete to ally themselves with the Christian community, recognizing its vital social and political role in the country.
Lebanon’s acceptance of cultural diversity and pluralism has enabled the country to emerge whole from 15 years of civil war, to withstand decades of Syrian and Israeli occupation, and finally to stand up to the Islamic State.
It may have taken years of violence, but Christians, Sunnis, and Shias seem to have internalized the lesson that they cannot impose their will on one another.
Today, Lebanon is bustling with the cosmopolitan spirit and energy that once characterized the entire region.
And the impact of its people’s creative activities is increasingly visible worldwide, with, for example, the fashion designer Elie Saab dressing Hollywood stars and Lamia Joreige’s art being exhibited in the permanent collection of London’s Tate Modern.
Furthermore, pluralism and moderation remain the dominant forces in the country; tellingly, the Islamic State could not find a single Lebanese to volunteer to be its emir of Lebanon.
But this inspiring model is under threat, as Lebanon struggles to cope with massive debt and the spread of abject poverty in rural areas, especially among Sunnis.
Making matters worse, more than a million Syrian refugees have poured into Lebanon – the equivalent, in proportional terms, of 80 million Mexicans suddenly arriving in the United States.
Such a large refugee population can easily transform – and destabilize – a society, especially one as fragmented as Lebanon’s.
Indeed, it can even provide a conduit – if inadvertently – for the Islamic State to penetrate the country.
Yet the international community has provided only 40% of the funds that Lebanon needs to cope with the crisis.
If Lebanon manages to weather the current crisis with its pluralistic system, cultural vibrancy, and creativity intact, its prospects of achieving political maturity are promising.
Given the importance of such progress not just for Lebanon, but also for its regional neighbors, the international community would do well to find ways to ensure that the country can hold its ground not only politically and militarily, but also culturally.
Lebanon must be able to continue inspiring its regional neighbors, and to provide a template for effective pluralism in the Middle East.
That is important today; it will be even more important when the Arab world emerges from its current turmoil and starts to re-establish a stable sociopolitical order.
Europe’s Educational Evolution
DUBLIN – Europe is grappling with great challenges – too great for any one country to address.
Facing economic crisis, widespread unemployment, and rising competition from developing economies, Europe must adjust to technological advances and new modes of working – all while an aging population puts increasing strain on exhausted public budgets.
In this fragile context, the European Union must focus on education in order to nurture people’s talents and potential, and thus to spur economic and social recovery.
Education holds the key not only to better jobs and stronger GDP growth, but also to the cultural, political, and social development that is needed to ensure that citizens are well-rounded and grounded enough to lead at the local, national, and international levels.
By focusing on the right policies, EU leaders can ensure that Europeans’ education enables them to be articulate global citizens and potent economic actors.
The good news is that European leaders seem to recognize the value of the pursuit of knowledge.
When allocating funds in the 2014-2020 European budget, EU governments wisely decided to increase funding for education and research – the only areas in which they did so.
This commitment to safeguarding education and research funding should be reflected at all levels of policymaking.
Moreover, in order to drive Europe’s transformation into a hub of responsible innovation and ethically sound production, policymakers must ensure that higher-education institutions equip students with cutting-edge knowledge and high-level flexible skills grounded in shared values.
This means developing differentiated education systems, ranging from vocational schools to doctoral programs, and giving students access to international experience, which can expose them to opportunities beyond national frontiers.
For example, the Erasmus program, which enables university students to study or work abroad as part of their degree, broadens participants’ outlook while enhancing their willingness and ability to go where the jobs are.
Such programs also enrich local students and offer valuable insights to professors about other traditions of higher education.
Furthermore, EU leaders must recognize that high-quality instruction is as central to universities as, say, pioneering research.
As it stands, while everyone agrees that researchers need extensive training, the prevailing assumption is that great teachers are born and great teaching just happens – a view that is hampering education at all levels.
Improving the quality of instruction in higher education is at the focus of the first report to the European Commission by the High-Level Group on the Modernization of Higher Education (of which I am President).
Among the report’s 16 recommendations is to develop quality teaching through compulsory continuous professional training, and to recognize and reward achievement.
This approach would give educators the skills and motivation that they require to provide the kind of education that Europe needs.
Another crucial issue – and the topic of the group’s next report – concerns new modes of delivering education, such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs).
In fact, some claim that a revolution in the way knowledge and information is created and transmitted is imminent.
While these new modes of delivery are undoubtedly transforming education, especially higher education, what is happening may be more evolution than revolution.
In other words, rather than bringing about the end of brick-and-mortar education, MOOCs and other innovations will spur the progression to so-called “click-and-mortar” education.
This suggests that the group’s recommendations in this area will include complementary improvements to existing formal and non-formal systems, as well as mechanisms for reviving lifelong learning in higher education.
For students, the foundations for success must be laid early, beginning with pre-primary and primary education.
And policymakers must recognize the risk of perpetuating a digital divide that favors those who are already advantaged.
Studies show, for example, that the vast majority of participants in MOOCs – which have been praised for their supposed accessibility – already have higher-education qualifications.
Europe’s leaders must work to ensure that new modes of delivering education translate into better opportunities for a broader range of people.
The pace and scope of technological progress makes predicting impending developments, and how they will affect education, virtually impossible.
Regardless of which new technologies arise, however, education will boil down to teachers and students.
Providing tools and opportunities that support the evolution of their respective roles is essential to creating a labor force capable of adapting to changing circumstances.
That is the real challenge facing Europe.
From San Francisco to the South China Sea
OSAKA – Territorial and maritime disputes among China, Taiwan, and several Southeast Asian countries are roiling the South China Sea region, with little prospect of resolution anytime soon.
But the current uneasy status quo may be tenable, so long as the parties embrace serious confidence-building measures through multilateral forums while maintaining effective deterrence vis-à-vis China and a commitment not to use offensive force.
Naturally, China is eager to exclude interference by extra-regional great powers, particularly the United States, preferring bilateral negotiations with weaker regional claimants that it can more easily dominate.
Extra-regional powers, however, cite the United Nations Convention on the Law of Sea – specifically, the freedom of navigation and the right of innocent passage – to justify their involvement.
Given that the South China Sea disputes stem from overlapping claims to “exclusive economic zones,” not open ocean, the UN convention is not entirely relevant.
But another international agreement does provide some guidance for settling these disputes: the San Francisco Peace Treaty, which entered into force in 1952 and officially ended World War II in the Asia-Pacific region.
Under the treaty, Japan renounced its sovereignty claims over the Spratly and the Paracel Islands, but did not reassign them to any single country.
As a result, these islands remain legally under the collective custody of the treaty’s 48 other parties – including two claimants to the islands, the Philippines and Vietnam.
China – then in the third year of Mao Zedong’s rule – was not even invited to participate in the peace conference.
Although Mao’s communists had clearly won the civil war and secured control of mainland China, the conference organizers disagreed about which government – Mao’s People’s Republic of China (PRC) in Beijing, or Chiang Kai-shek’s Republic of China (ROC) in Taipei – truly represented China.
As a result, the PRC denies that it is legally bound by the treaty.
But the treaty applies to the PRC indirectly through the ROC-Japan bilateral peace treaty of 1952, which was signed just hours before the San Francisco Treaty entered into effect and reaffirmed its terms – especially Japan’s renunciation of Taiwan.
Indeed, the San Francisco Treaty required that the ROC-Japan treaty be consistent with it, thereby preventing Japan from assigning in its treaty with the ROC any additional right or title to any country other than the parties to the San Francisco Treaty.
As a result, Japan is unable to recognize Taiwan as part of PRC sovereign territory.
To be sure, the San Francisco Treaty per se is not legally binding for the PRC.
But, for Japan, the PRC has clearly succeeded the ROC in Taiwan, as demonstrated by the 1972 Japan-PRC Joint Communiqué, on the basis of which the bilateral Treaty of Peace and Friendship was concluded six years later.
When Japan shifted its diplomatic recognition from the ROC to the PRC, it recognized the latter as the “sole legal government of China.”
Given that Japan was not recognizing China as a new state – international recognition of the Chinese state had existed without interruption since the ROC government emerged in 1912 – the PRC effectively accepted the rights and obligations of the previous government.
Moreover, Japan did not recognize Taiwan as part of China, on the grounds that doing so would infringe on its obligations under the San Francisco Treaty.
While Japan fully “understood” and “respected” the PRC’s declaration that Taiwan was an “inalienable” part of its territory, it did not recognize the claim in accordance with international law.
The two countries simply agreed to disagree over Taiwan’s legal status.
In other words, Japan renounced Taiwan without reassigning it.
To date, China has been silent about the implications of the San Francisco Treaty for its claims in the South China Sea.
This may simply reflect a dearth of international legal expertise in this field or the state of China’s segmented, stove-piped policy communities.
But it could also stem from concerns that using the treaty’s legal reasoning, which conflicts with China’s stance on Taiwan, to resolve today’s territorial disputes would undermine its credibility and weaken its position.
If left unchecked, China may use the South China Sea disputes to gain effective hegemony over weaker claimants.
All parties to the disputes, including China, can cite geographic and historical connections to the islands to back their claims, but none of them has solid legal title under the San Francisco Treaty.
The US and other extra-regional powers should take advantage of this fact, invoking their latent collective custody of the Spratly and the Paracel Islands in accordance with the San Francisco Treaty, and internationalize separate bilateral diplomatic processes between China and regional claimants.
The treaty’s parties could even hold a conference to deliberate on the matter.
Given that it would exclude China, such a discussion alone would be a game changer.
China’s Resurgent Warlords
OSAKA – Last December, the world was appalled by the North Korean government’s execution of Chang Song-thaek, an uncle-in-law of the young Supreme Leader Kim Jong-un and the regime’s de facto second in command.
Given Chang’s pivotal role in steering North Korea’s moribund economy, his execution raised serious doubts about the regime’s stability – raising fears of the collapse of a dynasty that possesses weapons of mass destruction.
But, ultimately, Chang’s execution really affected only one other country, North Korea’s only international ally: China.
Five months later, there remains no clear account of the motivation behind the decision to eliminate Chang.
Nonetheless, a series of in-depth analyses have offered some insight into the power struggle among North Korea’s leadership over the distribution of resources – including mining and other concessions – that are closely linked with the regime’s foreign policy.
Chang was known to have given priority to the regime’s economic survival over the development of nuclear weapons.
China – North Korea’s sole supplier of oil and food – strongly supported this approach.
Why would the North Korean regime jeopardize its relationship with China, the only country that could bring it down immediately, just to execute one official?
Assuming that Kim is rational, he must have had good reason to believe that the Chinese lifeline would be sustained, even if he executed China’s favorite North Korean interlocutor.
The only possible explanation lies in the Chinese government’s struggle to control the Shenyang Military District, which borders North Korea.
Otherwise, China may well have stopped supplying oil and food to the North after Kim’s regime conducted nuclear tests, in line with United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874, which imposed stringent economic sanctions against North Korea.
China could have vetoed both resolutions, in order to avoid North Korea’s collapse and the inflows of refugees that would result from it.
But it chose not to.
The problem was that the Shenyang Military District refused to implement them.
Even if China deliberately acted falsely – endorsing sanctions, while knowing that it would not enforce them – it would have used its support for Chang to tame Kim.
Chang’s execution was thus a straightforward challenge to Chinese President Xi Jinping – a move that, under normal circumstances, would prompt China to suspend, or at least reduce, its support for North Korea.
The fact that China did not suggests that Kim has somehow secured a lifeline directly from Shenyang.
Bo Xilai, the former Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chief in Chongqing who was sentenced last year to life in prison for bribery, embezzlement, and abuse of power, spent two decades in an area within Shenyang, including in stints as Mayor of Dalian City and Governor of Liaoning Province.
Exploiting popular discontent fueled by rapidly rising inequality, Bo, who had been widely viewed as a likely candidate for a top leadership position in the Politburo Standing Committee, adopted a neo-Maoist stance that China’s top leadership could not abide.
But, as the economy slows, the regime’s legitimacy is increasingly being questioned, which implies that neo-Maoism may yet make a comeback.
Indeed, it is a stance that resonates deeply with the egalitarian tradition of the People Liberation Army (PLA), as well as with its institutional interests, particularly those in the Shenyang District.
As it stands, in order to meet China’s strategic and operational needs in coping with the United States and its allies, particularly Japan, the government is emphasizing the modernization and professionalization of the navy and air force.
To this end, it has been redirecting spending away from the army.
Of the seven military districts, Shenyang’s mechanization and mobility makes it the most potent.
In fact, it houses four of the PLA’s five mechanized army corps, with the fifth protecting China’s strategic nuclear forces in Sichuan.
In 1992, China’s government established two additional mechanized corps in the Shenyang District to deter and, if necessary, respond to tumult in North Korea.
Given the CCP’s fear of warlordism – which played a key role in China’s dismemberment after the fall of the Qing Dynasty in 1911 – this imbalance in favor of Shenyang is odd.
The lack of a countervailing ground force in northern China makes it vulnerable to a possible coup by Shenyang, which has already taken advantage of its influence on the North Korean regime to put pressure on China’s leaders.
This has led to speculation that Chang’s execution was retaliation, endorsed by Shenyang, for Bo’s arrest and the ongoing purge of his supporters, including, most recently, Zhou Yongkang, the powerful former chief of internal security.
In other words, what appeared to be a form of political-military brinkmanship by Kim may actually be a manifestation of Shenyang’s reaction to Xi’s struggle to reassert Party authority over Bo’s faction and its supporters in the military.
Thus, China’s ability to bring North Korea into line – a capacity that the US, in particular, believes Xi has – may in fact depend on the outcome of a more epochal struggle to bring the PLA fully under central authority.
Twenty-five years after the military rescued the Party by crushing pro-democracy protesters in Tiananmen Square, Xi’s potential strategy for doing so – a purge of high-level military figures – may incite a major internal fight.
How Humans Cause Mass Extinctions
STANFORD – There is no doubt that Earth is undergoing the sixth mass extinction in its history – the first since the cataclysm that wiped out the dinosaurs some 65 million years ago.
According to one recent study, species are going extinct between ten and several thousand times faster than they did during stable periods in the planet’s history, and populations within species are vanishing hundreds or thousands of times faster than that.
By one estimate, Earth has lost half of its wildlife during the past 40 years. There is also no doubt about the cause: We are it.
We are in the process of killing off our only known companions in the universe, many of them beautiful and all of them intricate and interesting.
This is a tragedy, even for those who may not care about the loss of wildlife.
The species that are so rapidly disappearing provide human beings with indispensable ecosystem services: regulating the climate, maintaining soil fertility, pollinating crops and defending them from pests, filtering fresh water, and supplying food.
The cause of this great acceleration in the loss of the planet’s biodiversity is clear: rapidly expanding human activity, driven by worsening overpopulation and increasing per capita consumption.
We are destroying habitats to make way for farms, pastures, roads, and cities.
Our pollution is disrupting the climate and poisoning the land, water, and air.
We are transporting invasive organisms around the globe and overharvesting commercially or nutritionally valuable plants and animals.
The more people there are, the more of Earth’s productive resources must be mobilized to support them.
More people means more wild land must be put under the plow or converted to urban infrastructure to support sprawling cities like Manila, Chengdu, New Delhi, and San Jose.
More people means greater demand for fossil fuels, which means more greenhouse gases flowing into the atmosphere, perhaps the single greatest extinction threat of all.
Meanwhile, more of Canada needs to be destroyed to extract low-grade petroleum from oil sands and more of the United States needs to be fracked.
More people also means the production of more computers and more mobile phones, along with more mining operations for the rare earths needed to make them.
It means more pesticides, detergents, antibiotics, glues, lubricants, preservatives, and plastics, many of which contain compounds that mimic mammalian hormones.
Indeed, it means more microscopic plastic particles in the biosphere – particles that may be toxic or accumulate toxins on their surfaces. As a result, all living things – us included – have been plunged into a sickening poisonous stew, with organisms that are unable to adapt pushed further toward extinction.
With each new person, the problem gets worse.
Since human beings are intelligent, they tend to use the most accessible resources first.
They settle the richest, most productive land, drink the nearest, cleanest water, and tap the easiest-to-reach energy sources.
And so as new people arrive, food is produced on less fertile, more fragile land.
Water is transported further or purified.
Energy is produced from more marginal sources.
In short, each new person joining the global population disproportionately adds more stress to the planet and its systems, causing more environmental damage and driving more species to extinction than members of earlier generations.
To see this phenomenon at work, consider the oil industry.
When the first well was drilled in Pennsylvania in 1859, it penetrated less than 70 feet into the soil before hitting oil.
By comparison, the well drilled by Deepwater Horizon, which famously blew up in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010, began a mile beneath the water’s surface and drilled a few miles into the rock before finding oil.
This required a huge amount of energy, and when the well blew, it was far harder to contain, causing large-scale, ongoing damage to the biodiversity of the Gulf and the adjacent shorelines, as well as to numerous local economies.
The situation can be summarized simply.
The world’s expanding human population is in competition with the populations of most other animals (exceptions include rats, cattle, cats, dogs, and cockroaches).
Through the expansion of agriculture, we are now appropriating roughly half of the energy from the sun used to produce food for all animals – and our needs are only growing.
With the world’s most dominant animal – us – taking half the cake, it is little wonder that the millions of species left fighting over the other half have begun to disappear rapidly.
This is not just a moral tragedy; it is an existential threat.
Mass extinctions will deprive us of many of the ecosystem services on which our civilization depends.
Our population bomb has already claimed its first casualties.
They will not be the last.
Economists versus the Economy
LONDON – Let’s be honest: no one knows what is happening in the world economy today.
Recovery from the collapse of 2008 has been unexpectedly slow.
Are we on the road to full health or mired in “secular stagnation”?
Is globalization coming or going?
Policymakers don’t know what to do.
They press the usual (and unusual) levers and nothing happens.
Quantitative easing was supposed to bring inflation “back to target.”
It didn’t.
Fiscal contraction was supposed to restore confidence.
It didn’t.
Earlier this month, Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, delivered a speech called “The Specter of Monetarism.”
Of course, monetarism was supposed to save us from the specter of Keynesianism!
With virtually no usable macroeconomic tools, the default position is “structural reform.”
But no one agrees on what it entails.
Meanwhile, crackpot leaders are stirring discontented voters.
Economies, it seems, have escaped from the grasp of those supposed to manage them, with politics in hot pursuit.
Before 2008, the experts thought they had things under control.
Yes, there was a bubble in the housing market, but it was no worse, current Fed Chair Janet Yellen said in 2005, than a “good-sized bump in the road.”
So why did they miss the storm?
This was exactly the question Queen Elizabeth of Britain asked a group of economists in 2008.
Most of them wrung their hands.
It was “a failure of the collective imagination of many bright people,” they explained.
But some economists supported a dissenting – and much more damning – verdict, one that focused on the failure of economics education.
Most economics students are not required to study psychology, philosophy, history, or politics.
They are spoon-fed models of the economy, based on unreal assumptions, and tested on their competence in solving mathematical equations.
They are never given the mental tools to grasp the whole picture.
This takes us back to John Stuart Mill, the great nineteenth-century economist and philosopher, who believed that nobody can be a good economist if he or she is just an economist.
To be sure, most academic disciplines have become highly specialized since Mill’s day; and, since the collapse of theology, no field of study has aimed to understand the human condition as a whole.
But no branch of human inquiry has cut itself off from the whole – and from the other social sciences – more than economics.
This is not because of its subject matter.
On the contrary, the business of earning a living still fills the greater part of our lives and thoughts.
Economics – how markets works, why they sometimes break down, how to estimate the costs of a project properly – ought to be of interest to most people.
In fact, the field repels all but connoisseurs of fanciful formal models.
This is not because economics prizes logical argument, which is an essential check on faulty reasoning.
The real trouble is that it is cut off from the common understanding of how things work, or should work.
Economists claim to make precise what is vague, and are convinced that economics is superior to all other disciplines, because the objectivity of money enables it to measure historical forces exactly, rather than approximately.
Not surprisingly, economists’ favored image of the economy is that of a machine.
The renowned American economist Irving Fisher actually built an elaborate hydraulic machine with pumps and levers, allowing him to demonstrate visually how equilibrium prices in the market adjust in response to changes in supply or demand.
If you believe that economies are like machines, you are likely to view economic problems as essentially mathematical problems.
The efficient state of the economy, general equilibrium, is a solution to a system of simultaneous equations.
Deviations from equilibrium are “frictions,” mere “bumps in the road”; barring them, outcomes are pre-determined and optimal.
Unfortunately, the frictions that disrupt the machine’s smooth operation are human beings.
One can understand why economists trained in this way were seduced by financial models that implied that banks had virtually eliminated risk.
Good economists have always understood that this method has severe limitations.
They use their discipline as a kind of mental hygiene to protect against the grossest errors in thinking.
John Maynard Keynes warned his students against trying to “precise everything away.”
There is no formal model in his great book The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
He chose to leave the mathematical formalization to others, because he wanted his readers (fellow economists, not the general public) to catch the “intuition” of what he was saying.
Joseph Schumpeter and Friedrich Hayek, the two most famous Austrian economists of the last century, also attacked the view of the economy as a machine.
Schumpeter argued that a capitalist economy develops through unceasing destruction of old relationships.
For Hayek, the magic of the market is not that it grinds out a system of general equilibrium, but that it coordinates the disparate plans of countless individuals in a world of dispersed knowledge.
What unites the great economists, and many other good ones, is a broad education and outlook.
This gives them access to many different ways of understanding the economy.
The giants of earlier generations knew a lot of things besides economics.
Keynes graduated in mathematics, but was steeped in the classics (and studied economics for less than a year before starting to teach it).
Schumpeter got his PhD in law; Hayek’s were in law and political science, and he also studied philosophy, psychology, and brain anatomy.
Today’s professional economists, by contrast, have studied almost nothing but economics.
They don’t even read the classics of their own discipline.
Economic history comes, if at all, from data sets.
Philosophy, which could teach them about the limits of the economic method, is a closed book.
Mathematics, demanding and seductive, has monopolized their mental horizons.
The economists are the idiots savants of our time.
The Path to Altruism
SHECHEN, NEPAL – “Cooperation,” the Harvard University biologist Martin Nowak has written, is “the architect of creativity throughout evolution, from cells to multicellular creatures to anthills to villages to cities.”
As mankind now tries to solve new, global challenges, we must also find new ways to cooperate.
The basis for this cooperation must be altruism.
The desire to help others without consideration for ourselves is not just a noble ideal.
Selflessness raises the quality and elevates the meaning of our lives, and that of our descendants; in fact, our very survival may even depend on it.
We must have the insight to recognize this, and the audacity to say so.
Humanity faces three monumental challenges: ensuring everyone decent living conditions, improving life satisfaction, and protecting our planet.
Traditional cost-benefit analysis struggles to reconcile these demands, because they span different time frames.
We worry about the state of the economy from year to year; but we consider our happiness over the course of a lifetime, while our concern for the environment will mainly benefit future generations.
But an altruistic approach requires few trade-offs.
A considerate investor will never speculate recklessly with his clients’ life savings, despite the potential gain for himself.
A caring citizen will always think first how his actions affect his community.
A selfless generation will exercise care with the planet, precisely in order to leave a livable world to its children.
Altruism makes us all better off.
This vision of the world may seem idealistic.
After all, psychology, economics, and evolutionary biology have often claimed that humans share an essentially selfish nature.
But research over the past 30 years indicates that true altruism does exist and can extend beyond kin and community to encompass the welfare of humans generally – and that of other species.
Moreover, the altruist does not have to suffer for his good deeds; on the contrary, he often benefits indirectly from them, while the selfish actor often creates misery for himself as well as others.
Studies have also shown that an individual can learn to be altruistic.
Neuroscientists have identified three components of altruism that anyone can develop as acquired skills: empathy (understanding and sharing the feelings of another), loving kindness (the wish to spread happiness), and compassion (a desire to relieve the suffering of another).
Societies, too, can become more altruistic (and may even enjoy an evolutionary advantage over their more selfish counterparts).
Research on the evolution of cultures suggests that human values can change more quickly than our genes.
Thus, if we are to engender a more caring world, we must first recognize the importance of altruism – and then cultivate it among individuals and promote cultural change in our societies.
Nowhere is the need to cultivate this recognition clearer than it is in our economic system.
The unrealistic pursuit of endless quantitative growth places intolerable strains on our planet and widens inequalities.
But reversing that growth would create other problems; forcing people to compete for diminishing assets and resources would spread unemployment, poverty, and even violence.
So a balance must be struck: the global community must lift 1.5 billion people out of poverty, while the excesses of the world’s richest consumers – which cause the vast majority of ecological degradation – must be limited.
We need not impose more taxes to achieve this, but we can persuade the wealthy that the eternal pursuit of material gain is both unsustainable and unnecessary for their own quality of life.
This concept of “sustainable harmony” can be promoted by publishing indices of personal well-being and environmental preservation, alongside standard GDP data.
The government of Bhutan, for example, already accounts for the “social wealth” and “natural wealth” of its people, in addition to its GDP figures.
We could also establish a stock exchange, alongside traditional securities markets, comprising so-called ethical organizations, such as social enterprises, cooperative banks, microcredit agencies, and fair-trade groups.
Several initiatives – for example, in Brazil, South Africa, and the United Kingdom – have already taken small steps in this direction.
Small steps lead to big changes.
As the value of altruism becomes increasingly obvious, the new approach will spread through the economy, benefiting all of society, future generations, and the planet, too.
Brazil’s Own Goals
RIO DE JANEIRO – Ready or not, Brazil is rolling out the welcome mat for sports fans from around the world.
As soon as the clock winds down on the final FIFA World Cup soccer match in July, the country will resume preparations to host the 2016 Summer Olympics.
But, even as Brazil steps into the international spotlight, it maintains considerable barriers to the global economy, damaging its prospects for future growth and prosperity.
In a world that is constantly becoming more interconnected, Brazil risks being left behind.
Brazil has risen to become the world’s seventh-largest economy, propelled by a commodities boom, a demographic dividend, and rising consumption.
Yet it ranks 95th in per capita GDP.
This disparity can be at least partly explained by its 43rd-place ranking for “connectedness” in terms of flows of goods, services, finance, people, and data and communications.
Sealing itself off from the bracing effects of global competition is sapping Brazil of much-needed momentum, with serious consequences for households, most of which have experienced only modest income growth in recent years.
While Brazil has halved its official poverty rate since 2003, prohibitively high consumer-goods prices and astronomical credit-card interest rates (averaging 145%) have prevented many of those who have escaped poverty from attaining middle-class lifestyles.
In order to lift half of the still-vulnerable population into the middle class, Brazil will need 4.2% annual GDP growth, on average, through 2030 – a target that can be met by tripling productivity growth.
That may be an ambitious goal, but it is achievable, especially if Brazil becomes more deeply integrated into global markets and multinational production networks.
In fact, an assessment of how global connections affect economic growth suggests that, by pursuing deeper engagement with the world, Brazil could boost its average annual rate of GDP growth by up to 1.25 percentage points.
That would propel the economy roughly one-third of the way toward higher incomes and better living standards.
With global connectivity undergoing a profound transformation, now is the time to establish key partnerships and claim market shares.
In doing so, Brazil would gain access to innumerable opportunities for growth.
It would also reap the benefits of global competition, which would compel local firms to seek greater efficiency by implementing lean processes, investing in research and development, or adopting the latest technologies.
Global exposure makes supply chains more dynamic and enables companies to absorb more of the innovations, technologies, and ideas that are constantly emerging worldwide.
For decades, Brazil’s economic policy has drawn on the strength of its huge domestic market and protected local industries through a complex system of subsidies, taxes, and tariffs.
But exports are equivalent to only 13% of GDP, far below the level in India (24%) or Mexico (33%).
Furthermore, the sharp appreciation of the real’s exchange rate – driven by high global commodities prices – has diminished export competitiveness.
As a result, from 2005 to 2012, Brazil’s $20 billion trade surplus in manufactured goods swung to a $45 billion deficit.
To boost exports, Brazil will have to develop distinctive skills and capabilities, particularly in industries adjacent to commodities.
Despite efforts to liberalize trade, reform has been uneven.
In the heavily protected automotive industry, high import tariffs have encouraged foreign automakers to establish factories in Brazil.
But their productivity remains low; auto plants in Mexico, for example, produce twice as many vehicles per worker.
And Brazil exports only a small share of the vehicles that it produces.
This contrasts sharply with Brazil’s success in developing innovative and globally competitive aerospace and agricultural sectors.
One critical difference was the authorities’ emphasis on boosting R&D in these sectors before reducing the government’s direct role.
Brazil’s trade in goods also suffers from the country’s inadequate transportation and communications networks.
The rail system is limited, and only 14% of roads are paved, which is not surprising, given that Brazil’s investment in infrastructure averaged only 2.2% of GDP in 2000-2011 – well below the global average.
Brazil can improve on this record by using profits from the offshore oil fields that it is currently developing.
As for trade in services – an area where performance has been lackluster, at best – Brazil would benefit considerably from increased foreign-language proficiency, which would enable more Brazilians to conduct business abroad.
Tourism also offers significant growth potential, particularly if Brazil can build on the rare opportunity presented by hosting the World Cup and the Olympics.
Brazil’s connectedness agenda should also include efforts to attract more foreign talent.
Skilled migrants have been essential to the growth of some of the world’s leading hubs of technology and innovation – from Silicon Valley to Ireland, India, and Taiwan.
Today, only 0.5% of Brazil’s workforce is foreign-born, compared to more than 5% in the early 1900s.
Brazil also lags in terms of data and communication flows, partly because a large share of the population lacks Internet access.
With improved digital links, Brazil would gain new opportunities to improve productivity and innovation.
What better place than Brazil, with its large and growing consumer market, to incubate the next Facebook?
If that sounds farfetched, consider this: Instagram co-founder Mike Krieger is a Brazilian who left home to find his fortune in San Francisco.
This month, the World Cup is bringing the world to Brazil.
It is up to Brazil to invite it to stay.
No-Brainer Sustainable Development
BUDAPEST – The 2030 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals have among their objectives primary-school education for all children, jobs for all adults, and an end to hunger and poverty.
In truth, estimates vary because nobody is quite sure how much the SDGs will cost.
Meanwhile, donor countries are unlikely to provide meaningful increases in development funding anytime soon.
In the United Kingdom, voters want to renege on a previous foreign-aid commitment – amounting to 0.7% of GDP – by a margin of two to one.
In the United States, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has said that the federal government should “stop sending foreign aid to countries that hate us.”
And in Australia, the government has already slashed its aid budget to an all-time low, measured against gross national income.
If we can’t count on full funding for every SDG, then we should spend what we have wisely, and not spend more on investments that historically yield low returns.
For example, in education, investing in smaller class sizes and higher teacher salaries has not had any significant impact on student test scores.
Another area that promises more than it delivers is “climate aid,” which allocates development funds to efforts to mitigate the effects of global warming.
Too often, this funding serves a cosmetic purpose – making donors appear environmentally friendly – rather than effecting genuine change.
Ending these subsidies would reduce CO2 emissions, air pollution, and automobile congestion.
More important, it would free up money for other areas like health and nutrition, where simple measures can have a massive impact relative to their cost.
For example, while malaria killed more than 400,000 people last year, insecticidal nets to guard against malaria-carrying mosquitoes are effective for two to three years, and cost less than $10 to manufacture and distribute.
All told, a single case of clinical malaria can be averted for as little as $11.
According to the charity evaluator Givewell, the Against Malaria Foundation saves a child’s life with every $3,500 it spends, and one study in Kenya even found that as little as $1,000 spent on bed-net distribution can prevent a child’s death.
The typical American worker spends that much every year on coffee.
A small outlay can save one person from suffering through a painful fever, headaches, debilitating malaise, vomiting, and other symptoms of malaria; and it can save a community from lost economic productivity, because kids miss fewer days in school, and adults miss work less often.
And it can save hundreds of thousands of lives.
Our economists estimate that investing to reduce the incidence of malaria by 50% yields a 35-fold return in benefits to society.
Another simple and effective health-care intervention is to make aspirin more widely available, so that it can be taken at the onset of heart attacks to prevent death.
The cost per treated case of providing this cheap drug alongside clinical visits and diagnostic tests is just $13-15, which means that we could reach 75% of the population in low- and middle-income countries for just $3.5 billion.
That is roughly a fifth of what Brazil spent to host the Summer Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro this year.
Likewise, basic nutritional interventions – especially for pregnant women and infants – can have far-reaching effects for individuals and communities.
Adequate nutrition improves a child’s long-term health, educational performance, and future earnings.
Investing in nutrition is another no-brainer: measures such as salt iodization, and iron and folic acid and vitamin A supplementation can cost just a few cents annually per recipient.
Similarly, deworming treatments and vaccination are inexpensive, effective, and have a high return on investment.
While we should not only look for “bargains” in the SDGs, we absolutely should look for where a dollar is best spent.
It will be great if we can increase funding, but it would be foolish to think that development-aid money will multiply overnight, or that the UN’s massive, quixotic development agenda has the resources to remain on track.
In fact, to persuade high-income countries – and their taxpayers – to increase their development-aid outlays, we will have to be more mindful of costs and benefits, and recognize that not all development targets are equal.
When we can completely transform someone’s life for pennies, we should accept that small victory before pursuing grand projects with even grander price tags and no guarantee of success.
Where money is lacking, common sense shouldn’t be.
May Day Madness
May 1, 2006, is a crucial date for Europe, for it is the deadline for implementing the European Union’s directive on freedom of movement into national law.
Most countries have already changed their immigration laws, or have promised to do so before the deadline.
Only Belgium, Italy, Finland, and Luxemburg lag behind.
True, some of the old EU countries have opted for a prohibition of labor migration during a transition period that is initially set at two years and may be extended to April 2011.
However, this prohibition does not apply to people who are self-employed or not working.
Such people already enjoy full freedom of free migration today.
While the directive’s rules governing migration of employed and self-employed people hardly differ from previous EU law, the migration and social-welfare rights of non-working EU citizens have been significantly extended.
According to the directive, every EU citizen has the right to a residence permit for up to five years in any member state, followed by the right to permanent residence.
In principle, even inactive immigrants will then be eligible for social-welfare benefits, just like nationals.
The directive contains safeguards to limit potential abuse of welfare-state benefits during the first five years, including proof of health insurance coverage and a requirement that sufficient “resources” be shown when a residence permit of up to five years is requested.
But it is not clear what these resources are meant to be.
According to the directive’s preamble, the state cannot cite insufficient assets as a reason to refuse a residence permit, as this would be inadmissible discrimination.
In theory, the resource requirement must be tailored to the individual circumstances of the immigrant.
In practice, however, financial means in the form of assets or regular income are uniformly required from all immigrants, regardless of their individual characteristics.
Nevertheless, even during the five-year period, an immigrant will enjoy greater rights.
If he becomes indigent after receiving a residence permit, he cannot automatically be returned to his home country, as was possible before.
Instead, the welfare state must make its services available to him.
Only “unreasonable” claims may be refused, but the state will bear the burden of proving unreasonableness.
Nor can the duration of the residence permit be shortened simply because the immigrant claims welfare assistance.
When the five years of legal residence are completed, an immigrant automatically gains the inalienable right to permanent residence.
The host country cannot deny this right even if an immigrant has no health insurance and no resources to live on.
The immigrant will be fully eligible for all benefits the host country offers its domestic residents.
The incentives to make use of the new directive will be especially strong for East Europeans.
Today, average nominal wages in the eight post-communist EU countries are about one-fifth of the West European level and often only a quarter to a half of Western levels of social assistance.
The real differences in living standards are not quite as large, but they are a temptation nonetheless.
This will be particularly true for Bulgarians and Rumanians, who are invited to join the EU in 2007.
Currently their nominal wages are only about 7% of the West European average.
Western Europe has already experienced three decades of indirect migration into the welfare state, as social benefits have created artificially high wages for the unskilled, simultaneously fueling excessive immigration and unemployment.
Immigrants have crowded out domestic residents who prefer the benefits to engaging in low-wage competition with the newcomers.
The directive on free movement implies a new era of direct migration into West European welfare states.
The result may be an erosion of these welfare states themselves.
As no West European state wants welfare immigration, and because they are unable to discriminate between nationals and EU immigrants, they will begin to reduce their services.
Europe will enter an extended period of competitive deterrence, during which it will gradually abandon its old social values.
To be sure, countervailing political forces will press for harmonization of Europe’s social-welfare systems.
The draft EU constitution, which failed in the French and Dutch referenda last year, breathes the spirit of this approach.
Unfortunately, harmonization would probably apply to wage replacement payments, implying uniform minimum wage constraints for EU countries.
Given the EU’s economic heterogeneity, this outcome would likely boost unemployment.
There is still time to avert these frightening effects.
But, to do so, the directive on free movement must be changed, so that the right to immigrate does not automatically imply a right to social benefits.
If the home country were to remain responsible for welfare services to non-working immigrants, the erosion of West European welfare states that the theory of systems competition predicts could be halted.
But that would mean a substantial change in the direction of EU social policies, including revision of the draft constitution.
McCain, Obama, and Hot Air
WASHINGTON, DC – Whatever the outcome of the United States’ presidential election, climate change policy will be transformed.