They would have virtually all of the regional stakeholders on their side as well.
Feeding Young Minds
NEW DELHI – Of the many sad news stories emerging recently from India, the saddest in a long time concerns the deaths of 23 schoolchildren in July in Chhapra, the main town in the impoverished rural Saran district of the state of Bihar.
The children were poisoned by their midday meals – a vital part of a government-run nutrition program in schools – which apparently were cooked in oil that had been carelessly stored in used pesticide containers.
The sheer horror – parents seeing their kids safely off to school, only to have them be killed there by something intended to benefit them – is unbearable.
The reaction has been predictable breast-beating about the inefficiency of India’s government services (particularly in rural areas), the country’s woeful standards of hygiene, and inattentive implementation of even flagship national schemes by the country’s 28 state governments.
The midday meal scheme itself has been trashed in India and abroad as wasteful and counter-productive.
“Free school meals kill Indian children,” one headline screamed.
Another commentator even went so far as to claim that there is “little evidence to suggest that schoolchildren are actually getting any nutritional value from it at all.”
Critics of the scheme view it as symptomatic of big government run amok and ask why it is necessary for any government to feed schoolchildren.
But if children do not get enough to eat, they cannot learn: empty stomachs make it difficult to fill minds.
Tamil Nadu’s voters, who supported the scheme at election time, silenced the critics.
So did the scheme’s results – improved literacy rates and nutrition levels.
Soon, other states were imitating the program, and in 1995, India’s central government followed suit, supplementing state governments’ budgets so that children throughout the country could enjoy the same benefit.
Today, 87% of government schools implement the scheme.
The midday meal scheme – which costs India’s government about $2 billion a year, with additional funding coming from state governments – feeds 120 million schoolchildren in more than a million primary schools across the country.
By providing free and balanced nutrition to schoolchildren, it has provided a powerful incentive to poor families to send their kids to school and, equally important, to keep them there throughout the day.
Indeed, thanks to the scheme, school-attendance rates have improved, sometimes by as much as 10%, and dropout rates have declined.
And obliging children of different castes to eat the same meal at the same time in the same place has broken down social barriers in a highly stratified society.
Children whose families could not afford to feed them properly have benefited significantly.
In drought-affected areas, the midday meal scheme has allowed children who otherwise would have starved to overcome malnourishment.
Allegations that the scheme lacks nutritional value have been disproved.
One scholar, Farzana Afridi, reported in the Journal of Development Economics that the program “improved nutritional intakes by reducing the daily protein deficiency of a primary school student by 100%, the calorie deficiency by almost 30%, and the daily iron deficiency by nearly 10%.”
But, while the midday meal scheme’s benefits have ensured its popularity, the quality of its implementation has varied across states.
The national government provides funds for cooks and helpers, and has devised guidelines for the program’s implementation, but schools are under the jurisdiction of state governments, some of which are more capable than others of maintaining the standards required to provide a reliable service.
Many northern states, such as Bihar, have lagged in providing kitchens, storage facilities, and utensils.
The rule requiring at least two adults to taste meals before they are served to children has often been ignored, as it was in the Chhapra tragedy.
Attempts to enforce the rule have met unexpected resistance from teachers, who are obliged to rotate tasting duty: they object that they are at school to teach students, not to taste food.
Some teachers’ unions have refused to perform the task.
Sadder still has been the reaction of some parents in Bihar, who have withdrawn their children from school rather than risk their being poisoned.
Such concerns are understandable but manifestly exaggerated.
The Chhapra tragedy has at least focused attention on a scheme that public opinion has largely taken for granted.
But it would be a great pity if, in examining what went wrong, deficiencies in the program’s implementation were to obscure its accomplishments.
The midday meal scheme has transformed lives and helped educate a generation of poor schoolchildren.
It should be emulated by other developing countries, not shunned because of a preventable disaster.
Indeed, the Chhapra tragedy would be compounded were it to end up derailing a program that is benefiting millions of children and their families every day.
The Chimera of Russia’s Gas Power
Russia began 2006 by cutting off natural gas exports to Ukraine after its government refused to pay a fourfold increase in the subsidized price.
The crisis in Ukraine, many of whose Soviet-era industries depend on cheap Russian gas, soon spread to Europe, which consumes 80% of Russian gas exports, when Ukraine began to divert gas from the pipeline that crosses its territory.
Ironically, 2006 is also the year that Russia takes over the chair of the Group of Eight industrialized countries, which is set to meet in Moscow this spring.
The improbable theme that Russian President Vladimir Putin chose for the conference is energy security.
Even though it is no longer a global superpower, Russia’s vast oil and gas reserves make it an energy superpower, and Putin seems intent on playing that card.
Oil provides somewhat less economic power than gas because it is a fungible commodity, and interruptions of supply can be made up by purchases on world markets.
But gas is expensive to transport, for it depends on costly pipelines or gas liquefaction facilities that cannot be replaced quickly when flows are interrupted.
Gas provides a tempting form of leverage, and Russia had already used it against Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Moldova.
But when Gazprom, the Russian state gas monopoly, followed Putin’s instructions to turn off the spigot to Ukraine, Russia crossed a new threshold.
At first glance, this looks like a classic case of a large country bullying a small country into submission.
As Thucydides put it in his history of the Peloponnesian War, “The strong do as they will and the weak suffer what they must.”
Russia had supported the losing side in Ukraine’s “Orange Revolution” a year ago, and it was time for payback.
But, as it turned out, Putin miscalculed.
He underestimated both Ukraine’s leverage as the primary conduit for Russian gas exports to Europe and Europe’s influence as the major consumer of Russian gas.
In the process, he damaged Russia’s reputation as a reliable supplier of natural gas.
The result was a hastily patched together deal in which Russia and Ukraine each gave ground on price, and a shadowy Swiss-based company half-owned by Gazprom rolled supplies of cheap gas from Turkmenistan into the equation.
Some analysts, as well as former Ukrainian prime minister Yuliya Tymoshenko, raised accusations of corruption against the company, RosUkrEnergo.
But, charges of corruption aside, this outcome indicates that gas is not such an easy source of hard economic power as it would first appear.
Some economists argue that there is little power in relationships where buyers and sellers consent to a price that clears a market.
However, in cases where buyers and sellers are not equally dependent upon the relationship, the greater vulnerability of the more dependent party can be used as a source of coercive power by the less dependent party.
Russia thought it was less dependent than Ukraine, and decided to exercise that power.
But it is one thing to hold the high hand in a game that you play only once.
For the game to go on indefinitely, you must maintain the trust of the other players.
In other words, the shadow of the future suggests that a moderate strategy is best.
Russia quickly discovered that its threats against Ukraine were too costly to its reputation as a reliable supplier for Europe.
When considered in this wider European context, there was more symmetry in the Russia-Ukraine energy relationship than the simple numbers on energy dependence implied at first glance.
Where does this leave Europe’s energy security?
Germany’s Economics Minister, Michael Glos, has said that Russia’s questionable dependability means that the time has come to explore other energy sources .
That will not be easy.
Gas provides nearly a quarter of Europe’s energy, compared to 14% for nuclear power.
Even if governments rethink their ban on new nuclear plants, accelerate development of windmills and solar panels, and search for new gas supplies, Europe will remain dependent on Russian gas for more than a decade.
At the same time, as Europe’s largest consumer of Russian gas, Germany has built its hopes for energy security on developing a rich web of economic ties with Russia.
Former Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder even became chair of a Russian-German consortium to build a new gas pipeline from Russia to Germany.
But, as the Ukraine episode indicates, pipelines dedicated to a single country may be less reliable than those that run through several countries.
If Russia is going to throw its weight around, it is better to have allies among those affected.
The key to energy security is diversity – of pipelines as well as sources of supply.
Small neighbors without options will suffer, but Europe may not.
In the end, the next decade will be marked by a delicate balance in which Europe remains dependent on Russian gas, but Russia’s need for export revenues will also make it dependent on Europe.
The lesson from the Ukraine episode is that while Russia is less of a gas superpower than it would appear, Europe would be wise for to start building greater diversity into the energy relationship.
The China Bears’ Feeble Growl
BEIJING – In recent months, bearish sentiment about the Chinese economy has surged, owing largely to three conjectures.
First, China’s housing market is on the brink of collapse.
Second, China’s fiscal position will worsen rapidly because of massive local government debt.
And, third, the collapse of underground credit networks in bustling cities such as Wenzhou will lead to a broad financial crisis across the country.
In fact, despite its problems, China’s economy remains in good condition – at least so far.
Indeed, it is not yet near to hitting the rocks.
Since the twenty-first century began, skyrocketing housing prices in China, except for a short respite during the global financial crisis, have caused serious social discontent.
After years of half-hearted effort, China’s government has finally clamped down on housing speculation.
As a result, prices fell in October for the first time this year, while real-estate investment growth fell as well.
But the fall in housing prices is unlikely to turn into a rout, because real demand for houses will remain strong after speculative demand is driven from the market.
As soon as housing prices fall to an affordable level, buyers will enter the market and set a floor under the decline.
Moreover, because there are no subprime mortgages in China and down payments are as high as 50-60%, even a significant fall in housing prices will not seriously damage China’s mega-banks.
Over the past decade, real-estate investment in China has been the single most important contributor to fixed-asset investment growth and therefore, to the economy.
Indeed, since the late 1990’s, the real estate investment-to-GDP ratio has been far higher than it was in countries like Japan and Korea during their high-growth periods.
It is simply wrong for a developing country with per capita income of $5,000 to concentrate its resources on producing concrete and cement.
Although a significant decline in real-estate investment will have a very serious negative impact on China’s growth – &#160;which can and should be prevented – as long as the fall is not too drastic, it is a welcome development.
Meanwhile, local government debts are a relatively new phenomenon.
In 2009, local governments were encouraged to create Special Purpose Vehicles, specifically “local finance platforms” (LFPs), to supplement China’s RMB4 trillion ($628.7 billion) stimulus package.
The LFPs would borrow from banks using future government revenue as collateral to finance packaged-investment projects in Chinese localities.
By 2010, some 6,576 LFPs had been created.
There is no denying that local-government debt is a ticking time bomb for the Chinese economy.
According to China’s National Audit Office (NAO), these LFPs’ total borrowing amounts to RMB10.7 trillion, of which 79.1% is bank loans.
But it is equally true that China’s local-government debt has so far been manageable, and there is no reason to believe that all of it is bad.
In fact, for the majority of the LFPs, the cash flow generated by investment so far has been enough to meet repayment of principal and interest.
According to the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) – the largest of China’s “big four” banks – 93% of its loans to LFPs are being repaid regularly.
In addition, given that local-government debt comprises 27% of China’s 2010 GDP, while central government debt and policy loans stand at 20% and 6% of GDP, respectively, the total public debt-to-GDP ratio is approximately 53% – lower than Germany’s.
So, while China should not be complacent about local-government debt, panic is unwarranted.
Finally, there is a long history of underground lending and borrowing in some of China’s east coast region, especially in Wenzhou.
Whenever monetary tightening causes bank credit to shrink, small and medium-size private enterprises are prepared to borrow at suicidally high interest rates from relatives or loan sharks.
In recent years, real-estate speculation has become another important source of demand for underground loans.
When real asset prices fall and cause local credit networks to collapse, not only are hundreds of families left financially shattered and enterprises bankrupted, but banks suffer collateral damage, as occurred recently in the Wenzhou region.
But the severity of Wenzhou’s underground credit crisis has been exaggerated.
In fact, Wenzhou’s underground credit accounts for less than 20% of total credit in the region, while the region accounts for less than 1% of China’s GDP.
The total volume of affected bank credit in the crisis was just above RMB3 billion – roughly 0.5% of bank loans in the Wenzhou region.
So, the damage that the breakdown of Wenzhou’s underground credit networks has inflicted on the regional banking system is limited, with scant national impact.
Thus, despite the high likelihood that China’s economic growth will slow significantly in 2012, a hard landing is unlikely.
Nevertheless, while there is no need to be overly bearish about China’s short-term economic prospects, because of the slow progress in fundamental adjustment and further reform, even Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao has noted that China’s growth is ultimately unsustainable.
The real test has yet to come.
The China Question
President Bush’s recent visit to Asia made little news – by design.
But that’s because Bush didn’t begin to address the issue that is looming ever larger in the region: the changing face of security in Asia in view of China’s growing economic and military might.
This summer, for example, China and Russia conducted their first-ever grand-scale joint military exercise.
This was followed by Russian news reports that China, Russia, and India would conduct trilateral military exercises, named “Indira 2005,” on the same scale before the end of this year.
In the past, such a combination of countries was almost unthinkable, and these exercises cannot be explained away as simple “one-off” affairs with little resonance.
Instead, they reflect China’s long-term strategic goal of establishing hegemony across Asia.
One tool of this ambition is the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), under which the Sino-Russian exercises took place.
Established in June 2001, the SCO includes China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
The SCO’s original purpose was to mitigate tensions on the borders of China and the Central Asian countries after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the arrival of the United States military with the war in Afghanistan.
China regards the SCO as a stage for broadening its influence over a vast region, ranging from the Asia-Pacific to Southwest Asia, the Middle East, East Africa, and the Indian Ocean.
Indeed, its members include about 45% of the world’s population, and 28% of the landmass ranging across the Eurasian continent.
China’s active leadership of the SCO has resulted in policies that it favors.
Gradually, the SCO shifted its focus to fighting Islamic radicals.
Nowadays, however, the SCO is often used as a forum to campaign against supposed American unilateralism and to provide a united front – especially between China and Russia – against the US with respect to security and arms-reduction issues in the region.
This includes joint anti-terror training and demands to reduce US forces in the region, particularly from Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan.
The SCO provides China not only with a platform to confront the existing US-led alliance in the Asia-Pacific region, but is increasingly being used to prevent the formation of a US-led network to restrain China’s advance.
Ultimately, it is feared that the SCO could develop into a military alliance similar to the Warsaw Pact of the Cold War era, with an embryonic “Great China Union” at its core.
But China’s regional diplomacy goes far beyond the SCO.
It seizes every opportunity that comes its way, including the Six Party Talks on North Korea’s nuclear ambitions, to emphasize its centrality to the settlement of any and all Asian issues.
Moreover, it continues to build its “ string of pearls” of military bases at every key point on maritime transportation routes along the “arc of instability” from the Middle East to China’s coast.
No one seems to know how to respond to China’s diplomatic and military muscle flexing in Asia, for the extent of China’s ambitions remains utterly unclear.
But, while everyone else ponders China’s motives, its government is acting.
Indeed, the UK’s premier security think tank, the Institute for International Strategic Studies, recently warned that, while the world focuses on the fight against international terrorism and the unfolding events in the Middle East, China is rapidly expanding its influence from Asia to Africa.
The “pearls” in Africa include Sudan, Angola, Algeria, Gabon, Namibia, Zambia, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Djibouti, Mali, Central Africa, Liberia, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
In each country, China is nurturing special military and commercial relations intended to promote loyalty to Chinese interests.
As in Asia, there is a pattern at work: growing Chinese influence begets increased support for Chinese policies.
Of course, it’s a two-way street.
Whenever complaints come up in the United Nations’ Human Rights Committee, China can count on the support of many African countries that have their own human rights problems.
Even the selection of Beijing as the site of the 2008 Olympics benefited from “African votes.”
And China has publicly stated that it will back African nations in potential disputes at the World Trade Organization (WTO) and other international organizations.
Similarly, many African states now seem to be leaning heavily toward China in its dispute with Taiwan.
When Japan’s government tried to become a permanent member of the UN Security Council, few African countries backed its bid, despite receiving economic aid for decades.
China likes to boast of its “peaceful rise.”
But the rise of Bismarck’s Germany at the end of the nineteenth century was also peaceful – for a while.
The question is not whether China rises to great-power status peacefully, but whether it intends to remain peaceful when it gets there.
Just as the world confronted the “German Question” 125 years ago, it is now confronting the “China Question.”
We need a better answer this time.
The China Threat, Part Two?
Lost in the debates about whether the European Union should lift its arms export embargo on China is a much broader and more pressing question: does the Bush administration once again see China as a strategic competitor, as it did in the early days of the Bush presidency, before the war on terror forced Bush to seek cooperation with China’s rulers?
That Japan has joined the United States in standing alongside Taiwan in opposing an end to the EU’s arms embargo on China suggests that this is so.
Never before has Japan’s government joined a US administration so closely on the Taiwan issue.
When the two countries upgraded their alliance relationship in 1996, Japan’s military operational sphere was expanded far from the Japanese main island.
But the government remained deliberately vague about its responsibilities, and refused to clarify the geographic boundaries of Japan Defense Force activities.
Nearly ten years later, Japan is ready for strategic clarity.
Shinzo Abe, the acting secretary-general of Japan’s ruling Liberal Democratic Party and a leading candidate to succeed Junichiro Koizumi as Japanese prime minister next year, put it bluntly: it would be wrong for Japan to send a signal to China that the US and Japan will watch and tolerate a Chinese military invasion of Taiwan.
Monitoring this development and tracking its context, China’s government appears deeply disturbed.
China’s foreign ministry condemned the US-Japanese move as interference in Chinese internal affairs and expressed resolute opposition to Abe’s statement.
The Chinese regard Japan’s seizure of Taiwan in 1895 and the ensuing 50-year occupation as one of the most humiliating events in the country’s modern history.
In particular, China’s government has resented any Japanese involvement in Taiwan since 1972, when Japan severed diplomatic ties with Taiwan’s government and recognized the communist regime.
But in recent years, pro-Taiwan groups and politicians in Japan have been gaining momentum.
For example, despite Chinese protests, Japan hosted a birthday reception for the Emperor in Taipei in 2003.
Last year, Japan issued a visa to Taiwan’s former president, Lee Teng-hui, a man who explicitly advocates a US-Japan-Taiwan alliance against China.
Japan’s growing coziness with Taiwan has been accompanied by worsening political relations with China.
Despite the fact that China surpassed the US to become Japan’s largest trading partner last year, the top leaders of the two countries have not visited each other’s capitals since 2001.
Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi has insisted on paying an annual visit to the Yasukuni shrine, where Japan’s past aggressive wars are glorified, and where war criminals are among the buried, behavior that China’s government considers unacceptable.
Tensions are also running high in the East China Sea, where the two countries dispute sovereignty over a number of islands.
China is exploring gas fields close to the border as defined by Japan.
A brief incursion by a Chinese submarine into Japanese territorial waters a few months ago caused further alarm in Tokyo.
In response, a new Japanese defense review identified China as a threat.
Japan’s Self Defense Forces outlined three scenarios of a potential Chinese invasion and are making preparations accordingly, while the Japanese government announced last month that it had formally taken control of an island chain over which China, Taiwan, and Japan all claim sovereignty.
Moreover, America’s military is closely coordinating with Japan, redeploying its troops and strengthening its command and combat capabilities near Taiwan.
So, barely two months into the second Bush administration, alarm bells about the China threat seem to be ringing again.
Key US foreign policymakers now openly contradict conclusions reached last year by the Independent Task Force on Chinese Military Power headed by former defense secretary Harold Brown and retired admiral Joseph Prueher.
That panel found that the balance of power between the US and China, both globally and in Asia, is likely to remain decisively in America’s favor beyond the next 20 years.
More significantly, with the latest statement over Taiwan, the US and Japan are poised to use their joint military forces to deter, deny, and ultimately defeat potential Chinese military actions across the Taiwan Strait.
What counter-measures China will deploy are yet to be discerned.
Europe, however, needs to decide if it is ready to sign on with the US, as Japan has now clearly done, to contain China’s strategic and military ambitions.
The Chinese Mirror
TOKYO – The closing decade of the twentieth century offered a crystal ball for anyone peering into the future of the Asia-Pacific region.
Japan’s economy, once the region’s leader, was “lost” after its asset bubble burst, whereas China overcame the economic stagnation that followed the Tiananmen Square crisis of 1989 to achieve its current path of strong growth.
The debate raging 10 years ago about China’s rapid growth – whether it represents a danger or an opportunity – has now settled into broad agreement that wider regional development would be impossible without it.
Further geo-political implications for the region and the world follow from three key changes in China.
The first concerns the pattern of Chinese economic growth, which so far has been achieved mainly by rapid increases in factor inputs – labor, capital, and energy. But recent research suggests that about one-third of China’s economic growth comes from technological progress, or from the increase in total factor productivity.
In other words, China’s growth pattern is becoming similar to that of industrialized economies, suggesting that growth will be increasingly balanced.
The second transformation is the substantial appreciation of the renminbi that seems inevitable in the coming years.
Today, given the importance of exports to China’s economy, its government is reluctant to permit a major revaluation, despite strong pressure by foreign governments to allow the renminbi to appreciate in line with the country’s huge trade surplus.
But Chinese officials know that renminbi appreciation is also in China’s interest, as they seek to dampen inflationary pressures.
China’s government therefore appears ready to allow the renminbi to appreciate, the question being how fast.
From 2003-2005, long before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the renminbi appreciated by 20%.
In light of China’s rapid economic growth and the renminbi’s growing strength, Chinese GDP (based on the market dollar rate) will likely exceed that of the US much earlier than expected, possibly in 10-15 years.
And, when measured in terms of purchasing power parity, China’s GDP will reach that of the US around 2015, thus changing the world’s balance of economic power.
The third transformation is demographic: the fallout from China’s official one-child policy, which will cause the working-age population to start declining in the mid-2010’s.
This will cause economic growth to slacken, complicating effective management of China’s domestic problems, which range from deep income disparities to the lack of political institutions capable of channeling popular grievances and demands.
In these circumstances, the role of the country’s political leadership will become much more important.
Although the current president, Hu Jintao, is due to step down in 2012, he will continue to hold a degree of power through the military, so the succession of power to the next generation will not be completed until around 2015.
Although Chinese GDP is large and growing, its per capita income is still low, and its economic policies differ sharply from those prevailing in the region’s OECD countries.
The geopolitical landscape that emerges around the middle of this decade will thus reflect significant changes elsewhere in Asia as well.
Even so, Chinese policy choices significantly influence other Asian countries, with China’s “state capitalist” economic model now being mimicked elsewhere in the region.
Of course, Japan, Korea, and Singapore had similar policy models in the past (though they later adapted them in line with their GDP growth). Now, however, these countries are once again espousing forms of state capitalism and a return to industrial policy (encouraged as well by the 2008 global financial meltdown, which gave a new rationale for a return to government intervention).
In Japan, postal services that had been privatized are to be re-nationalized, and the role of government finance is being strengthened.
Japan Air Lines, which was almost bankrupt, was rescued by a government bailout, a device that seems to be increasingly common.
Similarly, while many Asian countries already have sovereign wealth funds, now South Korea’s government is establishing a new type of fund to support the construction sector’s export activities.
In short, closer business-government relationships are being re-established throughout the Asian-Pacific region.
Countries are especially seeking to strengthen their infrastructure exports through a combination of public- and private-sector activity.
But that means that international regulations will be needed to limit government intervention, or at least to define the circumstances in which it will be deemed acceptable.
To achieve this, the United States and China must reconcile their very different views of how a market economy should operate.
As the world begins to grapple with the creation of a new economic order, the moderating role of a third party in conflicts between the US and China will be extremely important.
It is a role that will fall to Japan for Asian-Pacific issues, but to European countries on global issues.
If Europe can successfully manage this role, US-China tensions can be overcome, offering the entire world the opportunity to harness and benefit from the strength of its two largest economies.
The Chávez Challenge
Venezuela’s recent legislative elections confirmed trends that have repeatedly brought the country into the headlines in recent years.
President Hugo Chávez showed once again that he enjoys broad support among the nation’s poor and desperate, and that he is miles ahead of his opposition in terms of political skill, cunning, and ruthlessness.
Yet at the same time voter turnout is declining with each passing election under Chávez, and the questionable fairness of the electoral process has grown increasingly apparent.
To be sure, the opposition’s withdrawal from the election just days before the vote was, as Chávez claimed, more a symptom of its own weakness than of problems with the electoral process.
And, just as surely, that very weakness is a function of the gradual stifling of many features of Venezuela’s traditional democratic order.
Even so, the opposition’s mistakes have been massive, ranging from support for the failed coup against the democratically elected Chávez in April 2002 to the failed strike at PEDEVSA, Venezuela’s national oil company, in early 2003.
Chávez will be able to modify the Constitution largely as he pleases, and pack both the justice system and the electoral authority with his placemen.
He will continue to dole out oil-based subsidies in the well-worn Venezuelan tradition of Marcos Pérez Jiménez and Carlos Andrés Pérez.
As a result, Chávez will be re-elected late next year, and he may well remain in power until the end of the next decade.
Yet, if this is what the Venezuelan people want, then so be it.
It is, after all, their business who governs them, and how, as long as human rights are not systematically violated, democratic institutions are not indefinitely suspended, and standard norms of international conduct are respects.
Judged by the last standard, at least, Chávez may have crossed the line.
For years, he has been accused of taking over where Fidel Castro left off: supporting the rhetoric of radicalism and anti-imperialism, if not revolution, throughout Latin America.
It could now be time for other Latin American nations and the international community to take such charges more seriously.
Chávez is giving away oil to Caribbean island nations and Cuba, and buying off Argentine debt to help President Nestor Kirchner’s political fortunes.
In Mar del Plata, Argentina, last month, he openly participated in a rally against the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), in the company of, among others, Evo Morales, the coca-leaf growers’ leader from Bolivia who might well become that country’s next president.
Similarly, Chávez is clearly supporting Daniel Ortega, the perennial Sandinista presidential candidate in Nicaragua, and Shafick Handal, the equally perennial FMLN candidate in El Salvador.
His former ambassador to Mexico participated openly and vociferously in campaign events for Mexico City Mayor Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador’s presidential campaign.
There seems to be a common thread to most of Chávez’s foreign policy: to provoke a major confrontation with the United States.
The danger, of course, is that if and when confrontation comes – over Bolivia, the FTAA, human rights, or press freedoms – it will be too late to defuse it.
The challenge, then, lies in avoiding a confrontation that Chávez clearly wants.
Unfortunately, George W. Bush’s administration has not proved particularly adept at conflict prevention.
The hemisphere’s other nations have a direct stake in attempting to pre-empt a fight that would force them to take sides and might threaten their economic and national-security interests.
Although many of Chávez’s positions have found support in certain Latin American nations, the division that he and Castro’s Cuba have created in Latin America – between left and right, free-traders and “Bolivarians,” and pro- and anti- Americans – is mainly artificial and certainly not impossible to overcome.
To be sure, many Latin American leaders have tried to assuage and control Chávez, and they have all failed.
But the cost of not trying again could be extremely high.
The last time revolutionary leaders confronted the US head-on, in Central America during the 1980’s, everyone lost.
A new split up and down the hemisphere, engineered by a leader awash in oil money, would prove far more disastrous.
The Citizen Bank
LONDON – Soon after the financial crisis began in 2008, I was at a meeting in the United States where a senior White House economic adviser put a question to me: “Do you think banks can be good citizens?”
As I started to answer “Yes,” he interjected: “If your answer is ‘yes,’ think about the fact that no one will believe you.”
His follow-up gave me pause.
I’ve thought a lot about it over the past three years, which have been so difficult for the world economy.
The economic environment in which we are all living and working nowadays is particularly challenging.
In Europe, the United Kingdom, and the US, we are feeling the effects of the unsustainable levels of public and private debt accrued in the years before 2008.
Spending cuts are being put in place by governments and households alike, with varying degrees of public acceptance and social unrest.
The single most important issue for banks and other businesses to focus on in 2012 is economic growth and job creation.
But, to play their proper role in generating employment, banks need to rebuild the trust that has been decimated by the events of the past three years.
That requires bankers to use the lessons learned from the crisis to become better and more effective citizens.
Simply put, the private sector has an obligation to be the engine of growth and employment, and banks have a vital role to play in achieving that end.
Frankly, though, banks have done a very poor job of explaining how we contribute to society. We need to fix that as part of the process of restoring trust in what we do.
At the most fundamental level, banks are entrusted with deposits from individuals, businesses, and governments.
We put that money to work by helping people to buy homes, for example, or by lending to growing companies.
Banks also provide critical services to governments and business, by providing direct access to global buyers of debt and equity, and by establishing large, consistent markets of buyers and sellers.
Some characterize these activities as speculative trading, and even caricature financial markets as casinos.
In fact, these markets serve a fundamental client need.
Of course, to meet these needs, banks must be safer and stronger than they were prior to the crises.
The reality is that much is different in today’s financial sector.
Banks are not borrowing as much; they have more capital; and they have far more stable and liquid sources of funds to lend.
Strong banks want strong regulation, and we believe that no taxpayer money should ever again be put at risk to rescue a failed or failing bank.
But, three years on from the 2008 financial crisis, we still face considerable challenges, as the continuing eurozone crisis demonstrates.
So it’s not surprising that many people doubt that anything has really changed.
The only way that banks will win back the public’s trust is to become better citizens.
That starts with how banks behave, and in demonstrating that we act with trust and integrity.
This means that the interests of customers and clients must be at the very heart of every decision we make.
In 1970, the Nobel laureate Milton Friedman – one of my favorite economists – wrote an influential article arguing that the only social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. On that point, I disagree with him.
Businesses must increase profits in a way that creates sustainable shareholder value, not just short-term gain.
This applies across industries, not just in banking. One sees the benefits of this approach in the paths that companies like Unilever, PepsiCo, and Nestle are forging.
Banks can and should do the same by focusing on the interests of the customers, clients, and communities that they serve.
The challenge is to balance our obligations to all of our stakeholders, both customers and shareholders, including the pension funds that help millions of people around the world save for retirement.
That is not always easy, and the decisions that we – just like any other business – make every day are imbued with inherent dilemmas.
But doing what’s right for customers, clients, shareholders, and communities will ensure that we get those judgments right much more often than we get them wrong.
That is why the answer to the question posed to me three years ago is that banks must be good citizens.
I appreciate that persuading people of that concept will require that they see a visible difference in the way that banks participate in society.
People may not recognize any difference right now; the change that is now taking place is in its early stages.
But we are determined to keep working at it, and I am committed to making it happen.
The Climate Change Revolution
The world is in the midst of a great political transformation, in which climate change has moved to the center of national and global politics.
For politicians in persistent denial about the need act, including US President George W. Bush, Australian Prime Minister John Howard, and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, there is no longer any place to hide.
The science is clear, manmade changes in climate are being felt, and the electorate’s demand for action is growing.
Though unlikely just a few months ago, a strong global agreement by 2010, one that will set a path for action for decades to come, now stands a good chance of being implemented.
Political leaders in countries that produce coal, oil, and gas – like the US, Australia, and Canada – have pretended that climate change is a mere hypothesis.
For several years, the Bush administration tried to hide the facts from the public, deleting references to manmade climate from government documents and even trying to suppress statements by leading government scientists.
Until recently, Exxon Mobil and other companies paid lobbyists to try to distort the public debate.
Yet truth has triumphed over political maneuvers.
The climate itself is sending a powerful and often devastating message.
Hurricane Katrina made the US public aware that global warming would likely raise the intensity of destructive storms.
Australia’s great drought this past year has similarly made a mockery of Howard’s dismissive attitude toward climate change.
Scientists themselves have operated with great seriousness of purpose in educating the public.
We can thank the United Nations for that.
The UN sponsors the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a worldwide body of hundreds of climate scientists who report every few years to the public on the science of climate change.
This year, the IPCC is releasing its fourth round of reports, starting with the one issued early in February.
That report was unequivocal: there is a powerful scientific consensus that human activity, mainly the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, gas), as well as deforestation and other land uses (such as growing paddy rice), leads to massive emissions of carbon dioxide into the air.
This is causing climate change, which is accelerating and poses serious risks to the planet.
The single biggest threat comes from the production and consumption of energy for electricity, transport, and heating and cooling buildings.
But the world’s scientists and engineers, as well as global technology leaders such as General Electric, are also sending a clear message: we can solve the problem at modest cost if we put our best thinking and action into real solutions.
By shifting to alternative energy sources, economizing on energy use, and capturing and safely storing the carbon dioxide produced by fossil fuels, global society can limit its emissions of carbon dioxide to prudent levels at an estimated cost of under 1% of global income.
The changeover to a sustainable energy system will not come quickly, and will require new kinds of electrical power plants, new kinds of automobiles, and “green buildings,” which economize on energy use.
The process will take decades, but we must start now and act on a global basis, using carbon taxes and emission permits to create market-based incentives for companies and individuals to make the necessary changes.
Those incentives will come at modest cost and huge benefit, and they can be designed to protect the poor and shift the climate-change burden to those who can afford it.
The richest country and biggest contributor to global climate change, the US, didn’t even sign.
Neither did Australia.
Canada signed but has failed to act.
Nor did huge energy users like China and India, which must be part of any meaningful solution, face serious responsibilities under the Kyoto agreement.
All of that will have to change.
All countries will have to shoulder their responsibilities to the rest of the world and to future generations.
There is now a way for individuals and companies to make their own voices heard.
The Earth Institute at Columbia University, which I direct, hosted a Global Roundtable of leading businesses, environmental groups, and other international organizations to reach a consensus to help inform the upcoming negotiations.
The Roundtable produced an important Statement of Principles and a longer overall statement that has been signed by many of the world’s largest businesses, including those based in the US, Europe, Canada, China, and India.
Many of the world’s leading scientists signed, too.
Global climate change requires global decisions, and initiatives like the Roundtable Statement show that we can find areas of agreement for powerful action.
It’s time for the world’s political holdouts to join that effort.
The Climate Imperative
NEW DELHI – Today, international action on climate change is urgent and essential.
Indeed, there can no longer be any debate about the need to act, because the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), of which I am chairman, has established climate change as an unequivocal reality beyond scientific doubt.
For instance, changes are taking place in precipitation patterns, with a trend toward higher precipitation levels in the world’s upper latitudes and lower precipitation in some sub-tropical and tropical regions, as well as in the Mediterranean area.
The number of extreme precipitation events is also increasing – and are increasingly widespread.
Moreover, the frequency and intensity of heat waves, floods, and droughts are on the rise.
This change in the amount and pattern of rainfall has serious implications for many economic activities, as well as for countries’ preparedness to handle emergencies such as large-scale coastal flooding or heavy snowfall.
Some parts of the world are more vulnerable than others to these changes.
The Arctic region, in particular, has been warming at twice the rate of the rest of the globe.
Coral reefs, mega-deltas (which include cities like Shanghai, Kolkata, and Dhaka), and small island states are also extremely vulnerable to rising sea levels.
Other negative effects of climate change include possible reductions in crop yields.
Even at the lower estimate, the consequences of climate change could be severe in several parts of the world, including an increase in water stress, serious effects on ecosystems and food security, and threats to life and property as a result of coastal flooding.
There also may be serious direct consequences for human health if climate change is not checked, particularly increased morbidity and mortality as a result of heat waves, floods, and droughts.
Moreover, the distribution of some diseases would change, making human populations more vulnerable.
Because the impact of climate change is global, it is essential that the world as a whole take specific measures to adapt.
But it is already clear that the capacity of some communities to adapt will quickly be exceeded if climate change goes unmitigated.
To help these most vulnerable communities, it is essential for the world to devise a plan of action to limit the emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs).
Several scenarios have been assessed by the IPCC, and one that would limit future temperature increase to between 2.0-2.4˚C would require that emissions peak no later than 2015, and decline thereafter.
The rate of decline would then determine the extent to which the worst effects of climate change can be avoided.
The IPCC also found that the cost of such a strict effort at mitigation would not exceed 3% of global GDP in 2030.
Moreover, there are enormous co-benefits to mitigation: lower emissions of GHGs would be accompanied by lower air pollution and increased energy security, agricultural output, and employment.
If these co-benefits were taken fully into account, that price tag of 3% of GDP in 2030 would be substantially lower, perhaps even negative.
The world could actually enhance economic output and welfare by pursuing a path of mitigation.
The need for international action, therefore, stems from two important observations arising out of the IPCC’s work.
First, if we do not mitigate emissions of GHGs, the negative effects of climate change will be difficult to reverse, implying great hardship and possibly danger to mankind and other species.
Second, the benefits of mitigating emissions of GHGs are so overwhelming that this, combined with the prospect of the harm resulting from inaction, makes it imperative for the world to devise an international response and a plan of action.
Given the challenge facing us, the magnitude and nature of which were clearly brought out by the IPCC, the Copenhagen Conference later this year must produce a multi-lateral agreement that deals adequately with climate change.
The Coming Age of Interest
One swallow does not make a summer, and one month of normal job growth, and rising prices in the United States does not mean that the Federal Reserve no longer fears economic malaise and deflation. But the time will come when world interest rates begin to rise, as central bankers prepare to resist the upward creep of inflation.
Whenever that moment arrives - whether this fall, in 2005 or 2006, or in 2007 - America and the global economy will face financial vulnerabilities that reflect the success of the past three years of monetary stimulation in stemming declines in production and moderating unemployment.
Short-term interest rates are astonishingly low: only 2% in the euro zone, just 1% in the US, and zero in Japan.
Expansionary monetary policy has been successful, but only by pushing interest rates to historic lows - and by convincing investors that borrowing costs will remain at their current levels for a long time.
The main result of monetary stimulus has been to boost asset prices: anything that pays a yield, a dividend, or a rent becomes much more attractive - and hence much more valuable in money terms - when interest rates are very low and expected to stay very low.
This explains the large gaps between current prices for real estate in the US, equities in New York, London, and Frankfurt, and long-term bonds everywhere and what one would conventionally think their fundamental values should be.
So what will happen when central banks start raising interest rates?
In 1994, rising short-term rates caused increases in long-term rates - and declines in long-term bond prices - that were at least double what standard models at the time were predicting.
Moreover, interest rates in the world's peripheral, developing economies rose far more than rates in the advanced industrial core.
Thus, the first danger to worry about for 2005 and beyond - when world interest rates will most likely rise - is another wave of emerging-market financial crises.
For countries like Mexico, Brazil, Turkey, Argentina, Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand, the record of the 1990's demonstrates that interest-rate spreads can widen and capital flows reverse remarkably rapidly, regardless of how favorably IMF officials and analyses by major banks view a country's policies.
Emerging-market interest-rate spreads now are abnormally low.
International money flows - aside from inflows into the US - are not yet at levels associated with "irrational exuberance," but there is still time for that to happen before interest rates start to rise.
This is an alarming prospect, because if there is one lesson from the 1990's, it is that nobody should overestimate the stability of international financial flows.
The second danger springs from high asset values within the advanced industrial core.
The dominant mode of thought within the Federal Reserve - with which I agree - appears to be that the information-technology revolution is continuing, that the pace of growth of potential output in the US remains very fast, and that the output gap is thus relatively wide.
This implies that interest rates may, in fact, need to stay low for a very considerable period.
Moreover, confidence in the Federal Reserve is high, and the last remnants of the 1970's inflation risk premium have been wrung out of interest rates.
As a result, even after output levels return to their potential, interest rates will stay low by the standards of the 1980's and the 1990's.
All of this is, of course, good news for those who own assets like long-term bonds, stocks, and real estate.
Indeed, elevating long-term asset prices was precisely the point of lowering interest rates: making bondholders and especially real estate owners richer, after all, provides a fillip to spending.
But the bad news is that even if interest rates are expected to remain low for a while, they will not stay this low indefinitely.
The bottom line is that when interest rates rise, asset values will fall.
It is during such periods - particularly when asset values fall swiftly and substantially - that we discover exactly how good our central bankers are at their main job: reducing financial volatility and promoting economic stability.
It is also during such periods that we discover how many people who are holding long-term bonds, real estate, or stocks are doing so not because they think current prices are attractive relative to fundamentals, but because their prices have gone up over the past several years.
This is a crucial question for policy makers, because those who bought long-term assets due to what seemed like perpetually rising prices are also those who will sell as soon as price trends seem to be reversing.
In particular, the US trade deficit looms as a massive source of instability should long-term asset prices fall significantly.
To be sure, the challenges facing the world's economic policy makers during the next several years will be different from those that they have faced since the collapse of the NASDAQ bubble.
The risks associated with inflation are probably less dangerous than those generated by collapsing output and the threat of deflation.
But, as we learned in the 1990's, this does not mean that the coming challenges will be easier to handle.
Four Marijuana Moments
MEXICO CITY – Latin America and the United States have experienced what one could call a series of “marijuana moments” over the past few weeks.
Given growing support for ending the senseless and bloody decades-long “war on drugs,” these signs of progress toward decriminalization and legalization should not pass unremarked.
The first moment took place during the Organization of American States’ annual General Assembly, held this year in Antigua, Guatemala, at the beginning of June.
The OAS Secretary General, José Miguel Insulza, presented a report entitled “The Drug Problem in the Americas,” which had been requested by the region’s heads of state when they met at last year’s Summit of the Americas in Cartagena, Colombia.
The report was drawn up by experts from almost all OAS member states, and was divided into two parts: an excellent analytical section, and a brief and somewhat exasperating chapter devoted to future scenarios.
The document itself represents a watershed, because it provides the data needed for a scientific and empirical discussion of an issue that is too often debated in ideological terms.
The report breaks down the issue in a compelling way: by countries (producers, transit states, consumers, or all of these); by substances (marijuana, cocaine, heroin, and synthetic drugs); by links among these illicit substances; and by the consequences of consumption, production, or trade of each drug for societies, institutions, and international relations.
The report also states explicitly that decriminalization of marijuana consumption is a legitimate, reasonable, and feasible option, though it does not recommend such a policy.
This is only an initial step, but it is an enormous one.
The second “marijuana moment” occurred in the US, where the states of Washington and Colorado have entered the final stages of fully legalizing marijuana usage, following popular referenda last November.
Both states have just concluded the drafting and publication of the rules and regulations that will translate their referendum results into law: how to forbid consumption by minors; how to punish consumers driving under the influence; what kind of taxes and tax rates are most appropriate; and how non-residents will be treated, among other complicated and controversial issues.
As legal pioneers in the US, both states will have to proceed by trial and error.
But perhaps the most interesting and intriguing facet of this process is President Barack Obama’s eloquent indifference to the entire affair.
So far, at least, he has refused to intercede in the discussion of whether federal law should trump state legislation, having said that he has “bigger fish to fry.”
The third “marijuana moment” stems from recent decisions in New York and Illinois – the third and fifth most populous US states, respectively – to proceed with legalizing medical marijuana.
In May, the Illinois legislature passed a highly restrictive bill governing marijuana use for therapeutic purposes, which the governor has not yet decided whether to sign.
Soon after, the New York State Assembly passed a strict bill on medical marijuana, which the State Senate has yet to vote on.
If New York and Illinois move forward, they will become the 19th and 20th of the 50 US states that, together with the District of Columbia, permit medical use of marijuana.
Finally, earlier this month, the US-based international NGO Human Rights Watch formally adopted a stance that rejects criminalization of possession and consumption of all drugs and calls for a radically different approach.
Most important, HRW did so from a human-rights perspective, and its statement is worth quoting:
“Subjecting people to criminal sanctions for the personal use of drugs, or for possession of drugs for personal use, infringes on their autonomy and right to privacy.
The right to privacy is broadly recognized under international law, including in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights.
Limitations on autonomy and privacy cannot be justified unless they meet the criteria for any restriction of a basic right, namely legitimate purpose, proportionality, necessity, and non-discrimination.
While protecting health is a legitimate government purpose, criminalizing drug use to protect people from harming themselves does not meet the criteria of necessity or proportionality.”
None of these recent developments will lead, on its own, to decriminalization.
International conventions still limit governments’ leeway, and the US government remains opposed to any backtracking from the punitive, prohibitionist strategy that it has pursued since 1981.
Even the boldest Latin American governments – including those in Colombia, Uruguay, and Guatemala – are reluctant to advance much further, especially if they remain isolated.
And presidents like Brazil’s Dilma Rousseff, Mexico’s Enrique Peña Nieto, and Argentina’s Cristina Fernández de Kirchner are sticking to their orthodox, conservative, and anachronistic stances, unwilling to budge until public opinion leaves them no other choice.
Yet something is stirring in the hemisphere; as its “marijuana moments” arrive with greater frequency, can a milestone be far off?
Where Europe Works
STOCKHOLM – With Swedish cities roiled for weeks now by rioting by unemployed immigrants, many observers see a failure of the country’s economic model.
They are wrong.
The Swedish/Scandinavian model that has emerged over the last 20 years has provided the only viable route to sustained growth that Europe has seen in decades.
Europeans should remember that perceptions of strength and weakness change fast.
In the 1980’s, Scandinavian countries stood for chronic budget deficits, high inflation, and repeated devaluations.
In 1999, The Economist labeled Germany “the sick man of the euro” – a monument of European sclerosis, with low growth and high unemployment.
Now, however, the specter of devaluation has disappeared from northern European countries.
Budgets are close to balance, with less public expenditure and lower tax rates, while economic growth has recovered.
The transformation of the old European welfare state started in northern Europe, and it is proceeding to most of the rest of the continent.
Today, it is difficult to imagine the mindset that prevailed before Margaret Thatcher came to power in the United Kingdom in 1979 and Ronald Reagan in the United States in 1981.
Thatcher’s greatest achievement was the liberalization of the overregulated British labor market, while Reagan turned the tide with his inaugural address: “In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.”
The moral superiority of high marginal income taxes suddenly waned.
Free-market ideas took hold.
In northern Europe, the transformation of the welfare state started in Denmark in 1982.
In deep financial crisis, traditionally social-democratic Denmark elected a conservative prime minister, Poul Schlüter, a jovial man with a bow tie.
One of his first decisions was to peg the Danish krone to the Deutschmark to stop the inflation-devaluation cycle.
The Danish peg – now to the euro – still holds.
Schlüter’s second big decision was to deregulate the Danish economy, which now has the world’s largest number of enterprises per citizen.
But he left the country’s high taxes and welfare state in place.
In the early 1990’s, Norway, Sweden, and Finland experienced a horrendous real-estate, banking, and currency crisis.
Output fell and unemployment skyrocketed.
In 1991, Swedish voters broke the reign of the Social Democrats, electing a coalition government under conservative Prime Minister Carl Bildt, who called his program “the only way.”
Bildt tried to follow Schlüter’s lead, but, in 1992, Sweden was forced to devalue – though his deregulation of markets did work well.
Sweden’s greatest achievement was a gradual cut of public spending by no less than one-fifth of GDP from 1993 to 2007.
Meanwhile, Sweden’s public debt was reduced from 73% of GDP to 39% of GDP, while taxes have been cut repeatedly.
The Social Democrats returned to power in 1994, but they accepted Bildt’s new fiscal policies, and even carried out a revolutionary pension reform in 1998 that properly tied benefits to payments.
In parallel with the Scandinavian crisis, communism collapsed in Eastern Europe in 1989 and in 1991 in the Baltic states.
Poland’s first post-communist finance minister, Leszek Balcerowicz, showed an amazed world how communism could be abolished and a market economy built almost instantly.
The rest of Central Europe and the Baltic states followed his lead.
Former Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar was the most radical European reformer.
Indeed, his ideas about taxation have revolutionized Europe.
In 1994, he introduced a flat personal-income tax, a policy that most Eastern European countries have since adopted.
In 1999, when Laar became Prime Minister again, he abolished the tax on corporate profit, which was harming entrepreneurship.
As a consequence of the ensuing tax competition, corporate-tax rates have fallen to 15-25% in most European countries.
More broadly, Estonia has revolutionized public finances.
Since 1992, it has maintained a more or less balanced budget, with hardly any public debt.
It slashed public expenditure and capped spending at 35% of GDP – the same level as in the United States.
As free-market thinking has taken hold and similar reforms have proliferated, the social-welfare state is being transformed into a social-welfare society.
Government spending remains large enough to guarantee reasonable public services and a social safety net.
Reformers have exposed the public sector to competition, not least from private providers, rendering it more efficient.
The systematic reforms in the United Kingdom, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, and Estonia have much in common.
First, all were caused by a profound crisis of the social-welfare state: falling output, rising unemployment, large budget deficits, inflation, and devaluation.
Without severe crisis, no significant reform was likely.
Second, a change of government through elections prompted reforms and gave them democratic legitimacy.
Reform does not require a state of emergency, as is often argued.
Third, reforms require a strong leader.
No major reform has been undertaken through consensus, though successful reforms usually generate a broad consensus a few years later.
At that point, reforms can be carried forward by those who had initially opposed them, as happened in Denmark and Sweden.
Finally, fundamental reform of the social-welfare state requires leaders who embrace free-market ideas.
Rethinking requires a new ideology, and, after one country has shown the right direction, neighbors often follow.
Europe has now reached the point at which most of its laggards are prepared to accept the social-welfare society.
This humane European capitalism is now hastening toward crisis-ridden southern Europe.
The Coming Global Credit Glut
HONG KONG – With world leaders meeting at the end of this week at the G-20 summit in Cannes, France, the next economic minefield that they will face is already coming into view.
It is likely to take the form of an opaque global credit glut, turbocharged by the fragile mixture of too-big-to-fail global banking with a huge and largely unwatched and unregulated shadow banking sector.
To be sure, that is not what many see.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke and others have blamed the financial crisis of 2008 on a global savings glut, which fuelled flows of money from high-savings emerging-market economies – especially in Asia – that run chronic balance-of-payments surpluses.
According to this school of thought, excessive savings pushed long-term interest rates down to rock-bottom levels, leading to asset bubbles in the United States and elsewhere.
But Claudio Borio and Piti Disayat, economists at the Bank for International Settlements, have argued convincingly that the savings-glut theory fails to explain the unsustainable credit creation in the run-up to the 2008 crisis.
They have shown that the major capital inflows were not from emerging markets, but from Europe, where there was no net balance-of-payments surplus.
The alternative theory – of a global credit glut – gained more ground with the release last week of the Financial Stability Board’s report on shadow banking.
The FSB report contains startling revelations about the scale of global shadow banking, which it defines as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system.”
Its importance was exposed only by analysis of the key roles played by structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and money-market funds (MMFs) in the 2008 meltdown.
The shadow banking system is complex, because it comprises a mix of institutions and vehicles.&nbsp;Investment funds other than MMFs account for 29% of total, and SIVs make up 9%, but the shadow system also includes public financial institutions (such as the government-backed mortgage lender Fannie Mae in the US).
They are some of the largest counterparties with the regular banking system, and their combined credit creation and proprietary trading and hedging may account for much of the global liquidity flows that make monetary and financial stability so difficult to ensure.
The trouble is that, by 2010, the shadow banking system was about the same size as it was just before the 2007 market crash, whereas the regulated global banking system was 18% larger than in 2007.
That is why the FSB report pinpoints the shadow banking system, together with the large global banks, as sources of systemic risk.
But the global problem is likely to be much larger than the sum of its parts.
Specifically, global credit creation by the regular and shadow banking systems is likely to be significantly larger than the sum of the credit creation currently measured by national statistics.
There are several reasons for this.
First, credit that can be, and is, created offshore and through off-balance-sheet SIVs is not captured by national balance-of-payments statistics.&nbsp;In other words, while a “savings” glut may contribute to low interest rates and fuel excess credit creation, it is not the main cause.
Second, the volatile “carry trade” is notoriously difficult to measure, because most of it is conducted through derivatives in options, forwards, and swaps, which are treated as off-balance sheet – that is, as net numbers that are below the line in accounting terms.
Thus, in gross terms, the leverage effects are larger than currently reported.
Third, the interaction between the shadow banking system and the global banks is highly concentrated, because the global banks act as prime brokers, particularly for derivative trades.
Data from the US Comptroller of Currency suggest that the top five US banks account for 96% of the total over-the-counter (OTC) derivative trades in the US.
Indeed, the nightmare scenario haunting the world is the collapse of another shadow banking entity, causing global trade to freeze, as happened in 2008.
The Basel III agreement on capital adequacy and other recent reforms still have not ring-fenced trade financing from these potential shocks.
We urgently need to monitor and understand the role of shadow banking and the too-big-to-fail banks in creating the global credit glut.
Obtaining a full picture of global monetary and credit numbers and their determinants is a vital first step.
So far, the G-20’s call to “think globally” has turned into “act locally.”&nbsp; We hope that the G-20 leaders will think systemically at Cannes, and act nationally and cooperatively to defuse the global credit glut minefield.
The Coming Revival in French-American Relations
With the American invasion of Iraq in 2003, French-American relations reached a low point.
The Bush Administration felt betrayed by French diplomatic tactics at the United Nations, while French President Jacques Chirac felt confirmed in his mistrust of the sole superpower and his call for a multipolar world.
Today, on the eve of the French presidential elections, opinion polls show that three-quarters of French voters believe that France should distance itself from the United States.
Despite a long history of alliance dating back to the American Revolution and including two world wars, France has always had a somewhat ambivalent attitude toward the US, and the Iraq War was not the first time that a controversial security policy undercut America’s attractiveness in France.
Polls show similar reactions after the Suez Crisis of 1956, the Vietnam War in the late 1960’s and early 1970’s, and the deployment of intermediate range missiles in Europe in the early 1980’s.
In addition, France has long had a strand of cultural anti-Americanism.
Some conservatives disliked the crude egalitarianism of American culture, while some on the left saw America’s faith in markets as a symbol of capitalist exploitation of the working class.
After World War II, France banned Coca-Cola for a time, and, more recently, the farmer José Bové became a folk hero by destroying a McDonald’s restaurant.
But the French still flock to McDonald’s and to theatres playing American movies, despite limits on their import.
While such ambivalence will not change, French-American relations are likely to improve no matter which of the three leading candidates prevails in the final round of voting on May 6, in part owing to Chirac’s exit.
In fact, French-American relations have already begun to improve, as both sides realized that their pubic dispute was damaging their interests.
The exit of some of the most strident neo-conservatives in the Bush administration over the past year has also helped, and with growing opposition to the Iraq War, some Americans are beginning to think that the French may have had a point after all.