India has yet to finalize its anti-surrogacy legislation.
But the way the debate has evolved since the first bill was proposed in 2008 illustrates the rapid change in how the practice is viewed.
The earliest drafts of the legislation actually encouraged commercial surrogacy, mandating that mothers employed as surrogates surrender their babies.
Given that under common law, the woman who bears a child is legally its mother, this provision would have been radically pro-surrogacy.
Since then, however, the focus of the discussion has shifted, as unsavory – and sometimes bizarre – aspects of the trade have come to light.
For example, in one case, Germany – where surrogacy is illegal – refused to accept twin children of a German father born to an Indian surrogate, while India demurred at giving the father an exit visa so that he could remove the children.
In October 2015, India’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, under pressure from the country’s Supreme Court, declared that international commercial surrogacy was unconstitutional.
The Council for Medical Research sent out a notification to all clinics, instructing them not to “entertain” foreign couples – including non-resident Indian citizens and people of Indian origin.
The next month, the Department of Health Research banned the importation of embryos to be implanted into surrogate mothers, making the procedure nearly impossible.
To be sure, India is not the only country involved in cross-border surrogacy.
Indeed, Indian regulations limiting surrogacy services to heterosexual couples who have been married for at least two years had already caused some of the trade to relocate, most notably to Thailand.
But there, too, attitudes have been shifting, especially after an Australian couple refused to take responsibility for a baby born through surrogacy who was diagnosed with Down Syndrome.
The couple did take the boy’s twin sister, however, making it clear that what they had paid for was not the “service” provided by the mother, but the children themselves – or rather, just the one who met their requirements.
As a result, it has become harder to deny that cross-border surrogacy is akin to selling babies.
In August 2015, Thailand restricted surrogacy to couples in which at least one partner holds Thai nationality.
Offenses under the law are punishable by up to ten years in prison – for the surrogate and commissioning parents alike.
As in India, surrogacy touched a deep nerve in Thailand, where some see it as neo-colonialist exploitation, with babies as the raw commodities being extracted for the benefit of Westerners.
“This law aims to stop Thai women’s wombs from becoming the world’s womb,” was how Wanlop Tankananurak, a member of Thailand’s National Legislative Assembly, put it.
By November 2015, about a dozen Indian and Thai clinics had shifted operations to Phnom Penh.
That development might at first seem to support the argument that the trade can never be stamped out – only relocated.
But, so far, the number of clinics that have set up shop in Cambodia is small.
And some reports indicate that Cambodia’s interior ministry intends to treat commercial surrogacy as human trafficking, with a potential prison sentence.
Nepal, too, has declared a moratorium on surrogacy, after some in the country denounced the practice as exploitative.
In April 2015, after an earthquake struck Kathmandu, Israel evacuated 26 babies born through surrogacy, but left their mothers – most of whom had crossed over from India – stranded in a disaster zone.
Malaysia also seems on track to ban the practice.
And in Mexico, the state of Tabasco, the only jurisdiction in the country where surrogacy is legal, has restricted it to Mexican heterosexual married couples in which the wife is infertile.
During the legislative debate, Deputy Veronica Perez Rojas denounced surrogacy as a “new form of exploitation of women and trafficking.”
There is the risk, of course, that the ongoing international clampdown will drive commercial surrogacy underground.
But that risk only underscores the need for clear and strict legislation.
Even if some would-be parents are willing to break the law, the vast majority will be deterred by the penalties, including the risk that they will not be allowed to keep the baby or that they will be unable to obtain an exit visa for it.
The pro-surrogacy camp emphasizes the benefits of the practice, which include increased reproductive choice and the accommodation of sexual pluralism.
But while these may be genuine and important considerations, they cannot be placed above the need to prevent the exploitation of some of the world’s most vulnerable women.
Create Growth-Linked Bonds
A year ago, at the Summit of the Americas, 34 western hemisphere heads of state agreed to promote the creation of government-issued growth-linked bonds whose payout is tied to gross domestic product (GDP).
But progress has mostly stalled.
Only one major proposal related to such bonds, from Argentina, is on the table.
A unique opportunity to strengthen the world’s financial infrastructure and increase economic efficiency for many years to come could be slipping away.
I have argued for growth-linked bonds since my 1993 book Macro Markets .
GDP is the most comprehensive measure we have of an economy’s success.
The simplest form of growth-linked bonds would be a long-term government security that pays a regular dividend proportional to the GDP of the issuing country.
Suppose that the Argentine government issued perpetual bonds that paid an annual dividend equal to one ten-billionth of Argentine GDP, payable in pesos. Because Argentina’s annual GDP now runs at about 500 billion pesos, one of these bonds today would pay a dividend of 50 pesos (about $17 or €13) a year.
The dividend would rise or fall as the success of Argentina’s economy is revealed through time.
The market for GDP-linked bonds would arrive at a price that makes them attractive to investors, reflecting expectations and uncertainties about the issuing country’s future.
Until there is a market for such bonds, we cannot know what the price will be.
But we can expect that the market for long-term GDP-linked bonds from countries like Argentina, where the future of the economy is uncertain, would be volatile, as investors adjust their expectations of future GDP growth up and down in response to new information.
What will happen to Argentina in the next 25 years?
Argentina’s long-term GDP growth has been disappointing.
In fact, real GDP per capita declined 15% over the 25-year period from 1965 to 1990 – a period that saw some Asian economies quintuple in size.
But the 8% real GDP growth recorded in 2004 might encourage some to expect a surge in economic performance, as has occurred elsewhere in the world.
Could there be another decline in Argentina?
Or a huge growth breakthrough?
Nobody knows.
The economic costs implied by this uncertainty could be reduced if there were a market for growth risk.
Indeed, Argentina’s economy would be better off today if Argentina had borrowed in terms linked to its GDP decades ago rather than at an interest rate denominated in dollars.
Its foreign debt would have declined in line with its GDP, thus sheltering the economy from default and economic disaster.
To be sure, investors would have then lost on their bet on Argentina’s growth, but they would still have been protected against inflation, even if their bonds had not been denominated in dollars (because Argentina’s nominal GDP would have moved up with inflation).
Can we engineer new debt contracts for countries like Argentina?
The stumbling block has been potential investors’ fear that accounting fiascos in emerging countries would render the bonds unsafe.
If you don’t trust the numbers, you can’t trust the debt.
Clearly, more work is needed to improve the quality of the numbers.
In the meantime, we should not give up on trying to create these bonds.
Instead, advanced countries should issue them first.
True, advanced economies are relatively more stable, which means that the bonds would have a less distinctive risk-management advantage.
But the demonstration effect would be immediate.
Once any major country develops a market for GDP-linked debt, the concept will be established, making it much easier for other countries to join in.
The spread of inflation-indexed bonds serves as a historical precedent.
Finland was the first to issue national inflation-indexed bonds, in 1946, in response to massive wartime price growth.
Israel and Iceland were next, in 1955, followed by Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Argentina, the UK, Australia, Mexico, Canada, Sweden, New Zealand, the US, France, Japan, and Italy.
It took a long time, but the contagion of a sound financial idea has been unmistakable.
GDP-linked bonds would also allow hedging the risk of inflation, plus respond to GDP growth.
Some will object that there is little point in creating GDP-linked bonds in advanced countries, because there is little uncertainty about GDP growth there.
Much of today’s debates about the future of old-age pensions hinges on this uncertainty.
If the economy grows rapidly, there will be no problem; if it does not, a pension crisis looms.
Creating a marketplace where such uncertainties are traded and hedged would be a fundamental step toward managing the risks involved.
If personal pension accounts or provident funds are invested in GDP-linked bonds, the payments that retirees receive in 25 years will reflect the growth rate of the economy – and that of the tax base – to that date, which all makes good sense.
Sweden’s pension system recently created a link between national income growth and benefits, but the reforms did not include creating GDP-linked bonds, a natural adjunct to such a scheme.
At a time when many advanced countries run government deficits, GDP-linked bonds would improve risk management and bring down financing costs.
They might also spur developing countries to do what it takes to join that market.
Writing the Future
ADDIS ABABA – What does the future hold for the global economy?
Will living standards rise worldwide, as today’s poor countries leapfrog technologies to catch up with richer countries?
Or will prosperity slip through our fingers as greed and corruption lead us to deplete vital resources and degrade the natural environment on which human well-being depends?
Humanity faces no greater challenge than to ensure a world of prosperity rather than a world that lies in ruins.
Like a novel with two possible endings, ours is a story yet to be written in this new century.
There is nothing inevitable about the spread – or the collapse – of prosperity.
More than we know (or perhaps care to admit), the future is a matter of human choice, not mere prediction.
What is happening is both powerful and clear.
Technologies that were once found only in rich countries now belong to the entire world.
Mobile phone coverage in Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, has gone from nearly zero subscribers 20 years ago to around 700 million today.
And those phones are helping to bring banking, health care, education, business, government services, and entertainment to the poor.
Within a few years, the vast majority of the world will have access to wireless broadband.
Yet there is another truth as well.
Last year was the hottest ever recorded in the US.
Droughts afflicted around 60% of US counties, including the breadbasket states of the Midwest and the Great Plains.
In October, an extraordinary “superstorm” smashed into the Atlantic coastline around New Jersey, causing losses of around $60 billion.
Climate problems – floods, droughts, heat waves, extreme storms, massive forest fires, and more – also ravaged many other parts of the world in 2012, including China, Australia, Southeast Asia, the Caribbean, and Africa’s Sahel region.
These environmental disasters are occurring with rising frequency, as they are partly caused by human actions, such as deforestation, coastal erosion, massive pollution, and, of course, the greenhouse-gas emissions that are changing the world’s climate and acidifying the oceans.
What is new is that scourges like climate change – until recently described as a future threat – are now clear and present dangers.
Scientists have even given a name to our era, the Anthropocene, in which humanity (“anthropos” in Greek) is having a large-scale impact on the planet’s ecosystems.
Herein lies our great challenge – the one that will determine whether we follow the path of prosperity or ruin.
The rapidly growing developing countries cannot simply follow the economic-growth path that today’s rich countries traveled.
If they try, the world economy will push the planet beyond safe operating conditions.
Temperatures will rise, storms will intensify, the oceans will become more acidic, and species will go extinct in vast numbers as their habitats are destroyed.
The simple fact is that humanity faces a stark choice.
If the world economy’s current growth patterns continue, we face ecological disaster.
If the world economy embraces a new growth pattern – one that harnesses advanced technologies like smart phones, broadband, precision agriculture, and solar power – we can spread prosperity while saving the planet.
I call today’s growth pattern the business-as-usual option; the smart-technology growth pattern, by contrast, represents the sustainable-development option.
Business as usual can work for a while, but it will end in tears, while the sustainable-development path can lead to long-term prosperity.
So, what will it take to write the happy ending?
First, we must recognize that we, as a global society, have a choice to make.
Business as usual is comfortable.
We think we understand it.
Yet it is not good enough: on our current trajectory, short-term prosperity is coming at the cost of too many future crises.
Second, we must recognize the powerful new tools and technologies that we have at hand.
Using advanced information technologies – computers, satellite mapping, image processing, expert systems, and more – we now have the means to grow more food with less environmental damage; improve public health for rich and poor alike; distribute more electricity with lower greenhouse-gas emissions; and make our cities more livable and healthier, even as urbanization raises their populations by billions in the coming decades.
Third, we should set bold goals for the years ahead – to spread prosperity and improve public health while saving the planet.
Fifty years ago, US President John F. Kennedy said that we should to go to the moon not because it was easy, but because it was hard – it tested the best in us.
In our generation, sustainable development will be our test, encouraging us to use our creativity and human values to establish a path of sustainable well-being on our crowded and endangered planet.
I am proud and honored that United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has asked me to help mobilize the world’s expertise as we seek to achieve that goal.
The greatest talents in our societies – in universities, businesses, NGOs, and especially among the world’s young people – are ready to take on our greatest challenges, and are joining the UN’s new Sustainable Development Solutions Network.
In the months and years ahead, these leaders will share their visions of a prosperous and sustainable global society.
Governments’ Self-Disruption Challenge
LAGUNA BEACH – One of the most difficult challenges facing Western governments today is to enable and channel the transformative – and, for individuals and companies, self-empowering – forces of technological innovation.
They will not succeed unless they become more open to creative destruction, allowing not only tools and procedures, but also mindsets, to be revamped and upgraded.
The longer it takes them to meet this challenge, the bigger the lost opportunities for current and future generations.
Self-empowering technological innovation is all around us, affecting a growing number of people, sectors, and activities worldwide.
Through an ever-increasing number of platforms, it is now easier than ever for households and corporations to access and engage in an expanding range of activities – from urban transportation to accommodation, entertainment, and media. Even the regulation-reinforced, fortress-like walls that have traditionally surrounded finance and medicine are being eroded.
This historic transformation will continue to gain momentum as it expands in both scale and scope.
But its benefits will not be fully realized unless governments take steps to empower the forces of change, ensure that the massive positive externalities are internalized, and minimize the negative impacts. Unfortunately, this is proving extremely difficult for many advanced-country governments, partly because the failure to recover fully from the recent crisis and recession has undermined their credibility and functioning.
The emergence of anti-establishment and non-traditional political parties and candidates on both sides of the Atlantic is complicating even the most basic elements of economic governance, such as enactment of an active budget in the United States.
In this context, taking the steps needed to upgrade economic systems, including infrastructure in the US and the incomplete union in Europe, or to meet historical challenges like the refugee crisis, seems all but impossible.
In fact, Western political and economic structures are, in some ways, specifically designed to resist deep and rapid change, if only to prevent temporary and reversible fluctuations from having an undue influence on underlying systems.
This works well when politics and economies are operating in cyclical mode, as they usually have been in the West.
But when major structural and secular challenges arise, as is the case today, the advanced countries’ institutional architecture acts as a major obstacle to effective action.
The political influence of financial donors and lobby groups add to the challenge.
Rather than promoting actions aimed at improving the long-term wellbeing of the system as a whole, these actors tend to push micro objectives, some of which help the traditional, often wealthy elements of the establishment maintain their grip on the system.
In doing so, they block the small and emerging players that are so vital to upgrading and transformation.
All of this serves to complicate an imperative that is relevant not just to governments, but also to companies and individuals that must adapt to changing circumstances by upgrading their structures, procedures, skills, and mindsets.
Few are eager to self-disrupt, a process that takes us out of our comfort zone, forcing us to confront our long-standing blind spots and unconscious biases and adopt a new mindset.
But those who wait until the disruptions are unavoidable – easy to do when governments do not mount a timely response – will miss out on the huge advantages that technology offers.
Even when governments decide to implement policies that enable economic upgrading and adaptation, they cannot do so in isolation.
With technology enabling unprecedented mobility and connectivity, the jurisdictional power of nation-states is being eroded, meaning that a truly effective response – one that unleashes the full benefits of disruptive technologies – is impossible without multilateral cooperation and coordination.
But multilateralism is undergoing a transformation of its own, driven by doubts about the legitimacy of existing structures.
With reforms of the traditionally Western-dominated institutions having stalled, there have been moves to create alternatives; China’s Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, for example, competes directly with the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank in some areas.
All of this makes global-level responses more difficult.
Against this background, a rapid and comprehensive transformation is clearly not feasible. (In fact, it may not even be desirable, given the possibility of collateral damage and unintended consequences.)
Otherwise, the transformative forces will leave them and their citizens behind.
Secular Stagnation or Self-Inflicted Malaise?
MUNICH – Almost exactly eight years ago, the Lehman Brothers collapse plunged the global economy into recession.
The interbank market collapsed, and the entire industrialized world was thrown into the worst crisis since the end of World War II.
Though central banks have maintained ultra-low interest rates, the crisis hasn’t yet been fully overcome.
On the contrary, numerous economies, such as the southern European countries and France, simply aren’t making any headway.
And Japan has been on the ropes for a quarter-century.
Some economists believe that this is evidence of “secular stagnation,” a phenomenon described in 1938 by the American economist Alvin Hansen, who drew on Karl Marx’s Law of the Tendency of the Rate of Profit to Fall.
Owing to the gradual exhaustion of profitable investment projects, according to this view, the natural real interest rate has continued to fall.
Stabilizing the economy thus is possible only by an equivalent decline in policy interest rates.
In view of the huge credit bubble that preceded the crisis in Japan, the United States, and southern Europe, and the aggressive policies pursued by central banks over the last few years, I doubt that this theory is correct.
In fact, I find it plausible that a very different mechanism lies behind the post-2008 stagnation, which I refer to as “self-inflicted malaise.”
This hypothesis is best understood in the context of the economist Joseph Schumpeter’s theory of the business cycle.
Faulty expectations on the part of market participants regularly cause credit and asset-price bubbles.
Investors, expecting prices and incomes to rise, purchase residential and commercial properties, and they take chances on new business ventures.
Real-estate prices start to rise, a construction boom occurs, and a new phase of rapid expansion begins, partly sustained by the revitalization of the domestic economy, including services.
The growth in incomes increasingly emboldens borrowers, which further heats things up.
Then the bubble bursts.
Investment collapses and real-estate prices fall; businesses and banks go bankrupt; factories and residential buildings are vacated; and employees are laid off.
Once prices and wages have fallen, new investors step in with new business ideas and establish new firms.
After this “creative destruction,” a new phase of rapid expansion sets in.
In the current crisis, however, monetary policy preempted the creative destruction that could have formed the basis for a new upswing in growth.
Asset holders talked central bankers into believing that Schumpeter’s economic cycle could be overcome by large-scale bond purchases financed via the printing press, and by corresponding interest-rate reductions.
To be sure, these measures stopped the fall in asset prices halfway and thus saved much wealth.
But they also prevented sufficient numbers of young entrepreneurs and investors from risking a new start.
Instead, established firms remained in place, keeping themselves afloat but lacking the wherewithal for new investments.
In Japan and Europe, in particular, large numbers of such zombie firms and banks survived, and they are now blocking would-be competitors able to drive the next upswing in growth.
The resulting economic ossification looks like the secular stagnation that Hansen described; in fact, the malaise is self-inflicted.
And, because low interest rates have reduced asset managers’ returns, some central banks – and the European Central Bank, in particular – have relied on successive interest-rate cuts in an effort to engineer ersatz value gains for assets.
The economy is thus caught in a trap, forcing the ECB to engage in ever more radical monetary-policy measures.
Its current program of quantitative easing is meant to double the money supply in a very short period.
Further guns are being moved into position, such as successively more negative nominal interest rates or so-called helicopter money.
The only way out of the trap is a hefty dose of creative destruction, which in Europe would have to be accompanied by debt relief and exits from the eurozone, with subsequent currency devaluations.
The shock would be painful for the incumbent wealth owners, but, after a rapid decline in the dollar values of asset prices, including land and real estate, new businesses and investment projects would soon have room to grow, and new jobs would be created.
The natural return on investment would again be high, meaning that the economy could expand once again at normal interest rates.
The sooner this purge is allowed to take place, the milder it will be, and the sooner Europeans and others will be able to breathe easy again.
Creative Europe
LJUBLJANA – At the Spring European Council meeting on March 13-14, EU member states’ leaders will launch the second cycle of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs, a strategy launched in 2000 with the aim of making the EU the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world.
The EU’s current economic upturn suggests that the strategy is working, particularly after its renewal in 2005.
But some areas in which Europe could gain a competitive advantage have been neglected.
One such area is creativity.
The Lisbon Strategy owes much to the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, who claimed that profit results from innovation.
This is an appropriate European compromise between the theory that profit comes from exploitation (Marx) and the view that it results from transactions that make both parties happier than they were before (Friedman).
It is also appropriate for an economy where goods and services fulfill people’s needs and where products compete on their technical or functional features.
But in post-industrial societies, consumers look for more in a product than just functionality.
Relatively prosperous Europeans tend not to purchase a car merely to get from point A to point B, shoes to keep their feet dry, a watch just to tell the time, or a bottle of water only to quench their thirst.
We buy things that mean something more to us than what we use them for.
The intangible characteristics that make a product more than simply useful are what differentiate expensive products from cheap products, and include design, brand name, and environmental friendliness.
We may also be willing to pay more for products that are manufactured at home, in a safe workplace, without child labor, etc.
These characteristics are intimately linked to the values and morals – to the general culture – prevailing in the market.
Companies apparently recognize this.
According to the popular business writer Daniel Pink, giving meaning or sense to a product or a service is increasingly becoming the main source of added value.
This is all the more true as Asian universities turn out vast numbers of engineers and other knowledge workers who are just as qualified as their European colleagues, and as brilliant in technical design as they are in optimizing the manufacturing process.
Adding value in this non-functional sense is a quintessentially European strength.
It is at least as much an art as it is a science, and it goes beyond technical and business innovation.
World-class design and brands already have a foothold in Europe, where creative industries are stronger that the car industry.
There are good reasons for that.
Europe gave the world Hippocrates, da Vinci, Voltaire, Beethoven, Florence Nightingale, Dostoyevski, Nobel, John Lennon, and many others who have shaped world culture.
Today, Europe is defending the moral high ground when it comes to values such as human rights, peaceful conflict resolution, social welfare, and care for the environment.
Far from being actual or potential obstacles to material success, it is precisely such values that should be celebrated and actively projected into Europe’s economy.
Embedding Europe’s cultural and ethical background in goods and services that reflect these values would not only set the European economy apart from the rest of the world, but would also strengthen these values globally.
Perhaps the most urgent example is Europe’s moral leadership on climate change, which, supported through policies such as the Lisbon Strategy, should be translated into technical leadership and early entry into lucrative markets for low-carbon products.
The “soft power” of goods and services reflects the cultural environment that creative individuals require for their work and growth.
In addition, such goods and services require properly cultivated consumers.
As the urban studies theorist Richard Florida has argued, it is technology and tolerance that attract talents.
Europe should therefore become a magnet for creative people from all over the world and should, based on its rich cultural heritage, raise its own.
Creating meaning and preserving values is probably the one task that Europe has to undertake on behalf of the entire world.
If the EU focuses on infusing its goods and services with Europe’s guiding ideas and values, its economy will reap significant rewards.
This will require an explicit emphasis on ensuring the conditions that promote and sustain creativity, and the updated Lisbon Strategy that is to be launched in March should include a commitment that Europe will move in this direction.
Credit Default Swaps on Trial
CHICAGO – The lawsuit filed by the US Securities and Exchange Commission against Goldman Sachs for securities fraud, charging the bank with misrepresenting the way  a collateralized debt obligations (CDO) had been formed, has revived public disgust at credit default swaps (CDS), the instrument used to bet against these CDOs.
Before the 2008 financial crisis, CDSs were an esoteric product, known only to a restricted number of sophisticated investors and specialized academics.
Today, they are a household name, synonymous with unruly speculation, boundless greed, and, ultimately, systemic instability.
Indeed, CDSs are blamed as one of the main causes of the financial crisis.
The legality of Goldman Sachs’ behavior will be determined by a court of law, but CDSs’ odious reputation is jeopardizing the survival of this instrument in the court of public opinion.
Riding the populist wave, several politicians have proposed a ban on CDSs.
The recent Greek crisis has further galvanized the anti-CDS camp.
After all, isn’t it the fault of the CDS market’s avaricious speculators that Greece was on the verge of default and that Greek public employees have had to endure deep wage cuts?
In a word, no.
Far from being the spawn of the devil, CDSs are a useful financial instrument that can improve not only financial stability, but also the way that companies and countries are run.
Banning them will do more harm than good.
Any attempt in that direction is detrimental, because it would divert attention from the useful goal of disciplining the CDS market to make it more transparent, stable, and efficient.
One key advantage (if not the key advantage) of capitalism over central planning is the information conveyed by market prices.
When the demand for potatoes at the current price exceeds supply, the price of potatoes rises, signaling scarcity.
Individual farmers do not need any bureaucratic directive to decide whether to plant more potatoes: an increase in prices creates an incentive to plant more potatoes; a decrease in prices is a signal that they should plant less.
The same is true with stock prices.
An increase in the stock price of steel manufacturers suggests an increase in the demand for steel, which induces entrepreneurs to start more steel plants and investors to provide them with the money.
Conversely, a decrease in the stock price of steel manufacturers leads entrepreneurs to liquidate existing plants and dissuades investors from committing more resources to the sector.
Unfortunately, sometimes prices fail to perform this signaling function properly, as the dot-com and housing bubbles in recent years showed.
During the dot-com bubble, prices signaled huge demand in the Internet sector.
For this reason, hundreds of millions of dollars were wasted in advertising improbable companies on TV and building network capacity beyond any foreseeable need.
During the housing bubble, prices signaled a severe scarcity of houses. So billions of dollars were poured into new developments in remote locations where nobody wants to live.
Given the large misallocation of resources in such cases, it is vital to understand why prices failed to provide an accurate signal to investors.
Why did the United States, with the most developed financial market in the world, experience two major bubbles in less than a decade?
An expansive monetary policy is partly to blame, but the real problem is an institutional setting that favors bullish sentiment.
Pension funds, mutual funds, and investment banks are all long in the stock market.
Shorting a stock is difficult and risky: it is difficult because borrowing stocks is hard to do, and it is risky because shorting has limited upside but infinite downside.
In other words, the traditional securities available to investors make it easier to bet in favor of a company than against it, causing prices to be affected more by irrational exuberance than by panics.
In this respect, CDSs are unique.
Because they function as insurance on borrowers’ ability to meet their obligations, they make it easier to express a negative opinion on a company or a security.
To express a negative view via the CDS market, investors do not need to locate securities to borrow (a prerequisite to shorting), and they risk only a limited premium, while they have the opportunity to gain many times that.
It was the CDS market that allowed the negative – and correct – view of the housing market held by John Paulson and others finally to be embedded into market prices.
They made the bubble burst.
While painful for the rest of society, this is healthy.
The longer a bubble lasts, the more damage it causes.
The same reasoning applies to the Greek crisis.
The CDSs on Greece provide a useful signal of the country’s compromised financial situation.
It is thanks to the spike in the CDS market that the Greek government tightened its budget and improved its fiscal position.
Medical tests, too, often bring bad news, but abolishing medical testing does not solve problems, it only hides them, making them worse.
The reason that politicians and corporate managers alike hate CDSs is precisely because CDS rates are so useful and so prompt in exposing their mistakes.
Nobody likes to be found wrong.
For this reason, politicians and powerful businessmen often cajole the press, the credit rating agencies, and even the analysts to portray their actions in a positive light.
As the main source of negative information that is not sensitive to power, the CDS market is feared, and politicians want to eliminate it.
Of course, the CDS market is not perfect.
In fact, it is not really an organized market, but only an informal virtual exchange.
The existing rules are designed not to make it transparent or resilient, but to make it more profitable for large institutions like Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan.
So intervention is needed to formalize the CDS market and force appropriate collateralization, so that no government has to step in to rescue any counterparty.
But regulating the CDS market does not mean banning it.
To do so would only sow the seeds of the next bubble.
The Moral Economy of Debt
LONDON – Every economic collapse brings a demand for debt forgiveness.
The incomes needed to repay loans have evaporated, and assets posted as collateral have lost value.
Creditors demand their pound of flesh; debtors clamor for relief.
Consider Strike Debt, an offshoot of the Occupy movement, which calls itself “a nationwide movement of debt resisters fighting for economic justice and democratic freedom.”
Its Web site argues that “[w]ith stagnant wages, systemic unemployment, and public service cuts” people are being forced into debt in order to obtain the most basic necessities of life, leading them to “surrender [their] futures to the banks.”
One of Strike Debt’s initiatives, “Rolling Jubilee,” crowd-sources funds to buy up and extinguish debt, a process that it calls “collective refusal.”
The group’s progress has been impressive, raising more than $700,000 so far and extinguishing debt worth almost $18.6 million.
It is the existence of a secondary debt market that enables Rolling Jubilee to buy debt so cheaply.
Financial institutions that have come to doubt their borrowers’ ability to repay sell the debt to third parties at knock-down prices, often for as little as five cents on the dollar.
Buyers then attempt to profit by recouping some or all of the debt from the borrowers.
The US student-loan provider Sallie Mae admitted that it sells repackaged debt for as little as 15 cents on the dollar.
To draw attention to the often-nefarious practices of debt collectors, Rolling Jubilee recently canceled student debt for 2,761 students of Everest College, a for-profit school whose parent company, Corinthian Colleges, is being sued by the US government for predatory lending.
Everest College’s loan portfolio was valued at almost $3.9 million.
Rolling Jubilee bought it for $106,709.48, or about three cents on the dollar.
But that is a drop in the ocean.
In the US alone, students owe more than $1 trillion, or around 6% of GDP.
And the student population is just one of many social groups that lives on debt.
Indeed, throughout the world, the economic downturn of 2008-2009 increased the burden of private and public debt alike – to the point that the public-private distinction became blurred.
In a recent speech in Chicago, Irish President Michael D. Higgins explained how private debt became sovereign debt: “As a consequence of the need to borrow so as to finance current expenditure and, above all, as a result of the blanket guarantee extended to the main Irish banks’ assets and liabilities, Ireland’s general government debt increased from 25% of GDP in 2007 to 124% in 2013.”
The Irish government’s aim, of course, was to save the banking system.
But the unintended consequence of the bailout was to shatter confidence in the government’s solvency.
In the eurozone, Ireland, Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus all had to restructure their sovereign debt to avoid outright default.
Rising debt/GDP ratios cast a pall over fiscal policy, and became the main justification for austerity policies that prolonged the slump.
None of this is new.
Creditor-debtor conflict has been the stuff of politics since Babylonian times.
Orthodoxy has always upheld the sacred rights of the creditor; political necessity has frequently demanded relief for the debtor.
Which side wins in any situation depends on the extent of debtor distress and the strength of the opposing creditor-debtor coalitions.
Morality has always been the intellectual coin of these conflicts.
Creditors, asserting their right to be repaid in full, historically have created as many legal and political obstacles to default as possible, insisting on harsh sanctions – garnishment of income, for example, and, at the extreme, imprisonment or even slavery – for borrowers’ failure to honor their debt obligations.
Governments that incurred debt in costly wars have been expected to set aside annual “sinking funds” for repayment.
Morality, however, has not been entirely on the side of the creditor.
In New Testament Greek, debt means “sin.”
But, though it might be sinful to go into debt, Matthew 6:12 supports absolution: “forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.”
Widespread social resistance to creditors’ claims on debtors’ property for non-payment has meant that “foreclosure” has rarely been carried to extremes.
The position of debtors was further strengthened by the prohibition of usury – charging unreasonably high interest on money.
Interest-rate caps were abolished in Britain only in 1835; the near-zero central-bank rates prevailing since 2009 are a current example of efforts to protect borrowers.
The truth of the matter, as David Graeber points out in his majestic Debt: The First 5,000 Years, is that that the creditor-debtor relationship embodies no iron law of morality; rather, it is a social relationship that always must be negotiated.
When quantitative precision and an unyielding approach to debt obligations are the rule, conflict and penury soon follow.
In an effort to stem recurrent debt crises, traditional societies embraced the “Law of Jubilee,” a ceremonial wiping clean of the slate.
“The Law of Jubilee,” writes Graeber, “stipulated that all debts be automatically canceled ‘in the Sabbath year’ (that is, after seven years had passed), and that all who languished in bondage owing to such debts would be released.”
The Rolling Jubilee is a timely reminder of the continuing relevance of one of the oldest laws of social life.
The moral of the tale is not, as Polonius instructed his son Laertes, “neither a borrower nor a lender be.”
Without both, humanity might still be living in caves.
Rather, we need to limit the supply of and demand for credit to what the economy is capable of producing.
How to do this and maintain freedom of enterprise is one of the great unsettled questions of political economy.
Credit Where Credit is Due
In the old days, when communist central planning suffocated China’s economy, fixed-asset investment was the regime’s measure of economic progress.
The more tons of steel produced, slabs of concrete poured, and gallons of crude oil pumped out of the ground the better.
The consumption-based economy, to which the capitalist West had apparently succumbed, was written off as a paper tiger.
On the surface, nothing much has changed.
China remains obsessed with investing –construction of factories and infrastructure accounted for 41% of GDP and around half of economic growth in 2005.
Moreover, the country’s continuing high levels of fixed-asset investment make sense – building roads, water pipes, metro systems, telecommunication networks, and electronics factories is what a vast and rapidly modernizing country must do.
But the Communist Party leadership has decided that in the next decade hairdressers, accountants, karaoke hostesses, tour guides, and movie directors will be the new pillars of economic performance.
As investment growth slows and export markets endure their unpredictable business cycles and protectionist moods, China will increasingly rely upon consumption for creation of jobs and income – and the service industry is where most consumption occurs.
There is only one problem: Chinese people do not seem to want to consume, at least according to commonly cited data.
National savings amounted to roughly 50% of GDP in 2005, which apparently means that households are so afraid of hospital bills, school fees, and the down-payment on the new apartment they dream of that they save every penny they earn.
But that savings number hides something very critical.
Chinese households do save a lot, about one quarter of their income.
But as Louis Kuijs of the World Bank has pointed out, what sets China apart from many other developing countries is not that households save uniquely high levels of their income, but that enterprises do.
Indeed, private consumption in China has been growing in real terms at an annual rate of around 10% for the last seven years.
This means that getting Chinese households to spend more is not a hopeless mission.
According to the credit card provider MasterCard, by 2010 China’s middle class will number 100 million, each with discretionary spending of $5,590, and 7.5 million affluent people, each with $13,500 to spend.
But why wait until 2010?
If a decent credit culture can be created, people can have access to tomorrow’s income today.
People in their twenties could borrow money to buy a house, start a family, and go on holiday, paying the money back when they are in their fifties and would much rather stay at home and enjoy their grandchildren.
Consumer credit began in China only in the late 1990’s, with regulations allowing banks to offer mortgage loans, which now amount to about 10% of total loans.
According to a recent survey by the People’s Bank (the central bank), households in the ten largest cities spend about 35% of their monthly income on average on mortgage repayments, which is comparable to other countries.
Loans for education and car purchases are now also possible, and 2% of households have credit cards, which is obviously still low compared to 75% in the United States, but there were no such households just five years ago.
Although debit cards remain far more common, banks like China Merchants Bank have been aggressive in issuing real credit cards.
A key problem with the credit card rollout is that the payment system is not yet in place.
UnionPay, the market leader, is expensive for retailers to install, and many shops prefer cash to avoid tax.
However, outstanding credit on cards is growing, more than quadrupling year on year in 2004, to 0.18% of GDP, according to the consulting firm McKinsey.
Several other obstacles must nonetheless be surmounted in order to boost consumption.
First, banks still have few reliable means of checking borrowers’ creditworthiness, including previous loans from other banks.
Educational loans should be booming in urban and rural China, but banks do not know to whom to lend, so they are not.
Second, banks are vulnerable to non-repayment.
The car loan market underwent a mini-boom in 2003-04, but non-repayment rates in excess of 50% forced banks to pull back.
The difficulty of repossession (where did the borrower park the car?) and sale (the used-car market is still in its infancy) meant that most of these bad loans had to be written off.
There is also a dark cloud over the mortgage market following a judgment by the Supreme People’s Court in 2003 that banned the repossession of homes that are a primary residence.
A recent revision of that decision permits banks to repossess homes, but only if they help arrange alternative lower-cost housing – an administrative nightmare for lenders, particularly if a lot of people start defaulting at the same time.
Third, consumers are generally not adept at dealing with interest-rate risk.
Nearly all mortgages have floating rates that vary with the five-year loan rate set by the People’s Bank.
However, late last year, Everbright Bank and some others began offering fixed-rate mortgages.
Take-up has been slow, but the April 2006 surprise hike in bank rates may help to sow greater public awareness of interest-rate risk.
Finally, China needs a greater diversity of financial products.
Until recently, banks could offer only simple savings accounts.
But structured deposits – for example, deposits whose rate of return is linked to the performance of the New York Stock Exchange – are becoming increasingly popular.
Securities investment funds now account for roughly 30% of tradable stock market capitalization, although this represents only 0.9% of GDP, compared to more than 5% in India.
The economic significance of new financial products is likely to grow more rapidly as foreign banks enter the market.
If China’s regulators issue the right licenses, the financial sector will play a key role in nurturing and sustaining the consumer society of tomorrow.
Crime and Punishment, Refugee Style
The horrible murder of Giovanna Reggiani that took place near a Romanian refugee camp in the suburb of Tor di Quinto in Rome shocked both Italy and Romania.
The case gained significance by adding fuel to the fiery public debates now underway not only in Italy but across Europe on the status of refugees and foreign residents.
Some Italians responded violently; some Italian and Romanian politicians, eager to offer quick and tough solutions, made scandalous statements that echoed the xenophobic and totalitarian slogans of the past.
We are encountering, not without irony, a kind of grotesque reverse of the “national pride” seen when cultural and sporting stars are appropriated by the state and presented as part of the collective patrimony.
Although the murder was an individual crime, to compound the tragedy of a crime through measures that target an entire minority is irresponsible, and will have grave moral and social consequences not only for the unjustly punished but also for the punishers.
No minority is, after all, homogenous, which was demonstrated by the fact that the person who alerted the police was a compatriot of the killer and from the same camp of refugees.
Collective punishment also means not only a type of amnesia by Italians and Romanians about what happened under fascism, nazism, communism, but also for their own national histories.
Italians, after all, migrated not only from Italy’s south to its north, but also to other countries looking for a better life.
They, too, know what it is like to be a refugee, an exile, a stranger.
Romania, for its part, has a history not at all admirable in regard to it its “Roma” minority, whose shortcomings and deeds always attract blame but never any real action by the state to improve their condition.
The Roma minority first appeared in Romania in the 14th century, but only in 1856 was its slavery abolished!
Romanian society nowadays is dealing with the consequences of decades of terror and lies, of demagogy and poverty that scarred several generations.
These wounds cannot be instantly healed.
Communism’s fall unleashed a huge surge of human energy, but this started with a bizarre and cynical transfer of privileges and assets within the old “nomenklatura,” and with a new general Darwinian struggle.
Although economic progress is visible across Romania, and a gradual renewal of a civic conscience through the arrival of democracy has appeared, Romania’s burlesque of a political life – despite its European Union membership – shows how persistent its bad old habits of duplicity, inconsistency, fatalism, inertia, and corruption are.
Corruption, indeed, now seems to be the society’s engine.
There remain in Romania today disadvantaged and neglected groups who are pushed to society’s sordid margins.
The Roma population, indeed, has 41% seasonal workers, 33.5 % lack any professional skills, 38.7 % are illiterate.
This is not only a Romanian problem, but has become a problem for all of Europe.
Nicolae Romulus Mailat, the young man of 25 accused of Giovanna Reggianni’s murder, had been interned at age 14 in a school for re-education.
He was later condemned again for theft, but was pardoned a year before arriving in Italy.
Was poverty the cause of his juvenile offenses in Romania and his crime in Italy?
In Dostoievski’s great novel Crime and Punishment , Raskolnikov is pushed to committing his crime not only by his nihilism and rebelliousness, but also by poverty.
His social identity is not the same as Mailat’s, his spiritual “entity” is drastically different, but his double crime is no less abominable.
For now, there is no reason to hope that Mailat will find through his crime a new start towards salvation through suffering and spiritual renewal.
But perhaps we should hear again the words of one of Raskolnikov’s interlocutors when he speaks about the “disgusting Sodome” in which he wanders and says that poverty is not a vice, but misery.
In poverty one still keeps a kind of “innate noble sentiment,” while in misery moral collapse is inherent and disastrous.
Mailat sought escape from his Romanian misery and his Romanian past, but could not imagine that he would find in an Italian refugee camp as much misery as before; that the image in the mirror of his daily new life would be that of a killer.
People who know the frightening neighborhood of Tor di Quinto, where Giovanna Reggiani was killed have harsh words to say about the neglect and indifference of Rome’s city government.
This isn’t, of course, an excuse for this crime or for any crime, but it cannot be ignored.
Although we cannot expect a miraculous reincarnation of the criminal Mailat, we can and must ask for a radical review of the situation that marginalized people like him face.
That review must be done not only by Romanian and Italian states, but by the Roma community in Romania and Italy and also by the European community itself.
For the perpetrator is a member of all these communities.
We hear voices now who are exasperated by the EU’s enlargement and the social tensions it provoked.
Increased migration is, indeed, a daily fact in our centrifugal and global modernity, but it isn’t only a negative one.
The free movement of people doesn’t only mean more social conflict and criminality.
It also means a gradual and beneficial cohabitation that began immediately after WWII as a common effort to help out the defeated countries and enhance their chances for democracy and prosperity.
When I visited Barcelona and Madrid last year, I was delighted to receive enthusiastic news about the successes of the growing Romanian community in these cities.
Some Romanian refugees were already candidates for the local elections, praised for their hard work and honesty.
It will happen, I hope, also in other places and not only with Romanians but with all the people ready to face the provocations of our time.
For these are examples not only of individual success, but are victories for the community as well.
Europe deserves to prove that it is a real community, one diverse, democratic, spiritual, free, and prosperous.
And yet, as in most settlements, BoA did not admit any fault.
Was BoA tripped up by bad luck or sloppiness?
Or did it and other financial institutions behave with intent to defraud investors?
As a result of the settlement, we will never learn the truth (at least the version that is established beyond a reasonable doubt in open court).
In each settlement, the investigations are stopped, and whatever has been found is sealed.
Fortunately, academic research may be able to shed some light on this important matter.
In a recent paper, the economists Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and James Witkin compare the characteristics of securitized mortgages as they were disclosed to investors at the time of sale with these loans’ characteristics as they were recorded in the banks’ proprietary databases.
The data cover non-agency residential mortgages, which are not the same as those targeted by the settlement, and the data come from a pool of banks, so we do not know which banks were present.
But their data are similar enough to enable us to learn a lot about what was going on.
If the massive wave of defaults on securitized mortgages was purely the result of bad luck, we would expect that the characteristics reported to investors would not differ from those recorded in the banks’ databases.
This is especially true of characteristics that are relevant to default risk, such as whether the borrower was an owner or an investor, or whether there was a second lien on the property.
In fact, the authors find that more than 6% of mortgage loans misreport the borrower’s occupancy status, while 7% do not disclose second liens.
Of course, any database contains errors.
Are these errors large enough to be worrisome?
And how can we be sure that the banks knowingly misrepresented this information, rather than that they merely were sloppy in reporting it?
The authors provide some interesting evidence in this context.
They show, for example, that the misrepresentation is correlated with higher defaults down the line: delinquent payments on misreported loans are more than 60% higher than on loans that are otherwise similar.
Thus, the errors do not seem to be random, but purposeful.
What the authors do not find is also interesting.
The degree of misrepresentation seems to be unrelated to the incentives provided to the top management and to the quality of risk-management practices inside these firms.
In fact, all reputable intermediaries in their sample exhibit a significant degree of misrepresentation.
Thus, the problem does not seem to be limited to a few bad apples, but is pervasive.
This makes a solution more difficult to achieve.
After all, if the financial industry’s leaders are misleading investors, it is the culture of the entire industry that needs to be changed.
Unfortunately, these giant settlements are unlikely to make a difference.
They are paid by shareholders and taxpayers (most of these settlements are tax-deductible), leaving the people who were ultimately responsible not only to walk away, but to walk away very rich.
For example, Angelo Mozilo received almost $470 million during his tenure as CEO of Countrywide Financial.
As far as I know, he paid nothing of BoA’s $11.6 billion settlement cost.
Mozilo did settle with the SEC, but on different charges (insider trading).
And he paid only $47.5 million of the $67.5 million settlement, owing to a $20 million indemnification agreement that was part of his employment contract.
Why have Mozilo and others been allowed to pay a relative pittance and avoid criminal proceedings?
A few prominent criminal convictions have sent a powerful signal in the fight against insider trading.
If the target is an industry-wide culture of deception, shouldn’t the criminal justice system be mobilized against banks’ mortgage fraud as well?
Criminalizing HIV
JOHANNESBURG – “If the law supposes that,” Mr. Bumble says in Charles Dickens’ novel Oliver Twist, “the law is an ass.”  A criminal law that makes it preferable for carriers of HIV not to know that they are infected and capable of spreading it to others, including their loved ones, seems particularly suited to Mr. Bumble’s condemnation.
Yet tragically, in a misguided attempt to thwart the spread of HIV and AIDS, lawmakers in many parts of the world have passed criminal statues that promote ignorance about the disease, punish its victims, and enhance the chances that the virus will infect new victims.
Some countries in Western and Central Africa are enacting poorly drafted policies based on the African Model Law, which makes it a criminal offense for any person infected by the virus to transmit it to someone else or to expose another person to it.
In some jurisdictions, prosecutors can bring charges against pregnant women who are HIV-positive for potentially exposing the virus to their unborn children.
There are, to be sure, rare and dramatic cases in which a person with HIV infects another with the specific intention of inflicting harm.
It is a reality that men infected with HIV or AIDS in some parts of Africa have even raped girls believing that sex with virgins is a cure.
And some women’s rights advocates have supported laws that criminalize transmitting HIV, arguing that these laws would punish men who concealed their HIV-positive status from their sexual partners, including their wives and girlfriends.
But existing criminal laws are more than adequate to allow willing justice systems to mete out appropriate sanctions against people who intend harm.
Criminal laws targeting all HIV carriers, however, are counter-productive and inherently unjust.
These laws effectively make criminals out of millions of the disease’s innocent victims, especially its women victims.
In Zimbabwe, for example, a woman was recently sentenced for exposing her lover to HIV even though she did not infect him.
In Ukraine, human rights lawyers report the troubling case of a woman who was convicted for transmitting HIV to her husband even though he had used a condom, and despite the fact that he asked for the charges to be withdrawn.
Gender bias against women permeates throughout Africa, and women are usually blamed for bringing HIV into a relationship.
This popular misconception springs, at least in part, from the fact that women are more likely to know their HIV status because they are routinely tested for HIV at maternity clinics when they seek pregnancy tests or examinations.
Most men on the other hand—deterred by fear, ignorance, pride, and, sometimes, taboo—refuse to be tested voluntarily.
This skews the outcomes of legal cases because the lack of testing of men makes it nearly impossible for a woman infected with HIV to establish before a court of law that her male sex partner infected her.
Laws criminalizing the transmission of HIV undermine public health because they deter people who are HIV-positive and those at risk of acquiring the virus from seeking testing, counseling, and treatment.
When persons face the possibility of criminal sanctions, not knowing their HIV status can be their most-effective legal defense.  Prosecutions will act to deter many people—especially men as well as persons living in areas where HIV treatment is largely unavailable—from being tested because it would expose them to the risk of criminal liability.
Such laws also transform HIV victims into scapegoats for a societal problem for which the governments and broader societies are failing to undertake effective, and sometimes politically or culturally risky, steps that can defeat the disease.
Sadly, these “risky” steps include things as rudimentary as open discussion of the disease, education, and encouraging people, and especially men, to undergo testing.
AIDS has claimed more than 25 million lives since medical scientists first identified it in 1981.
New infections continue to outpace treatment efforts.
Basic precautionary options such as HIV testing, male and female condoms, and sterile syringes for drug injection remain out of reach for the vast majority of those who need them.
This woeful situation demands effective action and not more victims and scapegoats.
Open, informed discussion of the HIV epidemic, education into HIV prevention, distribution of condoms, and other strategies are the only known way of preventing new infections.
The vulnerability of women to HIV should be addressed by protecting their equal right to marital property, enforcing laws against gender-based violence, including rape in marriage, and empowering them to negotiate safer sex with men.
Libor Unplugged
LONDON – Last year’s Libor scandal was a shock to the body politic in London.
Despite all that had gone before, the public and their representatives were stunned to learn that bankers had systematically undermined the foundations of a global market benchmark – one with London in its name to boot – for personal gain.
Britain’s Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, felt compelled to launch a parliamentary inquiry.
On June 19, after a year’s work, the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards finally laid a large egg.
Bankers will certainly regard the outcome as what in England we like to call a “curate’s egg” (served a rotten egg by his bishop, a young clergyman, when asked whether the egg was to his liking, replied that it was “good in parts”).
They will choke on the commission’s recommendation of a new criminal offense for reckless conduct that leads to taxpayer bailouts, reinforced by a new “senior persons” regime that would ascribe all bank functions to a specific individual, who would be held personally liable when things go wrong.
The commission argues that “top bankers dodged accountability for failings on their watch by claiming ignorance or hiding behind collective decision-making.”
Its members aim to make that impossible.
If they have their way, behaving recklessly with banking assets will result in a prison sentence, with no Monopoly-style “get out of jail free” card for financial masters of the universe.
I can already hear the sound of lawyers sharpening their pencils: the offense must be defined specifically enough to withstand a human-rights challenge.
But, if implemented, the commission’s proposed regime would certainly be tougher than what is now on offer in New York or other banking centers.
And British MPs are noticeably impatient with what they consider the glacial pace of change in global regulation; they want action now.
If the United Kingdom does proceed in this unilateral way, what would the consequences be for London’s banking industry?
Would New York, Frankfurt, or even Paris receive a competitive boost as international bankers, alarmed at the prospect of time behind bars if their derivative trades blow up again, flee the City?
The commission’s members offer two, somewhat contradictory, answers to that question.
The first is that, frankly, they don’t care.
“The risk of an exodus should be disregarded,” the commission says, noting that the advantages of being a global financial center have been accompanied by serious associated risks to the domestic economy.
Unlike the United States, where the financial sector is smaller as a share of GDP, the UK economy has still not recovered the output lost in the post-2008 Great Recession, owing to continued retrenchment in the banking sector.
The commission’s members do recognize that London’s loss of status as a global financial center would be costly in terms of jobs and output, so they developed a second line of argument.
“There is nothing inherently optimal,” they say, about a level playing field in international finance.
Attempts to develop a single European financial market have, in their view, forced countries to respond to the failings revealed by the 2008 crisis at the speed of the “slowest ship in the convoy.”
By contrast, the commission argues, “there may be big benefits to the UK as a financial center from demonstrating that it can establish and adhere to standards significantly above the international minimum.”
In addition to the tough new regime of personal accountability, the commission would supplement the Basel standards on bank capital with a tight leverage ratio.
The British government, preoccupied with finding ways to stimulate growth as the next election approaches, will no doubt think hard before making any changes that might drive business offshore.
But the government is caught between a rock and a hard place, hemmed in by a parliament that, strongly backed by a bank-hostile press and public opinion, is eager to enact reforms, and by EU directives to implement a tougher regime.
So, is the Commission right that the government should move quickly on reform and disregard the consequences?
Such evidence as one can find from international surveys suggests that the regulatory changes implemented so far have not driven bankers away.
London has already implemented an approach that is tougher than that of most other financial centers.
Taxes levied on executive bonuses have cost international banks dearly.
Regulators are now appreciably tougher and more intrusive than their counterparts in New York.
Bankers don’t like it, but they have not yet left for more congenial locations.
Nor do they indicate that they will.
Indeed, the latest Z-Yen index of global financial centers showed London maintaining its first-place position – and with its margin over New York unchanged.
The Asian centers are catching up, as one would expect, but they are hardly direct competitors for business that would otherwise be done in London.
Frankfurt and Paris, the most plausible European competitors, languish in tenth and 26th place, respectively.
Rating agencies and shareholders are nervous when they hear that a stricter regulatory environment is not necessarily a disadvantage.
But a regime in which personal responsibility strongly affects individuals in one jurisdiction will give bankers pause for thought, especially in the case of global banks with complex matrix-management systems that enable product heads to be moved elsewhere.
British legislators will need to be satisfied that any new regime captures the right people, in the right way.
However politically appealing the idea of rogue bankers behind bars might be, putting them there is likely to remain very challenging in practice.
Crippled Pakistan