Indeed, the most popular tactic among liberals nowadays is to unite with all opponents of the regime.
That scheme is both absurd and dangerous.
After all, the word “Weimar” draws its infamy from the pact with the devil that German conservatives and royalists made by backing Hitler.
Welcome to the Era of Incompetence
Two diametrically opposed scenarios exist for what will happen to global real interest rates over the next generation.
Those who predict generally low interest rates over the next generation point to rapid growth of productivity and potential output in the world economy.
According to this view, the principal problem faced by central banks will not be restraining demand as it shoots above potential, but boosting demand as it lags behind potential.
They point to the fact that the world's major central banks - the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan - have so firmly established their anti-inflation credibility that the inflation risk premium has been wrung out of interest rates.
Believers in low interest rates also emphasize shifts in income distribution in the United States away from labor and toward capital, which have greatly boosted firms' resources to finance investment internally and reduced their dependence on capital markets.
They point to rapid technological progress, which has boosted output from new and old capital investments.
With competition strong across the economy, they say that we can look forward to a generation of relatively high asset prices and relatively low real interest rates worldwide.
By contrast, those who predict generally high real interest rates over the next generation point to low savings rates in the US, high spending driven by demographic burdens in Europe, and feckless governments running chronic deficits and unsustainable fiscal policies.
Imagine a bunch of irresponsible Bush-like administrations making fiscal policy, forever.
They also cite investment opportunities in emerging markets, and make the obvious point that if China and India stay on track, their economies' relative weight in the world will double in the next decade or so, as rapid real growth is accompanied by appreciation in their real exchange rates.
Sooner or later, the Chinese and Indian central banks' desire to hold down exchange rates to boost exports and their rich citizens' desire to keep their money in accounts at Bank of America will be offset by the sheer magnitude of investment opportunities.
In this scenario, bond prices in post-industrial countries are heading for a serious fall - as are real estate prices in California, New York, and London.
In forecasting interest rates one is engaged not in examining fundamentals, but in predicting what average market opinion expects average market opinion about fundamentals to be.
But Rudi never followed his own advice.
So let me place my bet - which I think is only 60% likely - and say that my best guess is that world real interest rates will be high over the next generation, and that current bond prices (and real estate prices) are not sustainable.
Four features of modern politics in the world's post-industrial core lead me to this conclusion:
· In the US, the collapse of "grownup" Republicans in Congress - the extraordinary failure of fiscal conservatives to mount any effective opposition to the Bush administration's renewed destabilization of American government finances.
The deficit orgy of the Reagan era is looking less like a freak political accident and more like a structural feature of Republican Party governance - what the modern Republican governing coalition tends to do whenever it gains power;
· The parallel collapse of a grownup Republican presence in the executive branch.
As Ron Suskind reports in his recent biography of Bush's first Treasury Secretary, Paul O'Neill, former Bush Budget Director Mitch Daniels once whispered to himself at the end of a disastrous meeting, "Not a typical Republican package.
Definitely not."
But Daniels decided he would rather run for office in Indiana than take a stand in support of sound fiscal finance;
· The failure of Western European governments to even begin to think about how to address the coming fiscal crisis of the social-insurance state as a result of their aging populations;
· The inability of Western European governments to enact sufficiently bold liberalizing reforms to create the possibility of full employment, together with the failure of western European monetary policy to be sufficiently stimulative to create the reality of full employment.
The arguments for low interest rates seem to me to require a degree of government competence that is unlikely, given political parties' current positions and the existing structure of the institutions that make fiscal policy.
I hope to be surprised.
I hope to see governments in Western Europe and the US face up to their responsibilities and conduct sensible, sustainable fiscal policies.
But that is my hope, not my forecast.
Power to the Poorest
BREMEN – An estimated 1.2 billion people worldwide, including 550 million in Africa and 400 million in India, have no access to electricity.
Most live in rural areas where the population is sparse and incomes are low, making it uneconomical to connect homes and businesses to a grid.
Nor is it feasible to generate power locally with a diesel unit, owing to high fuel costs and the need for substantial initial investment.
A stable supply of affordable electricity is a prerequisite for economic development.
In fact, the consequences for people living without electricity can be dire: they may be deprived of adequate health care, or be unable to store fresh food.
But one solution, based on the local use of renewable energy, requires minimal initial investment and can be expanded over time.
This “boot-strap” approach is based on the use of photovoltaics – a simple, universal, and scalable technology that is easy to maintain.
Typically, in the first stage of this process, consumers would use a renewable energy source such as LED lighting, selling any surplus until they save enough money to buy lamp oil (on which Africans spend around $20 billion annually).
The additional revenue might initially come from selling small electricity surpluses to local farmers to recharge their mobile phones (thereby allowing them to work out the optimal prices for their crops), or to help them irrigate farmland using small electric pumps.
This is a new opportunity.
Until three or four years ago, photovoltaics were prohibitively expensive.
But advances in the industry and over-production have reduced their price by as much as 75%.
The cheapest system, generating two watts of power, can cost as little as $10-20 and be expanded to almost any level, depending on the size and number of photovoltaic (PV) modules and the size of the battery storage unit.
It is simple, too.
A residential solar-power system consists of just three components: the PV modules, a battery storage unit, and a charge controller.
Such a system can supply low-voltage DC electric power at five volts for mobile phones, and 12V for LED lighting, pumps for outdoor use, and electrical appliances such as computers and televisions.
When single-phase or three-phase 230V AC power is needed (say, to power larger machines), an inverter must be used.
This makes sense only for systems that are larger than a kilowatt of peak power and that have sufficient battery capacity.
Local systems in one building could be connected to local low-voltage DC or 230V AC grids to improve the security of supply.
One major challenge to the boot-strap approach is developing cheap and durable batteries.
Many residential systems break down after 3-5 years when the battery dies, undermining confidence in the system among owners who assumed that they had a lifetime supply of energy.
But it is not a complicated process to demonstrate how to extend a battery’s life to as much as ten years.
Indeed, getting the most out of a battery may require only that its owner fully charges it at least once every two weeks and never discharges it to less than 50% capacity.
In addition, our own research team is currently exploring ways to rejuvenate old solar or car batteries – without requiring any chemical treatment or disassembly – for re-use in a residential solar-power system.
Once such technologies have been perfected, we can turn our attention to developing a boot-strap business model.
We believe that existing distribution, sales, and maintenance networks for other goods and services could be adapted to supply and provide customer support for solar-power systems as well.
For example, bicycle mechanics, who are plentiful in Africa and rural India, or small shop and kiosk owners could be trained to install and maintain these systems.
The combination of low-investment electricity generation for households and the ability to sell surpluses, scale up output, and access pre-existing distribution and maintenance networks bridges a crucial gap in the energy market.
It is a simple idea that would allow millions of people in poor, rural areas worldwide to integrate their activities with the wider economy, accumulate capital, and improve their lives.
What the West Owes Ukraine
WASHINGTON, DC – Ukraine may not be grabbing as many headlines now as it did a year ago, but the crisis there is far from over.
The latest ceasefire agreement, concluded in Minsk in February, has contained, but not stopped, Russian military aggression.
And, though the stabilization program that Ukraine agreed with the International Monetary Fund last month is superior to last year’s deal – this one includes both more financing from the IMF and a more credible economic-reform plan from the government – it will be insufficient to repair the country’s economy.
What Ukraine really needs is to escape the old Soviet order – and, for that, it needs the West’s help.
Ukraine never managed to recast its state after the Soviet Union’s collapse.
Instead, the old Soviet elites held onto power – and most of the country’s wealth – through corrupt practices that became entrenched in the country’s economy and political system.
Reforming both will be a major challenge – one that Ukraine’s leaders have lately committed themselves to meeting.
Since February of last year, when the parliament voted then-President Viktor Yanukovych out of power by more than a two-thirds majority, Ukraine has held fresh elections for both institutions.
Hundreds of top officials have been replaced by young, Western-educated professionals, and the government is now working feverishly to implement deep and comprehensive reforms, including a new law on public procurement and a package of anti-corruption legislation.
Dozens of superfluous inspection agencies have been abolished, significantly reducing the regulatory burden.
Just last month, President Petro Poroshenko sacked the governor of the Dnipropetrovsk region, the billionaire tycoon Igor Kolomoisky
More recently, the authorities have been working to reform the energy sector – a hub of corruption.
On April 1, household gas prices were quadrupled, taking them to half the market price, with offsetting compensation provided to the poor.
And the parliament has enacted a law that harmonizes energy standards with those of the European Union, thereby delineating clearly the state’s role and opening the gas market to investors.
But Ukraine still has a long way to go.
The good news is that the public largely understands and supports the government’s reform efforts.
The bad news is that Ukraine still faces considerable destabilizing threats – beginning with a renewed Russian military offensive.
A Russian attack on, say, Mariupol, eastern Ukraine’s second-largest port (accounting for roughly one-third of the country’s exports), would devastate an economy that is already tanking.
Though several factors – including Western sanctions, a lack of public support for war in Ukraine, and the Russian economy’s rapid decline – should discourage the Kremlin from taking such a step, they may not be enough.
After all, Russia’s leaders have shown themselves to be unpredictable.
Even absent further Russian aggression, Ukraine’s economic woes could prevent further progress on reform.
The economy contracted by 6.8% year on year in 2014, and output has plunged by 15% in each of the two last quarters.
Moreover, at the end of February, with the country running low on reserves, Ukraine’s currency, the hryvnia, lost half its value; as a result, annualized inflation surged to 45% in March.
A full-scale financial meltdown was avoided only when the IMF provided an early disbursement that doubled Ukraine’s reserves, to $9.9 billion; by the end of the month, the exchange rate more or less recovered.
Nonetheless, the international financing that Ukraine has received, though invaluable, remains insufficient to support genuine recovery and reform.
The latest bailout program foresees about $40 billion in funding, nearly half of which will come from the IMF, over the next four years.
That means that, this year, Ukraine will receive only $10 billion – not enough to enable the country to replenish its reserves and service its debts.
Indeed, given Ukraine’s large bond debts, many of which will mature in the next two years, there is a $15.3 billion funding gap in the bailout package, which the IMF and Ukraine’s government hope to plug with a debt restructuring.
But, even if they succeed, Ukraine would need more funding than it is getting.
It needs more strategic support as well.
European politicians’ overwhelming opposition to supplying Ukraine with defensive arms is difficult to fathom.
Europe’s leaders claim that they want to avoid giving Russia reason to escalate its war on Ukraine.
But that is already happening, and Ukraine’s fight against Russia is, after all, a defense of core European values – and, indeed, of Europe itself.
The EU flag has draped the caskets of Ukrainians killed in that fight.
Europe’s leaders argue that the central focus of their policy toward Ukraine must be to support its economic recovery.
But here, too, Europe is doing too little, offering paltry credits of €1.8 billion ($1.9 billion) this year, when €10 billion would be more appropriate.
If the United States then met Europe halfway (at least), Ukraine’s financial crisis could finally be contained.
On April 28, Ukraine’s government will host a donor conference in Kyiv.
At a time when the country’s leaders and public are more committed than ever to combating corruption, building a welfare-creating economy, and becoming a normal liberal democracy, Europe should be eager to support it.
It is time for Western politicians to remember their ideals – and stand up for them.
The Age of Financial Repression
TILBURG – Following his re-election, US President Barack Obama almost immediately turned his attention to reining in America’s rising national debt.
In fact, almost all Western countries are implementing policies aimed at reducing – or at least arresting the growth of – the volume of public debt.
In their widely cited paper “Growth in a Time of Debt,”&#160;Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart argue that, when government debt exceeds 90% of GDP, countries suffer slower economic growth.
Many Western countries’ national debt is now dangerously near, and in some cases above, this critical threshold.
Even well disciplined Germany is expected to close in on the 90% threshold, at 88.5%.
Countries can reduce their national debt by narrowing the budget deficit or achieving a primary surplus (the fiscal balance minus interest payments on outstanding debt).
This can be accomplished through tax increases, government-spending cuts, faster economic growth, or some combination of these components.
When the economy is growing, automatic stabilizers work their magic.
As more people work and earn more money, tax liabilities rise and eligibility for government benefits like unemployment insurance falls.
With higher revenues and lower payouts, the budget deficit diminishes.
But in times of slow economic growth, policymakers’ options are grim.
Increasing taxes is not only unpopular; it can be counter-productive, given already-high taxation in many countries.
Public support for spending cuts is also difficult to win.
As a result, many Western policymakers are seeking alternative solutions – many of which can be classified as financial repression.
Financial repression occurs when governments take measures to channel to themselves funds that, in a deregulated market, would go elsewhere.
For example, many governments have implemented regulations for banks and insurance companies that increase the amount of government debt that they own.
Consider the Basel III international banking standards.
Among other things, Basel III stipulates that banks do not have to set aside cash against their investments in government bonds with ratings of AA- or higher.
Moreover, investments in bonds issued by their home governments require no buffer, regardless of the rating.
Meanwhile, Western central banks are using another kind of financial repression by maintaining negative real interest rates (yielding less than the rate of inflation), which enables them to service their debt for free.
The European Central Bank’s policy rate stands at 0.75%, while the eurozone’s annual inflation rate is 2.5%.
Likewise, the Bank of England keeps its policy rate at only 0.5%, despite an inflation rate that hovers above 2%.
And, in the United States, where inflation exceeds 2%, the Federal Reserve’s benchmark federal funds rate remains at an historic low of 0-0.25%.
Moreover, given that the ECB, the Bank of England, and the Fed are venturing into capital markets – via quantitative easing (QE) in the US and the UK, and the ECB’s “outright monetary transactions” (OMT) program in the eurozone – long-term real interest rates are also negative (the real 30-year interest rate in the US is positive, but barely).
Such tactics, in which banks are nudged, not coerced, into investing in government debt, constitute “soft” financial repression.
But governments can go beyond such methods, demanding that financial institutions maintain or increase their holdings of government debt, as the UK’s Financial Service Authority did in 2009.
Similarly, in 2011, Spanish banks increased their lending to the government by almost 15%, even though private-sector lending contracted and the Spanish government became less creditworthy.
A senior Italian banker once said that Italian banks would be hanged by the Ministry of Finance if they sold any of their government-debt holdings.
And a Portuguese banker declared that, while banks should reduce their exposure to risky government bonds, government pressure to buy more was overwhelming.
In addition, in many countries, including France, Ireland, and Portugal, governments have raided pension funds in order to finance their budget deficits.
The UK is poised to take similar action, “allowing” local government pension funds to invest in infrastructure projects.
Direct or indirect monetary financing of budget deficits used to rank among the gravest sins that a central bank could commit.
QE and OMT are simply new incarnations of this old transgression.
Such central-bank policies, together with Basel III, mean that financial repression will likely define the economic landscape for at least another decade.
Westernize the Black Sea Region
The bloody end to the schoolhouse hostage crisis in North Ossetia, and recent clashes in Georgia between government troops and separatist forces, have put the troubled Black Sea region on the front pages of newspapers once again.
This rising violence is also a wake-up call for the West, highlighting the need for a new Euro-Atlantic strategy in a vitally important region that lies at the crossroads of Europe, Eurasia, and the Middle East.
Indeed, the Black Sea region is the Euro-Atlantic community's eastern frontier with the wider Middle East.
With Afghanistan, Iraq, and Iran topping the list of strategic challenges facing the West, anchoring democracy and security in these new borderlands of the Euro-Atlantic community has become imperative for both the United States and the EU.
Moreover, success here can provide lessons in how to facilitate the daunting process of reform and modernization in the wider Middle East.
Georgia's "Rose Revolution" last winter demonstrated that the will to implement radical reform now exists.
For the first time, a country in the region is matching its aspirations with the concrete steps needed to become a viable candidate for eventual membership in Euro-Atlantic institutions.
A visitor to Georgia's capital, Tbilisi, now sees the same level of determination to join the West that existed a decade ago in the Baltic states.
America and Europe share an interest in the success of these efforts, particularly as they seek to diversify energy supplies away from Saudi Arabian and Persian Gulf oil.
The Black Sea is poised to become a key conduit for non-OPEC, non-Gulf oil and natural gas flowing into European markets and beyond.
The Black Sea region's long-term stability and integration with the West is thus critically important to the long-term energy security strategy of EU and NATO members.
Anchoring these countries to the West will not be easy.
Whether the end result is better relations or full integration of these countries into the EU and NATO is an open question.
But both organizations need to reach out to these countries, a process that should be seen as the next phase in completing the wider Europe.
What should a new bold yet realistic EU and NATO outreach strategy for the Black Sea region look like?
Clearly, the region's countries are weaker and further behind previous candidates for Western integration.
But the good news is that the EU and NATO are much better positioned to develop an ambitious strategy than they were vis-à-vis Central and Eastern Europe a decade ago.
If the EU and NATO decide to launch a bold outreach strategy for the region, they will be able to draw on existing tools, conceptual talent, and practical experience.
For example, NATO already has three members - Bulgaria, Romania, and Turkey - bordering the Black Sea.
As for the EU, the candidacies of Romania and Bulgaria need to be concluded successfully, together with the issue of Turkey's membership aspirations.
An EU that includes Sofia and Bucharest, and that is on track with Ankara, will be well positioned to engage the wider region.
The EU also needs to put meat on the bones of its new Neighborhood Policy, while NATO must apply new mechanisms for strengthening ties with the region.
As opposed to a 100- or 200-meter sprint, both organizations need to think more in terms of a much longer race, perhaps a marathon.
If countries in the region embrace the idea, a network of current EU and NATO members could step forward with projects and assistance aimed at promoting a Black Sea identity and community.
Recent events in Georgia remind us that resolving the region's "frozen conflicts"- i.e., those in the breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, of Transdneistria in Moldova, and Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan - must be a priority.
In reality, these conflicts are not frozen; they are festering wounds that breed corruption and organized crime.
They inhibit democratization and incite instability.
While these conflicts involve historical grievances, outside actors - particularly Russia - contribute to their lack of resolution, which is essential for successful reform.
So far, neither America nor Europe has made these conflicts a top priority.
Resolving these semi-dormant wars requires stepped-up political involvement, economic engagement, and a willingness to provide Western peacekeeping forces and monitors if and when they are needed.
But the long-term peace and stability needed to advance economic and political reform in the region will also require either a change in Russian behavior or a reduction in Russian influence.
The experience of the last decade suggests that a policy of engaging the Kremlin intensely while protecting fundamental Western interests may be the best way to proceed.
Developing a new Euro-Atlantic strategy for the Black Sea region must start with the democracies of North America and Europe recognizing their moral and political stake in the outcome.
Projecting stability and security in these countries is the next logical step in building a Europe "whole and free" and securing the Euro-Atlantic community's eastern frontier with the Middle East.
This task will be as important over the next decade as integrating Central and Eastern Europe into the West was in the 1990's.
The Despotic Temptation
MADRID – US President Franklin D. Roosevelt, when asked about American support for the notorious Nicaraguan despot Anastasio Somoza, purportedly replied, “He may be a son of a bitch, but he’s our son of a bitch.”
Whether or not the quip is apocryphal, it sums up a longstanding Western approach to much of the world – and one that underpinned US foreign policy throughout the Cold War.
But lately an even more troubling sentiment seems to have emerged, with Western leaders willing to settle not for “our son of a bitch,” but for just about any son of a bitch who can impose stability, whatever the cost.
It is an alluring but dangerous mindset.
Experience should have pushed Western leaders in the opposite direction.
After all, as time passed, the ostensibly pragmatic clientelism of the Cold War proved far from ideal.
Indeed, in many cases – the Shah of Iran, Cambodia’s Lon Nol, Chile’s Augusto Pinochet, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Mobutu Sese Seko, to name a few – it led to long-term insecurity and disorder.
But these are desperate times.
Unable to contain the violence, suffering, and chaos engulfing the Middle East and North Africa – the consequences of which are increasingly being felt in Europe – Western leaders are falling back into the Cold War trap.
All they want is for someone – and now virtually anyone – to enforce order.
This desperation is perhaps most apparent in Syria.
After years of insisting that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad was the problem, a growing number of Western policymakers and strategists are now suggesting that he may actually be part of the solution – or at least the transition.
Last month, German Chancellor Angela Merkel noted the necessity of including Assad in talks about Syria’s future.
Likewise, both US Secretary of State John Kerry and British Prime Minister David Cameron now concede a role for Assad in a hypothetical transition.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy went so far as to say that the world had to “count on” Assad in the fight against the Islamic State.
Whether driven by realism or resignation, this shift reflects a distinct desire for stability – a desire that is reinforced, especially in Europe, by the presence of another governance black hole in Libya.
The same desire has already driven the West to support Abdel Fattah al-Sisi’s regime in Egypt – despite its dubious origins and continuing repression – with only the slightest of pressure for reform.
When confronted with anarchy, this eagerness to secure stability by whatever means necessary is understandable.
But it is a slippery slope.
And, in fact, it is based on a false dichotomy between autocracy and instability.
Of course, autocratic figures like Russian President Vladimir Putin have a strong interest in promoting this dichotomy.
As the Bulgarian political analyst Ivan Krastev recently noted, Putin – a long-time ally of Assad – is doing his best to promote the idea that Western efforts to promote good governance lead only to volatility.
“Rather than bringing about reforms,” Putin declared in a recent address to the UN General Assembly, “aggressive foreign interference has resulted in…violence, poverty, and social disaster.”
A strong Assad-led government, the logic goes, would have the opposite effect – a point that Russia is now trying to prove on the ground in Syria.
However compelling this idea might be, and however weary the West feels, the reality, demonstrated starkly during the Cold War and its bloody aftermath, is that tyranny is never genuinely stable – certainly not in the long run.
The desire for human dignity and respect – the cornerstones of good governance – cannot be quelled, especially at a time when people have unprecedented access to information through the Internet and mobile technologies.
So good governance is the key to long-term stability.
But, like stability, good governance cannot be imposed from the outside; rather, it must develop organically, supported by sturdy roots within a society.
This does not mean that there is nothing Western governments can do.
On the contrary, by helping to cultivate a strong civil society at the local and national levels, external forces can play an important role in creating a strong foundation for good governance in crisis-stricken countries.
The Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet – the group of civil-society organizations that was awarded this year’s Nobel Peace Prize for its “decisive contribution” to democracy after the country’s 2011 revolution – has shown just how effective a strong civil society can be in supporting stability.
To make a real difference in stabilizing today’s most tumultuous regions, the international community should hold Tunisia up as a model (and remain committed to ensuring that it continues on the path toward stable democracy), rather than falling prey to Putin’s cautionary fables about Syria and Libya.
Unfortunately, Western leaders have repeatedly shown that they lack the patience and dedication needed to engage consistently and humbly with communities in crisis-stricken countries or to provide the reliable, incremental, and prolonged governance assistance needed to prevent state collapse.
With their short attention spans and heightened sense of their own importance, they prefer the option of simply installing a despot to deal with it.
They need to get over themselves – for everyone’s sake.
The Politics of Islamophobia
NEW YORK – There are many roads to political disaster: greed, hubris, the charisma of the demagogue, and, perhaps most dangerous of all, fear.
When people panic, they can become hysterical, and hysteria often leads to mass violence.
When politicians convince people that they are in a life-or-death battle – that survival is a matter of “us or them” – anything becomes possible.
Adolf Hitler combined all the elements of political catastrophe: hubris, charisma, greed, and the idea that “Aryans” and Jews were locked in a struggle for survival.
Of course, none of the demagogues in the West today – from Donald Trump in the United States to Marine Le Pen or Geert Wilders in Europe – are comparable to Hitler.
None has promoted dictatorship, let alone mass murder.
But they are definitely stirring up the politics of fear.
Trump, for one, also promotes greed, openly boasting of his wealth, and has somehow refined outlandish hubris and contradictory posturing into a bizarre form of charisma.
On the one hand, he promises to fix all the world’s problems, and to show China, Russia, the Islamic State, or anyone else who is boss.
On the other hand, he claims that his vast and powerful country cannot take in desperate refugees from Syria, because, he warns, Muslim asylum-seekers might stage “one of the great military coups of all time.”
Trump’s Republican colleagues in the race for the US presidency, such as Ted Cruz, Ben Carson, and Marco Rubio, stoke similar fears about refugees.
Cruz, as well as the supposedly more moderate Jeb Bush, even suggested that only Christians should be allowed into the US.
More than 10,000 people are killed every year by gun violence in the US – all but a handful for reasons having nothing to do with Islam.
And yet all of the Republican candidates are proud of opposing gun-control measures; indeed, they have no problem allowing people to enter a school or a bar bearing concealed weapons.
But even a relative handful of Muslim refugees is too dangerous to contemplate.
This is not to say that terrible acts of Islamist terror could not happen in the US, or elsewhere.
They have, and there probably will be more of them, so long as the Middle East remains in turmoil and revolutionary Islam appeals to disaffected Western youth.
But it is hardly an existential threat.
An American friend of mine speculated that, “We might be one terrorist act away from a Trump presidency.”
A spectacular murder spree by Islamists could spook Americans enough to vote for the greatest fear-monger.
Anything is possible, but I don’t believe American voters would be that stupid.
The greater danger is, however, that the demagogues will drive even mainstream politicians into their camp.
Since the November 13 terror attacks in Paris, François Hollande, the unpopular but altogether sensible French president, has been so afraid of being labeled a weakling by politicians of the right and far right that he has declared a national state of emergency – and war on the Islamic State (ISIS).
As long as France’s state of emergency lasts, police may arrest people without warrants, break down the doors of private residences in the middle of the night, take over restaurants and other public places with armed force, and generally behave like agents in a police state.
Most French citizens are now so frightened of Islamist attacks that such measures are widely supported.
But they are almost certainly counter-productive.
A national leader can declare war on a state, not on a network of revolutionaries.
ISIS, despite its claims, is not a state, and Hollande should not treat it as one.
Besides, even if bombing ISIS strongholds in Iraq or Syria makes military sense, it won’t break the spell of Islamist revolution for frustrated, bored, and marginalized young people in French slums.
On the contrary: The canny leaders of ISIS also rely on an apocalyptic “us or them” view of the world.
Most Muslims are not violent revolutionaries who condone, let alone admire, mass violence.
ISIS seeks to broaden its support, especially among young Muslims, by convincing them that true Muslims are in an existential war with the West – that the infidels are their mortal enemies. For them no less than for Trump, fear is the most powerful weapon.
So the more a Western government allows its policemen to humiliate and bully Muslims in the name of security, the more ISIS is likely to win European recruits.
The only way to combat revolutionary Islamist violence is to gain the trust of law-abiding Muslims in the West.
This will not be easy, but arbitrary arrests are surely the wrong way to go about it.
Likewise, when it comes to civil wars in the Middle East, Western restraint is usually a better strategy than hasty military intervention driven by domestic fear.
Republican candidates in the US are already using the recent murder spree in Paris to blame President Barack Obama, and by extension any future Democratic candidate, for being weak.
Trump has promised to “bomb the shit out of ISIS.”
This bellicosity has had the effect of pushing Hillary Clinton, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, into distancing herself from Obama.
Like Hollande, she has to assuage public fear by talking tough and promising more military action.
Obama has consistently resisted the temptation to unleash more wars.
His policies have sometimes been inconsistent and irresolute.
But in his refusal to give in to panic and act rashly, he has been far braver than all the big talkers who accuse him of being a wimp.
What About the World?
As America’s primaries move beyond Iowa and New Hampshire, it is simply impossible to predict who will be the Democratic and Republican nominees, much less who will become the 44th president of the United States.
But it is not too soon to address the question of what effect US foreign policy is having on the campaign and what it reveals about how Americans see the world.  
To the surprise of many seasoned observers, foreign policy is having only a modest impact on voters.
This is unexpected, because only six months ago the war in Iraq dominated the political landscape.
Although Iraq still matters a lot to Americans, its importance for determining how they vote has receded, partly because US casualties there are markedly down as the security situation appears to be gradually improving.
As a result, there is considerably less public pressure to do something dramatically different. 
Foreign policy has also become less salient than it was only months ago as the chance of war between the US and Iran has diminished, following the recently published National Intelligence Estimate on Iran’s nuclear program.
The judgment by America’s intelligence community that Iran has suspended its nuclear weapon development program – and, more importantly, that its large-scale uranium enrichment capacity is likely years away – postpones the day when a US president may have to decide between living with or attacking a nuclear Iran.
A third reason for the modest impact of international issues on voters’ choice of the next president is another surprising development: more agreement between and among the leading candidates than meets the eye.
There is something of a consensus, for example, emerging around the notion that the US should remain in Iraq for some time to come, albeit with a reduced level of military forces.
There is also widespread acknowledgement that the US must do more both at home and diplomatically to address global climate change; that the US must work with its European allies to prevent Afghanistan from slipping back into anarchy; and that the US must take the strongest possible stand against terrorism and those who would support it in any way.  No major candidate is advocating anything remotely resembling isolationism.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the deterioration of America’s economy is now overshadowing foreign policy.
The greatest crisis facing many Americans is their increasing inability to meet their monthly mortgage payments.
Recession, job loss, and expensive oil, not war, is what Americans fear most for 2008.
This is not to suggest that foreign policy is absent from the campaign.
Along with the economy, a dominant issue on the political agenda – and one that has affected Republican politics in particular – is immigration.
There is growing opposition to illegal entry, but no consensus about what to do about those who have been in the country illegally for years or those who want to come to the US in the future.
It is also possible to see in the politics of both parties mounting concern about globalization.
With tougher economic times inevitably come tougher positions toward foreign competition and outsourcing.
There may also be latent concern about foreign policy in the attention being given to the quantity and quality of candidates’ relevant experience.
A desire for “change” is a common refrain of the American debate, but it is far from the only one.
Renewed interest in foreign policy and the rest of the world could surface if there were a dramatic overseas development.
We saw this a few weeks ago, when former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto was assassinated.
Democratic and Republican candidates alike were called upon to explain what they would be prepared to do if there were an opportunity to capture Osama Bin Laden or a need to secure Pakistan’s nuclear weapons.
Likewise, Iraq could return to center stage if the positive momentum of recent months were suddenly reversed, perhaps following a new outbreak of violence between the country’s Sunnis and Shia.
The US and Iran could go to war not over nuclear issues but because of reckless behavior by the Revolutionary Guards (as occurred recently in the Strait of Hormuz), with Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad possibly seeking to provoke a crisis in order to distract domestic attention from his economic failures.
Order in Pakistan could break down irretrievably.
A terrorist attack could remind Americans of their fundamental vulnerability.
The possibilities are endless.
America’s next president will face a host of pressing and difficult foreign policy challenges – and how he or she responds will affect not only the US, but the entire world.
In the meantime, though, foreign policy will have only an indirect influence on Americans’ choice.
What Are Homebuyers Thinking?
Many places around the world have been in a housing boom since the late 1990’s.
As I argued last year, in the second edition of my book Irrational Exuberance , the boom is rooted in speculative investment by ordinary homebuyers, fueled substantially by the worldwide perception that capitalism has triumphed, and that all people must look out for themselves by acquiring property.
Convinced that private ownership has become essential to smart living, buyers bid up home prices.
Moreover, the fear that one must get in on the boom before it is too late often drives people to bid up home prices faster now.
This certainly seems to be the market psychology in China and India, where rapidly rising incomes and newly successful people are widely expected to put pressure on markets for land, real estate, and construction materials.
Real estate booms have been going on in these countries’ major cities for years.
In China, despite some signs of weakness – the Shanghai market is down, for example – price growth is still robust in much of the country.
But the boom generated by such beliefs cannot go on forever, because prices can’t go up forever, and there are already signs of a hard landing.
In the United States, newspapers and magazines are trumpeting reports in the last few months that the decade-long boom in home prices may be at an end, and that the bubble may be bursting.
The psychology has suddenly changed, creating widespread fear of sharp drops in US home prices.
The new futures market for single-family homes at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (which I helped establish last May with our firm MacroMarkets LLC) is predicting that by next August prices will fall between 6% and 8% in all ten US cities traded.
If home prices crash in the US, the bastion of capitalism, could it destroy confidence and end the boom in other countries?
If so, could a worldwide recession follow?
This scenario is a distinct possibility, although there are reasons to be skeptical.
Most importantly, the ultimate sources of the housing boom – the beliefs about capitalism and future economic growth – seem solidly entrenched.
The downward price trend in the US market, for example, does not seem to reflect underlying changes in long-run economic confidence.
The survey that Karl Case and I conducted in May and June of this year, under the auspices of the Yale School of Management, shows sharp declines in short-term expectations for home prices in the US, but relatively little change in long-term expectations.
Most people still believe that housing is a great long-term investment.
Maybe real estate prices are unlikely to fall to pre-boom levels because the fundamental change in perceptions concerning capitalism’s triumph will be longstanding.
Changes in people’s fundamental ways of thinking are not easily reversed.
Nor, therefore, is their interest in housing as a major speculative investment asset likely to change.
The transformation in investors’ beliefs is striking.
Before the real estate boom of the late 1970’s, hardly anyone was worried about rising home prices.
A search of old newspapers finds surprisingly few articles about the outlook for home prices.
Those that did appear generally seem to be based on the assumption that minor fluctuations in construction costs, not massive market swings, drove the modest home price movements that they noted.
Indeed, hardly anything interesting about home prices was ever reported at all, aside from an occasional comment in an article about something else.
For example, an article in The Times of London in 1970 argued that rising home prices reflected the switch to a new British Standard Time (imposed as a three-year experiment in 1968 to facilitate commerce with Western Europe by putting Britain in the same time zone).
The article claimed that the change raised costs by forcing British construction workers to perform more of their jobs in relative darkness.
Speculative investment behavior was hardly an issue in those rare instances in which home prices were discussed.
To understand the nature of the subsequent shift, consider that it is hard to find anyone today who worries that automobile prices will soar because rising demand in China and India for steel and other materials will push automobile prices out of reach in the future.
Though a small group of collectors invests speculatively in antique or specialty cars, the idea of speculating in automobiles just is not in the public consciousness.
That is how it was with housing until the late 1970’s.
Now that we think differently about real estate, we will never be the same again.
But, of course, housing prices can only rise so fast.
High and rapidly rising home prices tend to stimulate new housing supply, which in turn tends to undermine prices.
Over a period of years, as people see how much new supply there is, they may begin to revise their view that homes are such a terrific investment, causing a gradual, but eventually significant, drop in home prices.
Indeed, while changes in fundamental perceptions may not occur easily or fast, they should never be ruled out.
Urban land prices in major Japanese cities have steadily dropped over much of the period since 1991, as the enormous faith in the miraculous powers of Japanese capitalism gradually faded.
The same kind of erosion in home prices could occur in many cities around the world.
All that is required is that growth in housing supply eventually outstrips investors’ faith in capitalism to sustain faster growth in demand.
The Ghosts of North Korea
TOKYO – For most people, the arrival of a new year prompts a moment of reflection on what has been working and what needs to change.
Not for the people of North Korea.
In that benighted country, “New Year’s resolutions” are not really an option for ordinary citizens.
What happens to them depends entirely on their supreme leader, Kim Jong-un, and typically involves grim paranoia and deprivation.
North Koreans endure plenty about which outsiders can only speculate.
Consider the mysterious “ghost ships” that are carried to the Sea of Japan each autumn by southwesterly winds.
The boats are crude, small (about ten meters in length), and equipped with little more than basic fishing gear.
Some are empty; others carry the dead bodies of unidentified men.
Last month alone, 13 boats and 26 bodies (most already largely decomposed) were found.
In 2014, more than 60 such boats turned up.
Some of the boats and their contents bore markings in Korean Hangul script.
One carried a handwritten sign stating that it belonged to unit 325 of the North Korean army.
Another contained a tattered cloth that appeared to have once been part of a North Korean flag.
Add to that the boats’ dilapidated condition and lack of equipment, and the conclusion that they were North Korean seems fairly certain.
What is more difficult to discern is what the ships were for, and why they have been making their way, in such large numbers, to Japan’s shores and territorial waters.
After all, they seem like fishing boats, not military vessels, though North Korean soldiers are frequently also fishermen.
It has been widely speculated that the boats were filled with would-be defectors, not least because they resemble boats on which living defectors arrived in Japan.
Another explanation is that the boats are filled simply with fishermen who, under pressure from the government to boost their yields, ventured out too far into the open sea.
Sadly, that explanation is all too plausible.
North Korea’s government goes to great lengths to conceal the country’s abysmal food shortages, even going so far as to unveil to the foreign media an advanced indoor vegetable-farming facility near Pyongyang.
But the fact is that there have been no sustained improvements to food production since the mass starvation of the 1990s and early 2000s, despite slightly greater tolerance of private production by farmers.
Indeed, although Kim identified “food for the people” as one of his regime’s top three priorities for 2015, little investment in this effort was actually made.
Not even the resumption of fertilizer supplies by a private South Korean organization was enough to make a real difference.
With fallow soil and a poor climate inhibiting agriculture, North Korea’s government has indeed apparently been encouraging a growing number of fishing boats to go farther out in search of bigger catches.
Given the boats’ poor quality, it is no surprise that many do not make it home.
The ghost ships are not the only source of odd questions and speculation about North Korea.
Just this month, the all-girl Moranbong Band – reportedly organized and sponsored by Kim himself – canceled its first performance in China, intended for Chinese Communist Party officials.
Soon after arriving by train in Beijing, the band’s members were quickly bundled onto a plane back to Pyongyang.
Some have speculated that a song praising North Korea’s nuclear program was too much for China’s leadership to stomach, especially so soon after Kim declared (probably falsely) that his regime had detonated a hydrogen bomb.
Others think that Kim was angered by the news that Chinese President Xi Jinping and other top Chinese leaders would not be attending the concert.
In any case, the relationship with China, on which North Korea has long depended, seems to be coming under increasing strain.
As for Japan’s relationship with North Korea, the outlook remains far from rosy.
Discussions of North Korea’s abduction of Japanese citizens in the 1970s and 1980s – a major impediment to official relations – have stalled.
North Korea has stubbornly maintained its official line that only 13 Japanese were kidnapped; eight died and five were returned to Japan before ever making it to Pyongyang.
Japan insists – with good reason – that there were more kidnappings.
The five abductees who were repatriated in 2002 included Hitomi Soga, who was not included among the 13 acknowledged kidnappings.
This creates the impression that North Korea may still be holding some kidnap victims to use as bargaining chips in discussions on economic cooperation.
Japan continues to demand a new comprehensive investigation into the matter, though North Korea has not been particularly cooperative so far.
During bilateral talks in Stockholm in 2014, the Kim regime agreed to pursue a new investigation, in exchange for Japan’s agreement to lift some sanctions once the inquiry began.
In July, however, the North reportedly notified the Japanese government of its intention to postpone submitting the results of the reinvestigation.
If the report is eventually submitted and includes the names of one or two abductees available to be sent back to Japan, how should Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government respond?
This kind of manipulation may not merit a visit to North Korea by Abe or the lifting of sanctions.
So ends another bizarre year (which makes it similar to previous years) in the history of North Korea.
The only factor suggesting that 2016 could be different lies in the North’s estrangement from China.
Perhaps Japan could take advantage of the strains in that relationship to make some headway in other talks, say, on the nuclear issue.
The main question, however, is whether Kim is able and willing to act in his country’s real interests, and not those of his fantasies.
Carpet Bombing History in America
NEW YORK – Ted Cruz, one of the Republican candidates for the US presidency, recently said that his solution to the turmoil in the Middle East would be to “carpet bomb” the Islamic State (ISIS) and see if “sand can glow in the dark.”
Donald Trump, the Republican frontrunner, promised to “bomb the shit out of ISIS.”
A third candidate, Chris Christie, has threatened war with Russia.
With such rhetoric from their candidates, it is no wonder that, according to a recent poll, some 30% of Republican voters (and 41% of Trump supporters) favored bombing Agrabah, the central (and fictional) location of the Disney film Aladdin.
The place sounded Arabic, and that was enough.
One way to read such bellicose rhetoric is to assume that those who indulge in it must be bloodthirsty monsters.
A more charitable view is that they suffer from an appalling lack of historical memory and moral imagination.
None has any personal experience of war.
And they clearly find it impossible to comprehend the consequences of what they are saying.
And yet even a cursory acquaintance with fairly recent history is enough to know that “bombing the shit” out of people does little to win wars.
It didn’t work in Vietnam, and it is unlikely to work in Syria or Iraq.
Even the Nazis were not defeated by carpet bombing.
As postwar studies undertaken by the US and British air forces demonstrated, Russian tanks did more to bring down the Wehrmacht than did aerial bombing of German cities.
This raises the question, suitable for the beginning of a new year, of whether history really can teach us many lessons.
After all, nothing is ever exactly the same as what went before.
It is probably true that we cannot expect history to tell us what to do in any given crisis.
But, given that some patterns of human behavior recur, knowledge about the past can help us understand our own times better.
The problem is that politicians (and commentators) often pick the wrong examples to bolster their ideological positions.
For example, because few people apparently can think back further than World War II, examples from the 1930s and 1940s are the most commonly abused.
Whenever we are encouraged to oppose a dictator, the specter of Adolf Hitler is invoked, and the ghosts of 1938 are resurrected to counter skepticism about hasty “preemptive” war.
Those who had doubts about George W. Bush’s invasion of Iraq were “appeasers,” akin to Neville Chamberlain.
Our almost exclusive focus on Nazis and WWII blinds us to other – and possibly more instructive – historical parallels.
The terrible wars in the Middle East today, pitting revolutionary religious sects and tribal chiefs against ruthless dictatorships backed by one great power or another, have much more in common with the Thirty Years War that devastated much of Germany and central Europe from 1618 to 1648.
For three decades, marauding armies murdered, plundered, and tortured their way through villages and towns.
Many who weren’t killed died of starvation or disease, spread by vast numbers of armed men.
Like today’s wars, the Thirty Years War is often assumed to have been an essentially religious conflict, but between Catholics and Protestants.
In fact, again like the current violence in which the Arab world is embroiled, it was much more complicated.
Mercenary soldiers, Protestant or Catholic, switched sides whenever it suited them, while the Vatican backed the Protestant German princes, Catholic France backed the Protestant Dutch Republic, and many other alliances were forged across sectarian lines.
In reality, the Thirty Years War was a struggle for European hegemony between the Bourbon and Habsburg monarchies.
As long as one was not strong enough to dominate the other, the war continued, causing horrendous suffering among innocent peasants and city dwellers.
And just like in the Middle East today, other major powers – France, Denmark, and Sweden, among others – took part, backing one side or the other, hoping to gain advantage for themselves.
The similarity to the wars in Syria and Iraq is striking.
ISIS is a brutal Sunni rebellion against Shia rulers.
The US opposes it, but so do Iran, a Shia power, and Saudi Arabia, which is run by Sunni despots.
The main axis of conflict in the Middle East is not religious or sectarian, but geopolitical: the struggle for regional hegemony between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
Both have backers among the major powers, and both deliberately whip up religious fanatics; but theological differences are not the key to understanding the escalation of violence.
What is to be learned from all this?
Some might argue that only a thorough religious reformation will bring about long-term peace in the Middle East.
But, though reformation of Islam might be desirable in itself, it will not bring an end to the war at hand.
Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad is not fighting for a particular sect of Islam (the Alawites in his case), but for his survival.
ISIS is not battling for Sunni orthodoxy, but for a revolutionary caliphate.
The struggle between Saudi Arabia and Iran is not religious, but political.
There were moments during the Thirty Years War when a political settlement might have been possible.
But the will to take advantage of such opportunities was lacking; one party or another still sought greater advantage by fighting on (or encouraging others to do so).
It would be a tragedy if similar opportunities were missed today.
Settlements demand compromise.
Enemies will have to talk to one another.
Braggadocio about carpet bombing, and accusations of appeasement against those who try to negotiate, will only prolong the agony, if not cause an even greater catastrophe.
And that will affect almost all of us.
What Can Save the Euro?
NEW YORK – Just when it seemed that things couldn’t get worse, it appears that they have.
Even some of the ostensibly “responsible” members of the eurozone are facing higher interest rates.
Economists on both sides of the Atlantic are now discussing not just whether the euro will survive, but how to ensure that its demise causes the least turmoil possible.
It is increasingly evident that Europe’s political leaders, for all their commitment to the euro’s survival, do not have a good grasp of what is required to make the single currency work.
The prevailing view when the euro was established was that all that was required was fiscal discipline – no country’s fiscal deficit or public debt, relative to GDP, should be too large.
But Ireland and Spain had budget surpluses and low debt before the crisis, which quickly turned into large deficits and high debt.
So now European leaders say that it is the current-account deficits of the eurozone’s member countries that must be kept in check.
In that case, it seems curious that, as the crisis continues, the safe haven for global investors is the United States, which has had an enormous current-account deficit for years.
So, how will the European Union distinguish between “good” current-account deficits – a government creates a favorable business climate, generating inflows of foreign direct investment –&#160;and “bad” current-account deficits?
Preventing bad current-account deficits would require far greater intervention in the private sector than the neoliberal and single-market doctrines that were fashionable at the euro’s founding would imply.
In Spain, for example, money flowed into the private sector from private banks.
Should such irrational exuberance force the government, willy-nilly, to curtail public investment?
Does this mean that government must decide which capital flows – say into real-estate investment, for example – are bad, and so must be taxed or otherwise curbed?
To me, this makes sense, but such policies should be anathema to the EU’s free-market advocates.
The quest for a clear, simple answer recalls the discussions that have followed financial crises around the world.
These problems will occur with or without the euro.
But the euro has made it more difficult for governments to respond.
And the problem is not just that the euro took away two key tools for adjustment –&#160;the interest rate and the exchange rate – and put nothing in their place, or that the European Central Bank’s mandate is to focus on inflation, whereas today’s challenges are unemployment, growth, and financial stability.
Without a common fiscal authority, the single market opened the way to tax competition – a race to the bottom to attract investment and boost output that could be freely sold throughout the EU.
Moreover, free labor mobility means that individuals can choose whether to pay their parents’ debts: young Irish can simply escape repaying the foolish bank-bailout obligations assumed by their government by leaving the country.
Of course, migration is supposed to be good, as it reallocates labor to where its return is highest.
But this kind of migration actually undermines productivity.
Migration is, of course, part of the adjustment mechanism that makes America work as a single market with a single currency.
Even more important is the federal government’s role in helping states that face, say, high unemployment, by allocating additional tax revenue to them – the so-called “transfer union” so loathed by many Germans.
But the US is also willing to accept the depopulation of entire states that cannot compete. (Some point out that this means that America’s corporations can buy senators from such states at a lower price.)
But are European countries with lagging productivity willing to accept depopulation?
Alternatively, are they willing to face the pain of “internal” devaluation, a process that failed under the gold standard and is failing under the euro?
Even if those from Europe’s northern countries are right in claiming that the euro would work if effective discipline could be imposed on others (I think they are wrong), they are deluding themselves with a morality play.
It is fine to blame their southern compatriots for fiscal profligacy, or, in the case of Spain and Ireland, for letting free markets have free reign, without seeing where that would lead.
But that doesn’t address today’s problem: huge debts, whether a result of private or public miscalculations, must be managed within the euro framework.
Public-sector cutbacks today do not solve the problem of yesterday’s profligacy; they simply push economies into deeper recessions.
Europe’s leaders know this.
They know that growth is needed.
But, rather than deal with today’s problems and find a formula for growth, they prefer to deliver homilies about what some previous government should have done.This may be satisfying for the sermonizer, but it won’t solve Europe’s problems – and it won’t save the euro.&#160;
What China Wants in 2012
BEIJING – With economic globalization and the advent of a multi-polar world, China and other emerging countries are clearly set to play much more important roles not only in 2012, but in the coming decades.
As China’s economic power and influence in the world economy have increased following the financial crisis of 2008, the idea has been floated that China and the United States should co-lead the world under some sort of “G-2” arrangement.
But such a G-2 framework is not consistent with China’s independent foreign policy, nor with the general trend towards wider dispersion of geopolitical power within the international community.
Although China’s senior leadership will change this year, this position will not change.
Indeed, when China’s Premier Wen Jiabao visited Prague in May 2009 for the 11th China-European Union summit, he explained that China is opposed to the G-2 concept.
It is China’s firm intention never to seek hegemony, nor to support global domination by a small minority of countries.
What China does believe in is deepening cooperation with all of the world’s major regions.
Consider Europe – a splendid and time-honored civilization, and now a major player on the world stage.
The progressive deepening of EU integration has brought dynamic vigor to the European continent; despite Europe’s current difficulties, it still boasts extraordinary overall strength and international influence.
China has always supported European integration, and hopes that the EU will become a pillar of international order.
In the wake of the global financial crisis and the eurozone’s sovereign-debt crisis, China has bought government bonds, made direct investments, and sent business delegations to Europe.
During Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Zapatero’s visit to Beijing in April 2011, Wen reaffirmed China’s willingness to continue purchasing Spanish government bonds as a further demonstration of our support for Europe’s efforts to emerge from its crisis.
Moreover, China’s huge market and labor pool have created important opportunities for Europe.
In this new multi-polar era, China and Europe must work together, and they are now at a critical moment if they are to deepen their cooperation.
What we do to share opportunities, meet challenges, and pursue development will be directly relevant not only to our own peoples’ welfare, but also to the world’s future.
China-EU cooperation will be essential to maintaining global peace and stability.
We share a commitment to resolving international issues through political means, and both sides have already played a constructive role in addressing global challenges such as climate change, terrorism, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The parallel launch of China’s 12th Five-Year Plan and Europe’s 2020 Strategy has also helped to deepen our cooperation.
China and Europe worked together after 2008 to prevent a global financial meltdown, oppose protectionism, and promote reform of the international financial system, thus facilitating worldwide economic recovery.
China also takes its relations with the US very seriously.
Indeed, our bilateral relationship is among the most important in the international community.
That relationship has gone through some rough patches since diplomatic ties were established in 1979, but, overall, it has continued to grow and benefit both sides.
Today, China and the US share more interests than ever, and there are encouraging prospects for still broader cooperation.
When President Hu Jintao visited Washington, DC in January 2011, he and President Barack Obama agreed to build what Hu referred to as “a China-US cooperative partnership based on respect and mutual benefit.”
They reaffirmed their deference for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and reached agreements on major strategic issues, including efforts to strengthen cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region and in multilateral institutions, and to respond jointly to regional and global challenges to peace and stability, for example, on the Korean Peninsula.
China is the world’s largest developing country; Europe is the largest bloc of developed countries; and the US is the largest single developed country.
Together, we account for nearly a third of humanity and two-thirds of the world economy.
As the three major global powers, China, the EU, and the US must strengthen their cooperation, and must work with the rest of the world to face the complex international issues that challenge us all.
Together, we must shoulder the great task of upholding world peace and promoting common development.
While China is committed to its own independent foreign policy, it cannot achieve development in isolation.
Likewise, the world cannot develop without China.
Hu once said that the twenty-first century should be a century of peace, development, and cooperation.
China is willing to join with the EU, the US, and the rest of the world to realize the potential of a truly harmonious world.
Over the Cliff We Go
BERKELEY – Unless something unexpected happens, the United States’ many legislated reductions in taxes over the past 12 years – all of which have been explicitly temporary – will expire simultaneously at the start of 2013.
American tax rates will revert overnight to their Clinton-era levels.
Some of these reductions were implemented to fight what was seen four years ago as a temporary downturn.
Although their supporters wanted to make them permanent, claiming that they were temporary allowed for the circumvention of procedural requirements in the legislative process that Democrats had created in a vain effort to guarantee fiscal sanity.
The immediate increase in tax rates is only part of the story.
At the same time, automatic reductions in the defense budget and “discretionary” domestic spending – agreed to by both Democrats and Republicans in the summer of 2011 –&#160;will take effect.