If they could reduce the number of national insurers from five to three, they could then increase their market power and squeeze more profits from consumers.
The industry trotted out all the standard arguments to justify such consolidation, claiming that it would actually benefit consumers by making health-insurer operations more efficient.
No mention was made that, according to the Center for American Progress, competition between Aetna and Humana just in the Medicare Advantage health-insurance market reduces the average annual premium customers pay each company by $155 and $43, respectively.
In July, the US Justice Department sued to block a merger between Aetna and Humana, after the deal was on its way to being rubberstamped by regulators in Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky, North Carolina, and other states.
In fact, Ohio Governor John Kasich’s Department of Insurance approved the merger in May, and then kept its decision secret for more than a month.
Simple partisanship helps to explain why some states want to push these mergers through.
Republicans aren’t eager to ensure the proper functioning of a major reform enacted by a Democratic administration.
They conveniently forget that the ACA’s central features – an individual mandate to purchase health insurance and the establishment of health-insurance exchanges – were conceived by the conservative Heritage Foundation and originally implemented by Mitt Romney when he was the Republican governor of Massachusetts in the mid-2000s.
Another explanation for the momentum behind health-insurer mergers is lobbying.
Industry lobbyists maintain a social affinity with regulators and politicians, with whom they once worked in government or the private sector, and whom they still see on the cocktail-party circuit in Washington, DC, and state capitals.
They ply their targets with plausible-sounding arguments, talking points, and suggestions that campaign or “super-PAC” contributions will find their way to politicians whose policies reward discrete, organized interests, even if they are very bad for America’s amorphous and unorganized consumers.
So, on one side of the divide we have the major health insurers, which all maintain well-funded, national lobbying operations.
On the other side, at least for the past nine months, we’ve had the younger of us, Michael DeLong, serving as the Director of the Coalition to Protect Patient Choice (CPPC), funded by the Service Employees International Union to collects facts and figures about health-insurer mergers for state and local consumer groups.
If states hold public hearings to determine whether health-insurer mergers are warranted and serve the public interest, these groups can submit comments and possibly testify.
State and local consumer groups nationwide have been very worried about health-insurer monopolization.
But they are often underfunded and ill equipped to assess the likely consequences of mergers, and to make valid technocratic arguments against them.
The CPPC, too, is operating on a shoestring budget, and it is fighting an uphill battle.
It has submitted comments on health-insurer mergers for proceedings in California, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Indiana, Missouri, New York, Ohio, Virginia, and Wisconsin; it has testified at hearings in California, Delaware, Florida, Missouri, New York, Virginia, and Wisconsin; and it has armed consumer groups and unions with relevant facts and figures.
Despite all this activity, it is being massively outgunned.
In one of the worst pieces ever to appear in the Washington Post, its Op-Ed columnist Robert Samuelson claimed that disputes among lobbyists in America today take place on a level playing field.
“If the rich were all powerful, their taxes would be much lower,” he wrote.
The CPPC has risen to the challenge and provided a worthwhile service, by bringing past consumer-protection violations and noncompliance issues to health-insurance regulators who are willing to listen.
But all of us who want to put consumers before corporations could have used more manpower and background information from the beginning.
When many state and local consumer groups lack even one full-time staff member who is familiar with antitrust issues, we’re a long way from properly functioning democracy.
Now that the Justice Department has stepped in, we can only hope that this story will have a happy ending, and that the courts will recognize that these mergers are anticompetitive and immensely harmful to consumers.
American Wellbeing Since 1979
BERKELEY – The story goes like this: Since 1979 – the peak of the last business cycle before the inauguration of Ronald Reagan as President – economic growth in the United States has been overwhelmingly a rich-only phenomenon.
Real (inflation-adjusted) wages, incomes, and living standards for America’s poor and middle-class households are at best only trivially higher.
While annual real GDP per capita has grown 72%, from $29,000 to $50,000 (in 2009 prices), almost all of this growth has gone to those who now occupy the highest tier of the US income distribution.
All of this is true, but there are a few important caveats.
One is found in the Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes, published by the US Congressional Budget Office (CBO) last year.
After-tax real income for the lowest quintile of US households was 49% higher in 2010 than in 1979, growing at an average rate of 1.3% annually.
After-tax income for the middle three quintiles in 2010 was 40% higher – equivalent to 1.1% average annual growth.
To be sure, households in the 81st to 99th percentiles gained 64% in after-tax income, with the top 1% up by 201%, representing an average annual growth rate of 3.6% – far ahead of any other income group.
And, by now, with the recovery concentrated among the rich as well, the top 1% of Americans are highly likely to be approaching a cumulative 300% gain since 1979.
But when one looks at the 1.3% annual growth rate of after-tax real income that the CBO calculates for the bottom quintile, 0.9 percentage points comes from the growth of the health-care financing programs Medicare, Medicaid, and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program.
The CBO counts all of that growth as an increase in poor US households’ after-tax real income.
But that is not money that America’s poor can spend, so some downward adjustment should be applied.
Moreover, only half of those expenditures show up as more health care received by program beneficiaries; the other half flow into the general US health-care financing system and cover care that was previously uncompensated.
And America’s health-care financing system is uniquely inefficient: other OECD countries get more in terms of health and healthcare services from every dollar they spend than America gets from every $2 it spends.
As a result, a better estimate of the contribution of expanded US public health-care programs to the material wellbeing of America’s poor is just 0.2 percentage points per year.
Hence the necessity of something like the individual health-insurance mandate of the 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”), or of biting the bullet and adopting a single-payer system for financing health care.
Either way, America needs to gets something comparable to other OECD countries’ value out of its enormous health-care expenditures.
Frankly, I am of two minds on the relationship between growing government health-care financing programs and inequality.
On odd days, my bottom line is that material wellbeing since 1979 has grown at 0.5% per year for America’s poor, compared to 4% per year for America’s rich (and 6% per year for its super-rich).
This is because most of the expansion is not the equivalent of&nbsp;a greater income for America’s poor in any reasonable sense, and because America gets relatively little value for its health-care financing.
The Great Democracies’ New Harmony
CAMBRIDGE – When Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi invited US President Barack Obama to attend his country’s Republic Day ceremonies earlier this year, it signaled an important change in relations between the world’s two biggest democracies.
Ever since the 1990s, three American administrations have tried to improve bilateral relations, with mixed results.
While annual trade between the countries has soared during this period, from $20 billion to more than $100 billion, annual US-China trade is worth six times more, and the political relationship has had ups and downs.
The two countries have a long history of confusing each other.
By definition, any alliance with a superpower is unequal; so efforts to establish close ties with the United States have long run up against India’s tradition of strategic autonomy.
But Americans do not view democratic India as a threat.
On the contrary, India’s success is an important US interest, and several factors promise a brighter future for the bilateral relationship.
The most important factor is the acceleration in India’s economic growth, which the International Monetary Fund projects will exceed 7.5% through 2020.
For decades, India suffered from what some called the “Hindu rate of economic growth”: a little more than 1% per year.
It might more properly have been called a 1930s British socialist rate of growth.
After independence in 1947, India adopted an inward-looking planning system that focused on heavy industry.
Market-oriented reforms in the early 1990s changed that pattern, and annual growth accelerated to 7% under the Congress party, before slumping to 5%.
Since the 2014 general election brought Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party to power, the government has reversed the slowdown.
And prospects for continued growth are strong.
India has an emerging middle class of several hundred million, and English is an official language spoken by some 50 to 100 million.
Building on that base, Indian information industries are able to play a major global role.
Moreover, with a population of 1.2 billion people, India is four times larger than the US, and likely to surpass China by 2025.
Its sheer scale will be increasingly important not only to the global economy, but also to balancing China’s influence in Asia and managing global issues such as climate change, public health, and cyber security.
India also has significant military power, with an estimated 90-100 nuclear weapons, intermediate-range missiles, 1.3 million military personnel, and annual military expenditure of nearly $50 billion (3% of the world total).
And, in terms of soft power, India has an established democracy, an influential diaspora, and a vibrant popular culture with transnational influence.
Bollywood produces more films every year than any other country, out-competing Hollywood in parts of Asia and the Middle East.
But one should not underestimate India’s problems.
Population alone is not a source of power unless those human resources are developed, and India has lagged well behind China in terms of literacy and economic growth.
Despite its progress, around a third of India’s population lives in conditions of acute poverty, making the country home to a third of the world’s poor.
India’s $2 trillion GDP is only a fifth of China’s $10 trillion, and a ninth of America’s $17.5 trillion (measured at market exchange rates).
Likewise, India’s annual per capita income of $1,760 is just one-fifth that of China.
Even more striking, while 95% of the Chinese population is literate, the proportion for India is only 74% – and only 65% for women.
A symptom of this problem is India’s poor performance in international comparisons of universities, with none ranked among the world’s top 100.
India’s high-tech exports are only 5% of its total exports compared to 30% for China.
India is unlikely to develop the power to become a global challenger to the US in the first half of this century.
Indeed, even in terms of soft power, a recent study by the Portland Consultancy in London placed India outside the top 30 countries.
China ranked 30th, and the US came in third, behind the United Kingdom and Germany.
Nonetheless, India has considerable assets that already affect the balance of power in Asia.
While India and China signed agreements in 1993 and 1996 that promised a peaceful settlement of the border dispute that led them to war in l962, the issue has heated up again, following Chinese actions in recent years.
India and China are fellow members of the BRICS (along with Brazil, Russia, and South Africa).
But cooperation within that caucus is limited.
While Indian officials are often discreet in public about relations with China, and wisely want bilateral trade and investment to grow, their security concerns remain acute.
As part of the group of Asian countries that will tend to balance China, India has already begun to strengthen its diplomatic relations with Japan.
It would be a mistake to cast the prospects for an improved US-India relationship solely in terms of China’s rising power.
Indian economic success is an American interest on its own.
So is the open approach taken by India and Brazil on issues such as governance of the Internet, at a time when Russia and China are seeking more authoritarian control.
No one should expect an Indian-American alliance any time soon, given historical Indian public opinion.
But one can predict a relationship in the coming years that will be both sui generis and stronger.
A Marshall Plan for the United States
NEW YORK – When a major highway bridge in California collapsed last month, the impact on the entire southwestern United States once again highlighted the country’s serious infrastructure problem.
Indeed, in a sense, the world’s largest economy is falling apart.
Ideological aversion to public-sector investment, together with the endemic short-term thinking of those who write budgets, has kept spending on roads, airports, railways, telecommunication networks, and power generation at levels far below what is needed.
And yet the problem can no longer be ignored.
If the US does not act quickly to provide its fragile economic recovery with a solid foundation of modern infrastructure, it could find itself sinking slowly back into stagnation.
It seems self-evident that a developed economy requires adequate, ongoing investment in public goods.
But the state of infrastructure in the US suggests that many decision-makers do not share this view.
A 2013 report by the American Society of Civil Engineers gave the US a pathetic overall grade of D+ for its infrastructure.
The report cited numerous state-specific shortcomings, including Michigan’s “88 high-hazard dams and 1,298 structurally deficient bridges” and the “$44.5 billion needed to upgrade drinking-water systems” in California.
The report concludes that a $3.6 trillion investment (roughly one-fifth of the country’s annual GDP) will be needed by 2020 to boost the quality of US infrastructure by addressing the “significant backlog of overdue maintenance [and the] pressing need for modernization.”
Otherwise, the country’s crumbling infrastructure will drag down economic growth for years to come.
America’s desperate need for modern infrastructure has come, in some ways, at a fortuitous moment.
At a time when the economic recovery remains fragile, a publicly financed infrastructure program could meaningfully transform the prospects of US workers, providing new employment opportunities for low and un-skilled labor.
Meanwhile, scaling up infrastructure spending could provide an often-overlooked opportunity for long-term institutional investors.
Pension funds, insurance companies, and mutual funds in the US manage combined assets totaling roughly $30 trillion, and they have been struggling to find investments that match their long-term obligations.
Persistently low interest rates have been particularly challenging for pension funds, which face rising liabilities (calculated on a discounted basis).
A large-scale program to reboot America’s crumbling infrastructure would go a long way toward addressing this gap between assets and liabilities, providing pension funds with investments with long time horizons (and thus guaranteeing the incomes of tomorrow’s retirees) while leveraging private capital for the public good.
In fact, US pension funds are already investing in infrastructure, but they are doing so in Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands.
Sadly, ideological objections and partisan politics are likely to strew obstacles in the path of any effort to modernize America’s infrastructure and create such opportunities at home.
Public-sector investment invariably rekindles the age-old struggle between those who insist that government should stay out of efforts to create jobs and those who believe that part of government’s role is to put underutilized human resources to work.
One way to avoid this bottleneck would be for US President Barack Obama to establish a bipartisan Infrastructure Commission tasked with finding solutions to the problem.
This would operate much like the bipartisan National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, established in 2010 to address America’s fiscal challenges, or the military-base-closing commissions of the 1980s and 1990s.
By splitting the responsibility between the country’s two main parties, the commission would free its members from the pressures of day-to-day politics and allow them to concentrate on the health of the economy.
Congress would then hold an up-or-down vote on the commission’s recommendations.
Infrastructure has long been acknowledged as fundamental to a country’s economic prospects.
In neglecting the necessary investments, the US has put itself on a precarious path, one that could lead to stagnation and decline, which would be difficult to reverse.
There is little reason for US policymakers to accept this fate.
Low interest rates, the dollar’s continuing role as the world’s main reserve currency, and the capacity of the public sector to increase spending make the case for higher infrastructure spending compelling.
In the twentieth century, the US government spent billions of dollars to rebuild the European economy.
Its project for the first half of this century should be to do the same at home.
Using Antibiotics Wisely
LONDON – To solve the problem of antimicrobial resistance, the world needs not only new drugs, but also new behavior – by all seven billion of us.
Because of the misuse and overuse of antibiotics, common infections such as pneumonia and tuberculosis are becoming increasingly resistant to existing treatments; in some cases, they have become completely immune.
The threat is global in scale.
According to the Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, which I chair, drug-resistant infections kill at least 700,000 people every year.
By 2050, if nothing is done to address the problem, some ten million people a year could be dying from maladies that were once treatable.
Developing new drugs is an important approach in a coordinated response to fight antimicrobial resistance.
But it will not be enough.
We also need to reduce our demand for antibiotics and understand that they can sometimes do more harm than good.
According to one estimate, nearly half of all prescriptions for antibiotics in the United States are inappropriate or unneeded.
So the steep rise in antibiotic resistance is hardly surprising.
Improving people’s understanding of the problem will be crucial to reversing this trend.
Most people are either completely oblivious to antimicrobial resistance or incorrectly believe that it is an individual’s body that becomes drug resistant – not the bacteria itself.
A better understanding of when to use antibiotics, and how to use them effectively, will help people use them responsibly.
We need campaigns like the one introduced by the Australian charity NPS MedicineWise, which held a competition for videos promoting public awareness of antibiotic use.
The result was a series of short, witty films explaining simply and humorously how antibiotics can be misused.
These types of efforts are needed worldwide, particularly in the largest and most rapidly growing countries.
The BRIC countries – Brazil, Russia, India, and China – consume fewer antibiotics per person than the US.
But they are rapidly catching up as the rate of antibiotics consumption outstrips the pace of economic growth.
Pessimists will claim that behaviors are hard to change, especially when doing so depends on explaining the science of germs to uneducated audiences. That line of thinking brings to mind one of the most abhorrent arguments against making HIV medicines affordable for patients in lower-income countries: People in Africa have no watches, so they will not be able to take their antiretroviral medicine three times a day.
The truth, as researchers have shown, is that Africans are perfectly capable of reliably adhering to antiretroviral therapy – often more so than North Americans.
Indeed, in July, UNAIDS announced that the goal of having 15 million people on life-saving HIV treatment by the end 2015 was met ahead of schedule.
Every year on December 1, World Aids Day highlights the issue and raises global awareness.
We need a similar effort to address the perils of antimicrobial resistance.
European Antibiotic Awareness Day, on November 18, is a good start; but we must also find new, creative ways to spread the message.
Technological innovation brings unprecedented opportunities to reach people directly.
Roughly 95% of Chinese and 75% of Indians use mobile phones regularly.
In areas where literacy rates are high, sending text messages can be a rapid and effective way to spread a message.
Research in Europe and the US shows that 90% of text messages are read within three minutes of being received.
Social media are another powerful and relatively cheap tool to reach millions of people.
In China – home to the world’s largest Internet base, with 641 million users – 80% of doctors use smartphones for professional purposes, including by providing medical advice via social media, with some practitioners attracting millions of followers.
Enlisting these medical social-media superstars to educate the public on the urgency of antimicrobial resistance is an exciting opportunity.
An anti-smoking social-media campaign led by the World Health Organization provides another model that could be followed.
Posts by Chinese celebrities were used to increase awareness of a law banning smoking in indoor public spaces.
In some parts of the world, the best way to combat drug resistance will be to encourage changes in behavior that reduce the spread of infections and minimize the need for treatment.
Proper hand washing is a great place to start.
In India, a clever campaign called SuperAmma used images of people exposed to unsanitary situations to encourage hand washing.
The campaign successfully and sustainably increased regular hand washing from 1% of the groups involved to about 30%.
The cost of a global effort to raise awareness of the threat of antimicrobial resistance would be miniscule compared to the amount being spent to develop new drugs and technologies, which in any case will take years to become available.
Countries should urgently put in place educational campaigns and begin to change behaviors.
Together, we can break our bad antibiotic habits.
The Data-Poor Lives of Adolescents
SEATTLE – Data can save lives.
Without it, we wouldn’t know that smoking causes lung cancer and coronary disease, that helmets reduce death rates for motorcycle accidents, and that better education for women improves child survival – and much else.
Given the importance of reliable data, collecting it must be a high priority.
One area where data collection is particularly inadequate is adolescent health.
People aged ten to 24 receive far less attention than other age groups.
More broadly, as the new Lancet Commission on Adolescent Health and Wellbeing highlights, global health and social policy largely tends to ignore adolescent health.
In many ways, our future depends on the health of our adolescents.
In low- and middle-income countries, there are more adolescents than ever before.
And their health today will affect their future wellbeing, shaping their ability to earn a living, produce and raise healthy children, care for aging parents, and lead their societies toward peace and prosperity.
By enabling governments and others to design effective and targeted health programs for adolescents, data on adolescent health can play a critical role in securing a better future.
The first step is to find out where, why, and how many adolescents are dying.
Myriad surveys conducted in recent decades have aimed specifically to determine death rates among adults and children under the age of five.
Yet those in between are not specifically addressed, making it very difficult to track adolescent deaths in countries that lack adequate systems for civil registration and recording of vital statistics.
To address this shortcoming, donors and governments should fund the development of survey methods to measure adolescent death rates.
Questions designed to elicit the needed information could be incorporated into surveys already being conducted regularly in low- and middle-income countries, such as the Demographic and Health Surveys and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys.
Of course, we also need data about adolescents during their lives – ideally, data that come from the adolescents directly.
As it stands, individuals under the age of 15 are generally excluded from household surveys.
And while school surveys are conducted in some countries, funding constraints often mean that they are carried out infrequently.
More problematic, school-based surveys in low- and middle-income countries typically exclude those who are not in school, whether because they dropped out or never enrolled at all.
Governments and donors must therefore also work to develop and carry out targeted surveys of adolescents.
Among other things, such surveys should aim to create a clear picture of adolescents’ exposure to avoidable risk factors, such as alcohol and illicit drug use, unsafe sexual behaviors, violence, obesity, physical inactivity, and unhealthy diet.
To complement this effort, we must also invest in improving our understanding of how these risk factors – most often studied in connection with early childhood and adulthood – affect adolescents’ health.
According to the Global Burden of Disease Study, health risk factors explain at least 50% of the early death and disability of adults aged 50 and over; for young people, the figure drops to 26%.
More studies are needed to inform health policy and planning adequately.
The data-collection effort should also include a focus on mental health.
The Global Burden of Disease Study has estimated that, in 2013, depression was one of the top three causes of adolescent females’ loss of healthy years, and one of the top seven causes of lost healthy years in adolescent males.
Yet the data on mental health for individuals under the age of 18 are poor, particularly in low-income countries, and what is available is not comparable across countries.
It is thus imperative that governments and donors invest in building an expert consensus on how best to measure mental health and implement those methods globally, including in low-resource settings.
Before long, today’s adolescents will be running the world.
If they are to lead it well, they need to be healthy.
And we need to invest in collecting the data that are so essential to ensuring that they are.
Science, Heal Thyself
NEW YORK – Science may be humankind’s greatest success as a species.
Thanks to the scientific revolution that began in the seventeenth century, humans today enjoy instant communication, rapid transportation, a rich and diverse diet, and effective prevention and treatment for once-fatal illnesses.
Moreover, science is humanity’s best hope for addressing such existential threats as climate change, emerging pathogens, extra-terrestrial bolides, and a burgeoning population.
But the scientific enterprise is under threat from both external and internal forces.
Now the scientific community must use its capacity for self-correction – based on new information, discoveries, experiences, and ideas (the stuff of scientific progress for centuries) – to address these threats.
A major hindrance to scientific progress is the increasing scarcity of research funding – a trend that has been exacerbated by the global economic crisis.
Uncertain funding prospects not only discourage scientists from pursuing risky or undirected lines of research that could lead to crucial discoveries; they also make it more difficult to recruit the best and brightest for scientific careers, especially given the extensive training and specialization that such careers require.
Furthermore, leaders from across the political spectrum are questioning scientifically-established principles – such as anthropogenic climate change, evolution, and the benefits of vaccination – with no scientific basis.
At best, such statements serve as a distraction from important issues; at worst, they distort public policy.
Although such threats are outside of scientists’ direct control, improved communication with political leaders and the public could help to reduce misinformation and bolster confidence in science.
But the field’s credibility is also being undermined from within, by the growing prevalence of scientific misconduct – reflected in a recent spate of retracted scientific publications – and an increasingly unbalanced scientific workforce that faces perverse incentives.
Although the vast majority of scientists adhere to the highest standards of integrity, the corrosive effects of dishonest or irreproducible research on science’s credibility cannot be ignored.
The problems are rooted in the field’s incentive structure – a winner-take-all system in which grants, prizes, and other rewards go to those who publish first.
While this competitive mentality is not new in science – the seventeenth-century mathematicians Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz spent more than a decade fighting bitterly for credit for the discovery of calculus – it has intensified to the point that it is impeding progress.
Indeed, scientists today are engaged in a hypercompetitive race for funding and prestigious publications that has disconnected their goals from those of the public that they serve.
Last year, for example, when C. Glenn Begley and Lee Ellis sought to reproduce 53 “landmark” preclinical cancer studies, they discovered that nearly 90% of the findings could not be reproduced.
While the researchers who originally published those studies may have profited from increased funding and recognition, the patients who need new cancer treatments gained nothing.
Moreover, this winner-take-all system fails to account for the fact that scientific work is largely carried out by research teams rather than individuals.
As a result, the scientific workforce is beginning to resemble a pyramid scheme: unfair, inefficient, and unsustainable.
The incentives associated with the winner-take-all system encourage cheating – ranging from questionable practices and ethical lapses to outright misconduct.
This threatens to create a vicious cycle in which misconduct and sloppy research are rewarded, undermining both the scientific process and its credibility.
The problems are clear.
But addressing them requires a prudent strategy that accounts for the structural fragility of the scientific enterprise, in which scientists must complete extensive training, regulation can easily stifle creativity, and funding limitations can substantially delay progress.
Because of this fragility, few countries have been able to establish highly productive scientific enterprises, even though scientific innovation and technological breakthroughs are crucial to a country’s productivity, economic growth, and influence.
Given the challenges implicit in establishing and maintaining a robust scientific sector, reform efforts must be undertaken carefully.
At the same time, the reforms must be comprehensive, addressing methodological, cultural, and structural issues.
Methodological reforms should include revised training requirements that allow for less specialization, together with improved training in probability and statistics.
Scientific culture must be reformed to abandon longstanding practices, such as those that determine how credit is assigned.
And structural reforms aimed at balancing the scientific workforce and stabilizing funding are crucial.
Some reforms should be fairly easy to implement.
For example, it would not be difficult to win support for improving education in the ethical aspects of scientific research.
But other important reforms, such as creating alternatives to the winner-take-all incentive system, will present enormous challenges.
An effective reform strategy should employ the tools of science – specifically, data collection and analysis.
More data are needed to understand workforce imbalances, the peer review system, and how the economics of the scientific enterprise influence scientists’ behavior.
Science has been studied by sociologists, historians, and philosophers, but rarely by scientists themselves.
Now, with perverse incentives undermining their credibility and hampering research, scientists must take matters into their own hands.
Applying the scientific method to the problems of science could be scientists’ best hope for regaining public confidence and reinvigorating the quest for transformative discoveries.
India’s Data of Discrimination
NEW DELHI – Last December’s fatal gang rape of a 23-year-old woman in New Delhi triggered an unprecedented public outcry in India.
Tens of thousands of citizens took to the streets to demand an end to police indifference to women’s safety, stronger laws, and speedier trials for those charged with crimes against women.
The protests launched a countrywide movement, spurring nonstop media coverage of women’s issues.
So, has significant change followed?
Within eight days of the rape, a special commission, led by former Supreme Court Chief Justice J.S. Verma, was established.
The commission’s roughly 700-page report, completed in only 29 days, urged the government to take swift, far-reaching action.
Among the report’s recommendations were stronger penalties for sex crimes, including harassment; a requirement that police officers report every instance of alleged rape; and broader measures to address pervasive discrimination against women.
India’s government responded two weeks later, announcing a new ordinance that not only expands the definition of rape, but also makes behavior such as groping, stalking, trafficking, and voyeurism serious criminal offenses.
But, as the commission’s report highlighted, India does not lack laws intended to deter sexual violence against women.
Rather, amid widespread ignorance and apathy, government and law enforcement have lacked the motivation to administer existing laws adequately.
The recent explosion of long-dormant public outrage should be a tipping point, precipitating genuine progress toward a more equal society.
But designing effective policies to diminish the obstacles confronting women and girls requires measuring the prevalence of the attitudes and habits that limit their potential.
If the recently enacted laws are to have the intended effect, Indian society must reject discriminatory mindsets and practices.
Unlike conventional indicators, which capture inequality in outcomes like education and employment, the OECD’s Social Institutions Gender Index (SIGI) evaluates the underlying drivers of such outcomes, comparing factors such as preferential treatment of sons over daughters, violence against women, and restrictions on property rights.
According to this metric, in 2012, India ranked 56th out of 86 countries for gender equality, lower than other major emerging markets like Brazil, China, Indonesia, and South Africa.
But Indian society, which comprises more than 1.2 billion citizens, is hardly homogeneous.
Indeed, India is a complex amalgam of 28 states with widely varying social indicators.
For example, the nine states that the government has labeled “high focus” account for 62% of India’s maternal deaths and 70% of infant deaths, but contain only 48% of the country’s population.
Meanwhile, the southern states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh account for roughly 22% of the population, but less than 12% of maternal deaths.
Similarly, while infant deaths account for less than 5% of all deaths in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, more than 20% of babies born in the northern states of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan (all high-focus states) do not see their first birthday.
So, given the limited value of countrywide generalizations, India’s leaders must focus on the differences between states in order to devise targeted policies.
India’s National Rural Health Mission has adopted such an approach, using region-specific data to identify low-quality prenatal care,&#160;unsafe deliveries, and lack of access to birth control as high-priority issues in 18 states.
The measures that the mission has implemented since 2005 – including free contraception, pregnancy tracking, prenatal care, compensation for hospital delivery, and regular home visits to new mothers – contributed to a 20% drop in fertility rates in the targeted states by 2010, and helped to reduce maternal and infant deaths.
But this approach is not sufficient to address the gender inequality that characterizes Indian politics and society.
Women comprise just 10% of India’s parliament, and only two of 35 ministers with full Cabinet rank are women.
And, while the 33% quota for women in local-government bodies has placed a million of them in elected positions at the grass roots, the extent to which this has actually improved women’s status has yet to be measured.
Moreover, discrimination in India often begins in the family.
Indian families’ tendency to prefer sons has resulted in an adverse sex ratio, particularly in some northern states.
Moreover, in the same region, more than 60% of girls are married well before the legal age, making pregnancies among anemic and malnourished teenagers a common occurrence.
But, at the same time, most girls complete 12 years of schooling in the northern mountain state of Himachal Pradesh, demonstrating that the north-south distinction is no more conclusive than countrywide generalizations.
To facilitate the design of effective targeted policies, India’s Central Statistical Organization is working to provide detailed data through a pilot project that captures Indian states’ SIGI indicators.
The study will highlight the variations in social, cultural, and economic barriers to female empowerment across India.
Policies based on generalities will not work.
To initiate a fundamental shift in citizens’ gender-related attitudes and behavior, India’s leaders must understand – by the numbers – the often-dramatic disparities between their country’s individual states.
Slow Growth for US Interest Rates
LONDON – The US Federal Reserve’s new policy statement will, as usual, be analyzed in excruciating detail in the days ahead, as investors seek guidance on when and how quickly interest rates will be raised.
Notably, the word “patient” does not appear, and the Fed has signaled that it may raise its benchmark rate as early as June.
But the particular wording is far less telling than the context in which the statement is being released.
In fact, uncertainty about monetary policy in the United States has been the leading driver of financial-market volatility this year.
After all, the potential effect of interest-rate hikes on the US yield curve has a major impact on the pricing of all global assets.
But three factors suggest that investors are over-emphasizing the risk of a curve re-pricing.
First, economic developments will likely lead the Fed to exhibit caution when it comes to the process of raising interest rates.
Second, even if the Fed acts quickly, investor appetite for returns will anchor yields.
Third, the technical features of the market will ensure strong demand for US Treasury bills.
Let us begin with the relevant economic developments.
The core consumer price index, to be released next week, is expected to show a year-on-year increase of just 1.7% – or even less, if the lower oil price feeds through from headline to core CPI.
And real wage growth stands at less than 2%, which is below the level deemed necessary by the Fed to underpin a sustainable acceleration in consumer spending.
On top of already modest inflation expectations – characterized by a five-year break-even inflation rate of 1.9% – the dollar has appreciated by around 10% this year, and by almost 25% since the beginning of last year.
Given the deflationary impact of a stronger currency – and the Fed’s general intolerance of deflation – there is good reason to believe that the Fed will exercise caution in raising interest rates.
Even if the Fed ignores deflationary pressure and hikes interest rates more quickly, medium- and long-term rates are still likely to be anchored, given how little yield is available elsewhere in the world.
Yields on German Bunds are now negative out to eight years.
Given such low yields in most of the world, investors will be eager to take advantage of the relative value opportunity offered by rising US interest rates.
Add to that America’s safe-haven status, and the fact that any re-pricing of US rates surely would reflect an economic resurgence, and the bid for US Treasuries should be exceptionally strong.
In this context, interest rates would remain capped, mitigating the risk of a disorderly bond-market sell-off.
The final, technical reason why interest rates are not likely to rise excessively is that years of central-bank purchases and a shrinking US budget deficit have made US Treasuries scarce.
Indeed, so-called “repo” activity – that is, the sale of a US Treasury obligation that the seller promises to buy back later at a slightly higher price – has declined considerably, with the balance of such transactions having fallen from $5 trillion before the crisis to $2.5 trillion today.
Both the two-year and five-year US repo rates have been pushed periodically into negative territory, owing to the combined effects of risk-averse behavior, investor deleveraging, and stricter banking regulation.
Though US monetary policy undoubtedly exerts significant influence on global markets, fears surrounding the direction of US interest rates may be overdone.
Though the Fed may no longer be promising patience, the current financial environment implies that investors should not, for the time being, anticipate a major hike.
America in the Way
NEW YORK – The Third International Conference on Financing for Development recently convened in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa.
The conference came at a time when developing countries and emerging markets have demonstrated their ability to absorb huge amounts of money productively.
Indeed, the tasks that these countries are undertaking – investing in infrastructure (roads, electricity, ports, and much else), building cities that will one day be home to billions, and moving toward a green economy – are truly enormous.
At the same time, there is no shortage of money waiting to be put to productive use.
Just a few years ago, Ben Bernanke, then the chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board, talked about a global savings glut.
And yet investment projects with high social returns were being starved of funds.
That remains true today.
The problem, then as now, is that the world’s financial markets, meant to intermediate efficiently between savings and investment opportunities, instead misallocate capital and create risk.
There is another irony. Most of the investment projects that the emerging world needs are long term, as are much of the available savings – the trillions in retirement accounts, pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds.
But our increasingly shortsighted financial markets stand between the two.
Much has changed in the 13 years since the first International Conference on Financing for Development was held in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002.
Back then, the G-7 dominated global economic policymaking; today, China is the world’s largest economy (in purchasing-power-parity terms), with savings some 50% larger than that of the US.
In 2002, Western financial institutions were thought to be wizards at managing risk and allocating capital; today, we see that they are wizards at market manipulation and other deceptive practices.
Gone are the calls for the developed countries to live up to their commitment to give at least 0.7% of their GNI in development aid.
A few northern European countries – Denmark, Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden and, most surprisingly, the United Kingdom – in the midst of its self-inflicted austerity – fulfilled their pledges in 2014.
But the United States (which gave 0.19% of GNI in 2014) lags far, far behind.
Today, developing countries and emerging markets say to the US and others: If you will not live up to your promises, at least get out of the way and let us create an international architecture for a global economy that works for the poor, too.
Not surprisingly, the existing hegemons, led by the US, are doing whatever they can to thwart such efforts.
When China proposed the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank to help recycle some of the surfeit of global savings to where financing is badly needed, the US sought to torpedo the effort.
President Barack Obama’s administration suffered a stinging (and highly embarrassing) defeat.
The US is also blocking the world’s path toward an international rule of law for debt and finance.
If bond markets, for example, are to work well, an orderly way of resolving cases of sovereign insolvency must be found.
But today, there is no such way.
Ukraine, Greece, and Argentina are all examples of the failure of existing international arrangements.
The vast majority of countries have called for the creation of a framework for sovereign-debt restructuring.
The US remains the major obstacle.
Private investment is important, too.
But the new investment provisions embedded in the trade agreements that the Obama administration is negotiating across both oceans imply that accompanying any such foreign direct investment comes a marked reduction in governments’ abilities to regulate the environment, health, working conditions, and even the economy.
The US stance concerning the most disputed part of the Addis Ababa conference was particularly disappointing.
As developing countries and emerging markets open themselves to multinationals, it becomes increasingly important that they can tax these behemoths on the profits generated by the business that occurs within their borders.
Apple, Google, and General Electric have demonstrated a genius for avoiding taxes that exceeds what they employed in creating innovative products.
All countries – both developed and developing – have been losing billions of dollars in tax revenues.
Last year, the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists released information about Luxembourg’s tax rulings that exposed the scale of tax avoidance and evasion.
While a rich country like the US arguably can afford the behavior described in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks, the poor cannot.
I was a member of an international commission, the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation, examining ways to reform the current tax system.
In a report presented to the International Conference on Financing for Development, we unanimously agreed that the current system is broken, and that minor tweaks will not fix it.
We proposed an alternative – similar to the way corporations are taxed within the US, with profits allocated to each state on the basis of the economic activity occurring within state borders.
The US and other advanced countries have been pushing for much smaller changes, to be recommended by the OECD, the advanced countries’ club.
In other words, the countries from which the politically powerful tax evaders and avoiders come are supposed to design a system to reduce tax evasion.
Our Commission explains why the OECD reforms were at best tweaks in a fundamentally flawed system and were simply inadequate.
Developing countries and emerging markets, led by India, argued that the proper forum for discussing such global issues was an already established group within the United Nations, the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters, whose status and funding needed to be elevated.
The US strongly opposed: it wanted to keep things the same as in the past, with global governance by and for the advanced countries.
New geopolitical realities demand new forms of global governance, with a greater voice for developing and emerging countries.
The US prevailed in Addis, but it also showed itself to be on the wrong side of history.
Engaging Trump
WASHINGTON, DC – If Donald Trump’s victory in the United States’ presidential election was an earthquake, then the transition period leading up to his inauguration on January 20 feels like a tsunami warning.
The entire world is speculating about what will happen, and, depending on who has appointments at Trump Tower that day, the mood oscillates between concern and panic.
But, rather than wallow in fatalism, we must take steps to avert the worst.
The situation certainly looks bleak.
America’s commitment to its allies has long formed the bedrock of post-World War II security, just as its engagement in international institutions has underpinned global cooperation.
This remains as true today as it was 50 years ago, despite some weakening of America’s global primacy.
Yet Trump seems to think that America’s commitment to its allies should have strings attached, exemplified in incendiary campaign declarations that the US would protect only the NATO allies who are “paying their bills.”
And he is ready to renounce rules-based cooperation across the board, from trade (he has already rejected the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal) to climate change (he has threatened to withdraw from the historic agreement reached last year in Paris).
In short, America’s global engagement, in all its forms, can be expected to suffer substantially, posing a serious challenge to the liberal international order.
This represents a clear reversal from President Barack Obama’s second term, during which important progress was made in adapting America’s international role to a changing global environment.
At a time when power is increasingly diffuse and organization difficult, Obama began to spearhead more flexible policy responses.
Informal was married with formal.
Firm ties were replaced by complex regimes that created hundreds of weaker (and often lower-level) connections, rather than a few strong high-level linkages.
The Paris agreement was the clearest and fullest example of this approach; but efforts in other areas, from disease eradication to Internet governance, reflect a similar philosophy.
This is not to eulogize the Obama administration; nor is it to lionize Obama himself.
In fact, Obama’s reticence to engage in some areas has contributed to the breakdown of some components of world order during his tenure, most clearly in the Middle East.
Nonetheless, under his leadership, hints of how to structure international cooperation in a new era began to emerge – hints that Trump seems determined to ignore.
Under Trump, the US appears likely to be a largely unilateral actor, focused on its own short-term interests.
Without the US in the driver’s seat, the process of developing a new, more flexible underpinning for global cooperation will grind to a halt, at least for the next few years.
This is bad news for the world, but there seems to be little that can be done about it.
There is, however, another potential consequence of Trump’s presidency that must not be allowed to occur: the deterioration of the structural integrity of the existing global system.
Failing to make progress is one thing; dismantling the rules-based order that has underpinned relative peace and prosperity for seven decades is quite another.
Beyond being the indispensable power, the US is the interconnected power.
It is the hub of the linkages holding the world together, from the dollar to security to law to research and innovation.
As damaging as Trump’s unilateralism will be to the rules-based international order, its consequences would pale in comparison to the harm wrought by a truly isolationist and withdrawn US that fails to uphold these bonds.
Of course, in theory, another power could step in to replace the US.
But no one really qualifies at the moment.
Europe is depressingly far from the level of unity needed to assume a major global role.
Russia fills the role of spoiler well, but lacks the vision and authority to act as a world leader.
India is certainly not there yet, either.
Perhaps the most obvious candidate is China.
And the Chinese government’s loud calls for continued climate cooperation and quick moves in the wake of Trump’s election to fill the void left by the TPP’s apparent abandonment indicate a will to assume a more central position in global cooperation.
But China, too, remains a long way away from US-style leadership, not least because of the serious and mounting domestic challenges that it faces.
More regional authority, together with a gradual increase in global participation, provides all of the positive publicity and influence China needs for now.
If the US does take a truly isolationist tack, regional hegemony may become the order of the day.
China, Russia, the US, and Germany would each lead their respective spheres.
This raises the specter of conflict along the borders of these spheres: Russia would compete with China in Central Asia, and with Germany in Eastern Europe.
In regions lacking a clear hegemon, such as in Africa and Latin America, regional rivals would compete for primacy, perhaps backed by other regions’ hegemons in proxy contests, much like during the Cold War.
As we know all too well, while spheres of influence can give the appearance of stability, they breed great power conflict.
We cannot sit idly by and allow such a future to unfold.
The stakes are too high.
Instead, we must step up now, while the Trump administration is still in its gestation period, to form connections with the US that keep it engaged and active.
In the short term, this will require a transactional, rather than a principled, approach; Trump is, after all, a dealmaker.
But from this low bearing comes a high purpose.
As hard as it may be to admit, Trump has a key role to play in saving the world.
We have to make sure he is in place when the curtain goes up.
The Decline of US Military Innovation
NEW YORK – The United States is at risk of losing its military edge.
America’s armed forces may still be the most advanced in the world; after all, the US spends more than twice as much on military research and development as major powers like France and Russia, and nine times more than China and Germany.
But America’s continued technological leadership is far from assured.
Since 2005, the US Department of Defense has cut R&amp;D spending by 22%.
In 2013, as part of a deal to avert a showdown over the debt ceiling, the US Congress mandated some $1.2 trillion in automatic spending cuts.
The move, which requires reduced spending in numerous programs, including many defense research initiatives, was described by US President Barack Obama’s administration as “deeply destructive to national security.”
If US defense innovation continues to erode, not only will America’s defense capabilities suffer; the country will also risk slipping in terms of commercial innovation and competitiveness.
Budget limitations pose some of the greatest challenges to the US military’s efforts to maintain its technological edge.
The Army and the Missile Defense Agency have been particularly hard hit, with R&amp;D spending nearly halved since 2005.
The Navy’s research budget has been cut by some 20%, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) – the organization tasked with keeping the US military ahead of the technological curve – has had to slash R&amp;D spending by 18%.
Even the Air Force, where research spending has traditionally been a congressional priority, has been forced to cut its budget by roughly 4%.
When money does get allocated, cost pressures too often encourage investment in projects that promise quick results – a bias that comes at the expense of long-term innovation that could provide a strategic advantage.
Even DARPA has fallen prey to pressure for research that can demonstrate immediate progress.
To make matters worse, the US military’s innovation efforts face several structural problems.
Six decades of attempts to reform the defense acquisition process have yet to yield fruit.
Most of the design, development, and production of military systems is carried out by civilian industry, but decision-making remains firmly in the hands of military officials, who may not be able to strike the right balance between cost-cutting and innovation.
Rivalries within and among the military services once mimicked the role of competition in the private sector: they drove innovation.
But with the end of the Cold War, the pressure to remain a step ahead has waned, depriving the defense sector of a crucial engine of progress.
Moreover, top defense contractors’ R&amp;D spending as a proportion of sales plummeted by nearly a third from 1999 to 2012.
By contrast, America’s technology giants invest 4-6 times as much in R&amp;D.
Meanwhile, the US is suffering from the hollowing out of its defense industrial base.
Increased competition from China and other large emerging economies has eroded US manufacturing capabilities, jeopardizing America’s ability to develop the most technologically sophisticated defense platforms.
The defense industry once created the new technologies – lasers, GPS, and the Internet, for example – that helped drive the American economy.
Today, in most fields, civilian technology is likely to be leading the way.
The result can be seen in the rise of foreign competition in the international arms market.
American manufacturers are finding themselves increasingly vulnerable in areas that they once dominated – including unmanned aerial platforms, intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance, missiles, and satellites – as low-cost competitors gain market share.
In 2013, Russia’s weapons exports surpassed America’s by more than $2 billion.
In November, US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel announced a new initiative to “sustain and advance America’s military dominance for the twenty-first century.”
Unfortunately, Hagel’s successor is likely to find that, in an era of limited budgets and automatic spending cuts, the type of comprehensive innovation strategy that Hagel envisioned may simply not be viable.
Fixing America’s Fiscal Problem
CAMBRIDGE – With America’s elections less than six weeks away, it is time to think seriously about what will be done afterwards to deal with the nation’s fiscal mess.
Regardless of who wins, addressing the problem can no longer be postponed.
Americans are rightly focused on the “fiscal cliff” looming at the start of 2013, when, under current legislation, virtually all tax rates will rise, sucking more than 3% of GDP out of households and businesses.
In addition, automatic cuts in government spending on defense and non-defense programs will subtract nearly another 1% of GDP in 2013 and similar amounts in future years.
The Congressional Budget Office warns that falling off the fiscal cliff would push America’s economy into a serious recession next year.
And the fiscal cliff is only part of the problem that must be solved.
The bigger problem is that the United States has an enormous fiscal deficit – now about 7% of GDP and predicted to grow rapidly in future decades as an aging population and rising health-care costs increase government outlays for the “entitlement programs” that benefit middle-class seniors.
Although politicians on both the left and the right recognize that these programs’ growth must be slowed to avoid massive deficits or very large tax increases, their growth is unlikely to slow enough to prevent the national debt/GDP ratio from rising.
Fiscal consolidation therefore requires additional revenue as well as slower growth in entitlement spending.
The challenge facing US politicians after the election will be to find a politically acceptable way to raise that revenue without undermining incentives and economic growth.
The task is made more complex by the large number of legislators who insist that the deficit should be reduced by spending cuts alone.
Although no one can be sure how this complex problem will be solved, here is my best guess: Soon after the election, the US Congress will vote to postpone the fiscal cliff for about six months to allow time to work out an acceptable legislative solution.
That solution will involve slowing the growth of Social Security pension benefits for future middle- and upper-income retirees.
Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate, has explicitly proposed this, and President Barack Obama indicated support for such an approach back in 2009, before he turned his attention to health care.
The tougher problem will be how to raise revenue.
The key will be to focus on the many special features of the tax code that are equivalent to government spending.
If I buy a hybrid car, install a solar panel at my home, or upgrade to a more efficient water heater, I get a tax credit.
And if I buy a bigger home or just increase the size of my mortgage, I receive a larger deduction that reduces my taxable income, lowering my tax bill.
While the government is not giving me money, these special targeted tax breaks are no less “government spending” than they would be if the government sent me a check.
These features are rightly called “tax expenditures,” because they describe the government spending that occurs through the tax code.
Eliminating or reducing these tax expenditures should therefore be seen as cutting government spending.
Although the effect is to raise revenue, that is just an accounting convention.
The fundamental economic effect is to reduce government spending.
So the key to raising revenue is to reduce tax expenditures, use some of the resulting revenue to reduce tax rates, and devote the rest to reducing future deficits.
Opponents of tax increases should see that, because such revenue-raising is really cutting government spending, it does not imply the adverse incentive effects of raising marginal tax rates.
But even if the intellectual objection to extra revenue can be overcome in this way, the practical political problem is that every large tax expenditure – the home mortgage interest deduction, the exclusion of employer payments for health insurance, etc. – has its fervent defenders.
So here is an idea that might work politically: Let taxpayers keep all of the current tax expenditures, but limit the total amount by which each taxpayer can reduce his or her tax liability in this way.
I have explored the idea of “capping” the benefit that individuals can get as a percentage of their total income (their “adjusted gross income,” or AGI in US tax parlance).
Applying a 2%-of-AGI cap to the total benefit that an individual can receive from tax expenditures would have a very powerful effect.
It would not limit the amount of deductions and exclusions to 2% of AGI, but rather would limit the resulting tax reduction – that is, the tax benefit – that the individual gets by using all these special features.
For someone with a 15% marginal tax rate, a 2%-of-AGI cap would limit total deductions and exclusions to about 13% of AGI.
Such a cap would have a significant impact on the fiscal outlook.
Even if the cap were applied only to “itemized deductions” and the health-insurance exclusion, it would raise about $250 billion in the first year and about $3 trillion over the first decade.
There are many options in designing such a policy.
The cap rate could be higher, or it could start higher and be gradually tightened, or it could vary with an individual’s income level.
But the economic and political attractiveness of a cap consists in its ability to raise substantial revenue without eliminating specific tax expenditures.
Fixing America’s fiscal problem will be as difficult as it is important.
But slowing the growth of Social Security benefits and capping total tax expenditures would be a good framework for the coming reform.
Why is Obama Winning?
PRINCETON – James Carville, Bill Clinton’s chief campaign strategist in 1992, famously expressed a bit of established insider wisdom about winning elections: “It’s the economy, stupid.”
Incumbents win if the economic outlook is rosy, and are vulnerable – as George H. W. Bush was – when times are hard.
Indeed, throughout Europe – in France, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom – governments have been turned out of office in the face of a crisis that they have seemed unable to address.
By this standard, President Barack Obama should now be in a hopeless situation.
According to United States Census data, household income fell in 2011 for the fourth consecutive year.
Unemployment remains persistently high, despite the $787 billion stimulus package in 2009, and house prices, though recovering slowly, remain far below their pre-2008 peak.
And yet Obama seems likely to be reelected in November.
One reason is that there is no reliable way to render an instant judgment about economic effectiveness, and the legacy that Obama inherited – coming to office in the middle of a major economic and financial catastrophe – clearly matters.
President George W. Bush and Prime Minister Gordon Brown are obviously more responsible for the financial crisis than are their successors, who have to clean up the mess.
Moreover, as Zhou Enlai memorably responded when Henry Kissinger asked him about the effects of the French Revolution, “It is too early to tell” (though Zhou apparently thought he was being asked about the consequences of the 1968 Paris student uprising).
Tracing the precise consequences of policy measures or institutional reforms –&#160;and estimating when they might “pay off” – is hopelessly complex.
Much else is happening.
Obama could not have known that a European crisis would have a big impact on US banks, and he could not have done much more to get European leaders to solve their problems.
The long-term success of the economy, and its capacity to build wealth and jobs, depends on productivity gains, which in turn depend on technical and organizational innovation.
Governments cannot just conjure that up by waving a magic wand.
But governments can influence the development of productivity.
And this is where legitimate debate begins, because immediate action to save jobs does not necessarily help.
The wrong kind of stimulus may get in the way of future productivity growth by channeling workers into the wrong kind of employment (or keeping them there).
Large-scale public projects, particularly when they are aimed simply at putting as many people as possible quickly back to work, will lead to a shortage of labor available for more productive jobs.
In the 1930’s, some governments tried to make themselves popular with large-scale public work programs.
John Maynard Keynes and his disciples pushed the idea that even apparently useless projects, such as pyramid construction in ancient Egypt, made sense.
Keynes’s Cambridge disciple, Joan Robinson, was particularly worried because Hitler seemed to have grasped this point more quickly than democratic governments had.
Hitler, she noted sarcastically, had solved Germany’s problem by “painting the Black Forest white and putting down linoleum in the Polish Corridor.”
In fact, increased spending, which the Keynesians saw simply as boosting aggregate demand, produced distortions.
Under Hitler, the German economy in the 1930’s shifted to a lower-productivity mechanism in order to churn out armaments and shoddy manufactured goods, neither of which would have any use in a market economy.
Such misallocation of resources was not just a menace of the interwar period.
The big pre-2008 construction boom in Spain did as much harm as subsequent high unemployment, because it encouraged a generation of young people to take high-paying, low-skill jobs in the building industry.
But simply permitting the crisis to continue is a terrible option.
A severe and long-lasting episode of large-scale unemployment is devastating, because it erodes an economy’s skill base, undermines human potential, and affronts human dignity.
Government policy should thus be subject to a longer-term test: How effectively is initiative being enabled and skills developed?
But the answer to that question is not why the pundits are cheering Obama.
They are cheering because financial markets are cheering, following the Federal Reserve’s recent announcement of further stimulus.
Though the evidence that monetary stimulus produces increased investment and a business upturn is patchy, its effects on financial markets and asset prices are very easy to document quickly.
Asset prices create a large “wealth effect” that determines how financially well off people feel.
With many Americans anxiously monitoring the monthly performance of their private pension plans, the only economic statistic that matters is that the S&amp;P 500 has returned to its pre-2008 level.
As a result, the lesson about the economy’s electoral salience is being subtly reformulated.
It is no longer the real state of the economy, but rather the perception of asset markets, that is crucial.
And the perception can be far removed from reality, which means that the more the prevailing political wisdom assigns decisive electoral importance to the economy, the greater the temptation to view monetary policy’s impact on asset prices, and not on long-term growth, as crucial.
In America, the Federal Reserve is bound to become much more politicized as a result.
Republicans will blame their defeat in November on the Fed’s monetary stimulus (if not on the ineffectiveness of Mitt Romney’s blunder-filled campaign).
Meanwhile, in Europe, many national leaders, looking at Obama and the Fed, may conclude that they would do better with more direct control over the central bank.
Given the difficulty of establishing such control over the European Central Bank, the euro’s next great challenge may be growing sentiment in favor of a return to national currencies.
Anti-Trade America?
CAMBRIDGE – The rise of anti-trade populism in the 2016 US election campaign portends a dangerous retreat from the United States’ role in world affairs.
In the name of reducing US inequality, presidential candidates in both parties would stymie the aspirations of hundreds of millions of desperately poor people in the developing world to join the middle class.
If the political appeal of anti-trade policies proves durable, it will mark a historic turning point in global economic affairs, one that bodes ill for the future of American leadership.