Just as recycling has gained currency through both regulation and a new social consciousness, vendors who learn how to sell healthy food to schools may someday tap a much larger adult market, whether because of regulation, a change in expectations, or the simple fact that their customers have grown up.
Philanthropies of Scale
MIDLAND, TEXAS – Since starting my own nonprofit organization, I look at other nonprofits with new eyes.
There are far more of them than I ever realized.
As an angel investor, I did not normally engage with them.
Now I worry that they are terribly inefficient.
As I travel in small towns, many of the businesses that I see – most of them, it seems – belong to large chains, with mass-purchasing contracts, standardized training procedures, consistent quality, and, I assume, profitability.
The nonprofits, by contrast, are mostly small and are often run by people with passion but not much expertise or management skill.
The ownership is local.
Our ultimate goal is to provide models and inspiration for other, larger communities over time.
What worries me is that just having a diabetes program, a visiting nurse corps, or a bicycle-share program is not enough.
There are good programs and unsuccessful ones – just as there are good and bad restaurants, airlines, and oil companies.
Management makes a difference, one that ultimately boils down to good leadership and best practices.
But that is not what most nonprofit programs can achieve.
They are not part of a larger organization that trains their workers, sets standards, and provides support for everything from branding to purchasing.
Yes, there are now “social entrepreneurs.”
But can we find and support them at scale?
Nonprofits have no easy way to expand, raise capital, or combine forces.
There are some new business models (such as social-impact bonds), and there are certainly businesses that sell social programs to payers such as governments, just as there are charities that outsource.
But, unlike the for-profit sector, the nonprofit world is not fluid and efficient, and nonprofits have no incentive to merge, particularly as some people would have to give up their board seats or leadership positions.
While that is also true of many for-profit companies, the market trumps their leaders’ preferences.
If customers or shareholders walk away, the board hires new managers or sells the company to someone who can run it better.
The problem with charities is that they have little incentive to become more efficient.
Disclosure requirements help, but they are no match for the discipline of the market.
In the case of for-profit goods and services, customers and payers are the same people; they monitor the quality themselves.
And the shareholders monitor – in essence – the use of resources to deliver that quality (roughly measured as profitability).
There is no simple way to monitor the quality and efficiency of a charity – especially one devoted to long-term changes (that is, investments) rather than daily delivery of services.
At HICCup, we are looking for places and people that have already decided to do something and need help going further.
But even where such “social fabric” exists, a proliferation of independent efforts often reflects individuals’ passions rather than broad-based capacity.
So how does one go about building the interacting capabilities that address poverty, ignorance, and poor health while avoiding too much redundancy?
The question is not how to create a chain of soup kitchens, but how to develop leadership that creates intrinsic incentives for the staff.
Consider Susan Burden at Beach Cities Health District in California.
Originally an administrator at a for-profit hospital, she joined BCHD when it was a small pot of money and a building left over from the sale of a nonprofit hospital to a for-profit health group.
With energy and enthusiasm, Burden turned that operation into a thriving health (not health-care) agency that covers three cities and about 300,000 people on the western edge of Los Angeles.
The BCHD has 70 staff and about 700 volunteers.
I am excited about the possibility of using software to help deliver customized community services at little extra cost.
But the capacity in short supply is trained people.
How much do we need to train the trainers – and those who train the trainers?
How trainable are people?
Online courses may work for teaching technical topics, but is there a way to automate, at least partly, the training of all the people who need to be mobilized to foster health?
For example, I am an investor in Omada Health, a for-profit diabetes-management service.
A single counselor runs ten groups of ten people each, partly online, partly face-to-face (usually paid for by health insurers or employers, who benefit when pre-diabetics become healthy or do not develop the disease).
The challenge for Omada is not the curriculum; it is training people to become effective counselors.
While I expect to learn much more as I work on HICCup, I am already sure that the biggest problem will be finding people to take on the challenges in each community.  What’s the optimal balance between replicability and the human touch?
The promise of scale is great for nonprofits – not just in terms of costs, but also for best practices and quality control.
Yet the real value is in training people to deliver for themselves, at a local scale – empowered rather than controlled, creative rather than rehearsed, and working by choice rather than in desperation.
The Capital-Flow Conundrum
ITHACA – In recent months, emerging economies have experienced capital-flow whiplash.
Indications that the US Federal Reserve might “taper” its quantitative easing (QE) drove investors to reduce their exposure to emerging markets, sharply weakening their currencies and causing their equity prices to tumble.
Now that the taper has been postponed, capital is flowing back in some cases.
But, with little influence, much less control, over what comes next, emerging economies are still struggling to figure out how to protect themselves from the impact of a Fed policy reversal.
When the Fed initially hinted at its intention to taper QE, policymakers in some emerging economies cried foul, but were dismissed by advanced-economy officials as chronic complainers.
After all, they initially rejected the very policies that they are now fighting to preserve.
But emerging-market policymakers’ criticisms do not reflect an inconsistent stance; in both cases, the crux of their complaint has been volatility.
They have already attempted to erect defenses against the potentially destabilizing effects of advanced-country monetary policy by accumulating foreign-exchange reserves and establishing capital controls.
Now they are calling on their central banks to ensure stability by, for example, raising short-term lending rates.
But this approach fails to address the underlying issue – and misdiagnosing the problem could have far-reaching consequences, not only leading to ineffective solutions, but also possibly causing severe distortions for specific economies and the global financial system as a whole.
In order to design effective remedies, it is useful to distinguish among three types of failures that impede financial-market functioning.
First, there are market failures, which occur when, for example, investors display herd behavior, information asymmetries exist, or the structure of incentives for investment managers encourages excessive risk-taking.
Second, there are policy failures, which occur when undisciplined macroeconomic policies and inconsistent or ineffective financial regulatory policies heighten the risks associated with volatile capital flows.
The third – and currently most problematic – failure is one of national or international institutions.
Domestic monetary policy has become the first and last line of defense against growth slowdowns and financial panics, enabling policymakers to avoid pursuing other important, but far more difficult measures.
Using monetary policy to compensate for deficiencies in other policy areas constitutes an institutional breakdown: monetary policymakers are not necessarily getting it wrong, but they are constrained by the configuration of other policies.
The inadequacy of the current framework for global governance compounds the problem.
The grim reality is that, with financial markets becoming increasingly interconnected, monetary-policy measures taken by any of the major economies have international spillover effects.
An effective governance mechanism or reliable institution is needed to help emerging markets cope with these effects.
The lack of effective global economic governance has important implications for capital flows.
Emerging-market policymakers believe that they lack recourse to safety nets that would cushion the impact of volatile flows.
Their efforts to “self-insure,” by, say, building up their foreign-exchange reserves, perpetuate global economic imbalances.
So how can policymakers address these failures?
There has been some progress at the international level on regulatory reforms aimed at addressing market failures, though such efforts have been limited by strident resistance from financial institutions.
Solutions for policy failures are not difficult to discern.
Flexible currencies, more transparent monetary frameworks, and sound long-term fiscal policies can serve as buffers against capital-flow volatility.
Moreover, the functioning of emerging-economy financial markets should be improved, with policies aimed at institutional development and improved regulatory capacity.
While the right policies cannot eliminate risk, they can ameliorate the cost-benefit tradeoff from capital flows.
Fixing institutional failures is the most important – and the most difficult – step.
Successful reform requires, first and foremost, finding the right mix of domestic policies.
In the advanced economies, in particular, a sharper focus on long-term debt reduction, rather than short-term fiscal austerity, is needed, along with structural reforms to labor, product, or financial markets, depending on the country.
In many of the troubled emerging economies, however, monetary policy has shouldered the burden of controlling inflation, managing the local currency’s value, and supporting growth.
This balancing act is difficult to maintain, leaving these economies vulnerable when the external environment turns unfavorable.
In India, for example, increasing productivity and long-term growth require fiscal discipline and a raft of financial- and labor-market reforms.
But the central bank is being asked to do all the heavy lifting.
In other emerging markets, too, the main challenge is to ensure that all macroeconomic and structural policies advance common goals.
At the same time, the governance structure of multilateral institutions like the International Monetary Fund must be reformed, in order to bolster their legitimacy in emerging markets.
Otherwise, these institutions will remain ineffective in confronting collective problems related to macroeconomic-policy spillovers, and in providing insurance against crises.
Policymakers in advanced and emerging countries alike should focus on the underlying failures that destabilize their economies and impede growth, rather than trying to treat the symptoms by manipulating monetary policy or capital controls.
Unless they are supported by strong institutional structures at all levels, such measures will prove futile in managing capital flows.
The Dollar is Still King
ITHACA – Scarcely a week passes without news about the ascendance of China’s currency, the renminbi.
But China has a long way to go before its currency can rival – let alone displace – the US dollar as the dominant global reserve currency.
To be sure, China already plays a significant role in international trade and finance, with major financial centers like London and Frankfurt eagerly lining up for renminbi business.
Recent speculation that China’s economy may soon be as large as America’s has boosted this interest further, causing many to believe – whether ruefully or gleefully – that the renminbi will soon dominate.
Moreover, the Chinese authorities have launched a raft of reforms aimed at opening the economy and making it more market-oriented, and have announced plans to liberalize interest and exchange rates and continue to ease restrictions on cross-border capital flows.
All of this will strengthen the renminbi’s claim to reserve-currency status.
But China is missing one crucial ingredient: the world’s trust.
To achieve currency dominance, China needs more than economic and military might; it requires a broader and more credible set of public and political institutions.
And it is here that the US shines – at least relatively speaking.
This was never more apparent than in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
Even though America’s financial markets nearly collapsed, its public-debt levels rose sharply, and the Federal Reserve was forced to undertake massive monetary expansion to support the economy, the dollar strengthened relative to most other currencies.
That is because global investors seeking a safe haven automatically turn to US Treasury securities in times of global financial turmoil.
Foreign investors now hold more than $5.7 trillion of these low-yielding securities, not to mention large quantities of other dollar assets.
And the dollar’s share in global foreign-exchange reserves has held steady since the crisis.
This can be explained partly by the fact that the United States boasts the world’s deepest and most liquid financial markets.
But the most important factor supporting America’s currency dominance is the institutionalized system of checks and balances that operates among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of its government.
Trust in US public institutions is rooted in the open and transparent democratic process that underpins them.
Freedom of expression and unfettered media bolster this confidence, not by highlighting the system’s strengths, but by exposing its weaknesses, which can subsequently be corrected through responsive, rule-based mechanisms.
With the US government forced to answer to its citizens, it is unlikely to resort to inflationary debt financing.
In fact, about $4.5 trillion of US federal debt is held by domestic investors, including retirees, pension funds, financial institutions, and insurance companies – groups whose considerable political clout ensures that no administration would risk allowing inflation to spin out of control.
The US legal system – independent from the executive and legislative branches of government – further supports the dollar’s global role.
While one might quibble about the complexity of US laws and regulations, it cannot be said that they are not applied relatively consistently.
This contrasts sharply with China’s single-party system, in which the level of government accountability is much lower.
Official corruption, for example, has become so entrenched that President Xi Jinping has made an anti-graft campaign a central objective.
The reality is that, despite China’s economic heft and low central-government public debt, foreign investors are unlikely to trust China with large sums of money.
Capital inflows – which will undoubtedly increase in the coming years – are driven largely by investors’ interest in diversification and high yield, rather than the country’s image as a refuge from troubled financial markets elsewhere, especially given that China’s financial markets are relatively underdeveloped and beset by considerable risks.
Of course, some foreign central banks have signed currency-swap agreements with China and even hold small amounts of its currency in their reserve portfolios.
But these actions may be less a sign of the renminbi’s inevitable march toward global dominance than a low-cost bet on its likely emergence as a widely accepted international currency.
And countries’ desire to maintain good relations with China, owing to its rising economic power, cannot be discounted.
Depending on how soon China opens up its capital account and develops its financial markets, the renminbi could become a significant reserve currency in the near future.
But it will not contest the dollar’s supremacy unless China’s leaders align the country’s political and legal institutions with its economic reforms.
Eternal Hong Kong
I have been a part of Hong Kong’s civil service for more than three decades.
Throughout my entire career I have worked with many people whose driving impulse has been to serve Hong Kong.
That remains as true today as it did almost 40 years ago, when I first entered government.
The past couple of weeks have been among the most momentous periods since our reunification with China in 1997, and it has left me in the hot seat as Hong Kong’s Acting Chief Executive.
It is not easy to describe the enormous level of responsibility I feel.
What sets Hong Kong apart is our ability to sustain social stability and economic growth.
One key element of our success is the institutions that buttress our development.
These include our legal system, which is underpinned by an independent judiciary, our legislature, and our civil service.
Each operates independently but is an integral part of the whole.
In short, ours is a system of government like many others.
However, Hong Kong has some distinguishing features, including a very internationally minded and outward-looking government, owing to our close integration into world markets long before globalization became a catchphrase.
Within the ranks of our civil service and judiciary are nationals from Britain, Australia, the United States, Canada, and India.
Moreover, our Court of Final Appeal calls on some of the most esteemed minds of the common-law world.
We have a large foreign population and one of the world’s largest consular corps.
International chambers of commerce play a very active and vital role in government consultations.
Our Basic Law even allows for foreign nationals to be elected to one-fifth of the seats in our legislature.
Hong Kong’s cosmopolitanism long ago planted the seeds of tolerance and respect in our approach to government.
As a result, we are committed to dialogue and compromise as the only way to balance the many competing demands and opinions that pervade public affairs.
Good government is not a competition. It’s not about winning or losing, or whose view or will prevails.
It is about making the best decisions for the community as a whole.
Inevitably, this will often involve compromise.
Indeed, as Hong Kong’s society has grown more sophisticated, it has also become more complex, multi-faceted, and pluralistic.
This means that government can no longer afford to view issues in isolation; its operations need to be de-compartmentalized and flattened, as well as streamlined.
This is a difficult task, given that some of our systems have been in place for many years, often entrenched in law.
Of course, pragmatism has its limits, because good government is also about upholding core values.
I have often referred to what I call the four pillars of Hong Kong’s success: the rule of law, a level playing field for business, a clean and efficient civil service, and the free flow of information.
These are values that we simply will not compromise.
To do so would mark the beginning of the end for Hong Kong.
Since reunification with our motherland, we have the added safeguard of the Basic Law, which gives effect to the principles of “one country, two systems” and “Hong Kong’s people running Hong Kong with a high degree of autonomy.”
Good government also requires sharing a vision of the future – the purposes and thinking behind public policies – with the community.
Our vision is to develop Hong Kong as Asia’s world city.
This is an all-encompassing brief, covering everything we do as a community and an economy in areas ranging from international trade to art, culture, and tourism.
The Basic Law embodies this vision, laying the foundations for our development over a 50-year period and providing the freedom and the power for us to position ourselves as Asia’s world city – and to do it on our own.
At the same time, it also embodies the depth of the central government’s support for Hong Kong.
It is thus crucial to the good governance of the Hong Kong Special Administration Region.
In many areas – financial services, infrastructure, communications technology, and tourism – I would say we have reached our goals for Hong Kong.
Hardly a day goes by when we don’t read something in the local press that refers to our status as Asia’s world city.
Even when people feel we have not lived up to the standards expected of a world city, we are glad to be held to a high benchmark, because it keeps us on our toes.
That may sound disingenuous to some, but Hong Kong’s officials share a common mission to maintain the stability and prosperity of our city.
Our duty is to make Hong Kong a better place for us all, without hidden agendas or quid pro quos.
It is an onerous and solemn undertaking, uplifting one day and extremely frustrating the next.
But, above all, it is an honor and a privilege to play such a role in our society, and I know that the vast majority of officials, legislators, judges, and civil servants with whom I’ve worked would agree.
Ethics and Obama
TUBINGEN – Many say that the world financial crisis could not have been foreseen.
Perhaps not by financiers and economists, but others who were watching how markets were developing – often with dismay – were more than worried. 
As early as 1997, I warned about a repeat of the collapsed economic order of 1929-1933 in my book A Global Ethic for Global Politics and Global Economics : “The slightest remark, for example by the President of the American Federal Bank, Alan Greenspan, at the beginning of December 1996, that an “irrational exuberance” had led to an overvaluation of the financial markets was enough to drive the nervous investors on the high-flying stock markets of Asia, Europe and America into a spin, and panic selling.
This also shows that crises in globalization do not a priori balance out, but perhaps get progressively worse.”
Back then, I was already venturing what is, for economists, a heretical presumption: that chaos theory should be applied to the economy; that devastating effects can follow from the smallest causes.
One could by no means rule out “a return of the world economic crisis and the collapse of the world economic order of 1929-1933.”
So I was not at all surprised by the speed and dimension of events in recent months.  Indeed, only a few economists – such as the 2001 Nobel economics laureate Joseph Stiglitz and the 2008 laureate Paul Krugman – warned against fatal developments that were mounting in the now globalized economy.
Contrary to many predictions by economic experts, the crisis has not been limited to the financial sector.  Instead, it is generating a massive impact on the real economy – hitting the automobile and chemical industries especially hard.
In contrast to 1929, credits are not now being throttled; on the contrary, public money is being pumped into banks and the economy.
But these measures will be successful only if they are not taken in an isolated and populist way.
Instead, they need to be part of a convincing overall plan that combines responsible state intervention with relief of the financial burdens of individual citizens, as well as savings in public budgets.
Unforeseeable state debt – at the cost of coming generations – is neither a viable nor an ethical solution.
Fortunately, there are signs that the general state of mind that helped spawn the crisis is changing.
In the rich industrialized countries, after an era of cynical and short-sighted profit-maximizing behavior, we may be at the dawn of a new age of modesty and sustainability.  Companies are facing growing pressure to behave ethically, and unethical business behavior is at last being punished.
On a lecture tour in the United States in November 2008, I could see that many people are now complaining about the overwhelming desire for profit in business and megalomania in politics.
As markets failed, calls for ethical regulation of the quest for profit has become justified not only in principle, but also in fact.
But ethics is not the icing on the cake; it is not merely an incidental addition to the global market economy.
Rather, the new financial architecture that many are calling for, and which is urgently needed, must be supported by an ethical framework.
The fatal human instincts of greed and hubris can be tamed only with some elementary ethical norms.
So what should this ethical framework entail?  A paragraph of the Declaration toward a Global Ethic of the Parliament of the World’s Religions in Chicago in 1993 reads as follows:
“In the great ancient religious and ethical traditions of humankind we find the directive: You shall not steal!
Or in positive terms: Deal honestly and fairly!
Let us reflect anew on the consequences of this ancient directive: No one has the right to rob or dispossess in any way whatsoever any other person or the commonweal.
Further, no one has the right to use her or his possessions without concern for the needs of society and Earth.
To be authentically human in the spirit of our great religious and ethical traditions means the following:
• We must utilize economic and political power for service to humanity instead of misusing it in ruthless battles for domination.
We must develop a spirit of compassion with those who suffer, with special care for the children, the aged, the poor, the disabled, the refugees, and the lonely;
• We must cultivate mutual respect and consideration, so as to reach a reasonable balance of interests, instead of thinking only of unlimited power and unavoidable competitive struggles;
• We must value a sense of moderation and modesty instead of an unquenchable greed for money, prestige, and consumption.
In greed humans lose their ‘souls’, their freedom, their composure, their inner peace, and thus that which makes them human.”
Many hopes throughout the world are now directed toward President Barack Obama, who enters his presidency with a moral claim that is extraordinarily high for a politician.
Of course, Obama is not the Messiah; he cannot work miracles.
But he is in a position to define an ethical framework for the rebuilding global economy.
In view of the oppressive – and unprecedented – abundance of problems with which Obama is confronted at home and abroad, he will certainly not be able to fulfill all expectations.
I shall not pass judgment on his plans for the world economy as reported so far.
But it is certain that he has recognized the ethical dimension of the current economic crisis: “It amounts to one of values: do we assign a value only to wealth or the work which creates it?”
The suffering that so many people are enduring leads to pressure for reform, and Obama has shrewdly transformed these pressures into a political force.
All this shows that reflection on common ethical values, a global ethic, is needed more urgently now than ever before.
The Promise of Ethical Machines
STORRS, CONNECTICUT – The prospect of artificial intelligence (AI) has long been a source of knotty ethical questions.
But the focus has often been on how we, the creators, can and should use advanced robots.
What is missing from the discussion is the need to develop a set of ethics for the machines themselves, together with a means for machines to resolve ethical dilemmas as they arise.
Only then can intelligent machines function autonomously, making ethical choices as they fulfill their tasks, without human intervention.
There are many activities that we would like to be able to turn over entirely to autonomously functioning machines.
Robots can do jobs that are highly dangerous or exceedingly unpleasant.
They can fill gaps in the labor market.
And they can perform extremely repetitive or detail-oriented tasks – which are better suited to robots than humans.
But no one would be comfortable with machines acting independently, with no ethical framework to guide them.
(Hollywood has done a pretty good job of highlighting those risks over the years.)
That is why we need to train robots to identify and weigh a given situation’s ethically relevant features (for example, those that indicate potential benefits or harm to a person).
And we need to instill in them the duty to act appropriately (to maximize benefits and minimize harm).
Of course, in a real-life situation, there may be several ethically relevant features and corresponding duties – and they may conflict with one another.
So, for the robot, each duty would have to be relativized and considered in context: important, but not absolute.
A duty that prima facie was vital could, in particular circumstances, be superseded by another duty.
The key to making these judgment calls would be overriding ethical principles that had been instilled in the machine before it went to work.
Armed with that critical perspective, machines could handle unanticipated situations correctly, and even be able to justify their decision.
Which principles a machine requires would depend, to some extent, on how it is deployed.
For example, a search and rescue robot, in fulfilling its duty of saving the most lives possible, would need to understand how to prioritize, based on questions like how many victims might be located in a particular area or how likely they are to survive.
These concerns don’t apply to an eldercare robot with one person to look after.
Such a machine would instead have to be equipped to respect the autonomy of its charge, among other things.
We should permit machines to function autonomously only in areas where there is agreement among ethicists about what constitutes acceptable behavior.
Otherwise, we risk a backlash against allowing any machine to function autonomously.
But ethicists would not be working alone.
On the contrary, developing machine ethics will require research that is interdisciplinary in nature, based on a dialogue between ethicists and AI specialists.
To be successful, both sides must appreciate the expertise – and the needs – of the other.
AI researchers must recognize that ethics is a long-studied field within philosophy; it goes far beyond laypersons’ intuitions.
Ethical behavior involves not only refraining from doing certain things, but also doing certain things to bring about ideal states of affairs.
So far, however, the determination and mitigation of ethical concerns regarding machine behavior has largely emphasized the “refraining” part, preventing machines from engaging in ethically unacceptable behavior, which often comes at the cost of unnecessarily constraining their possible behaviors and domains of deployment.
For their part, ethicists must recognize that programming a machine requires the utmost precision, which will require them to sharpen their approach to ethical discussions, perhaps to an unfamiliar extent.
They must also engage more with the real-world applications of their theoretical work, which may have the added benefit of advancing the field of ethics.
More broadly, attempting to formulate an ethics for machines would give us a fresh start at determining the principles we should use to resolve ethical dilemmas.
Because we are concerned with machine behavior, we can be more objective in examining ethics than we would be in discussing human behavior, even though what we come up with should be applicable to humans as well.
For one thing, we will not be inclined to incorporate into machines some evolutionarily evolved behaviors of human beings, such as favoring oneself and one’s group.
Rather, we will require that they treat all people with respect.
As a result, it is likely that the machines will behave more ethically than most human beings, and serve as positive role models for us all.
Ethical machines would pose no threat to humanity.
On the contrary, they would help us considerably, not just by working for us, but also by showing us how we need to behave if we are to survive as a species.
Ethiopia’s New Climate of Fear
Vienna – The European Union, the United States, and other major donors will pump about $2.5 billion into Ethiopia this year, a sum that does not even begin to include the cost of medicines, famine relief, and countless other services provided by non-profit groups in one of the world’s most impoverished countries.
That help is needed, because Ethiopians are prone to malnutrition, disease, and natural calamity.
Its burgeoning population far outstrips the country’s ability to feed itself.
So desperate is Ethiopia that celebrity causes – from Bob Geldoff’s Live Aid famine-relief concerts to Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt’s adoption of orphaned babies – supplement what donors cannot possibly provide.
But for all this generosity, an authoritarian government rules Ethiopia with virtual impunity.
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, in power for 18 years, has crushed the opposition.
His ruling party dominates public institutions.
Worse still, in a vast and predominantly rural country, the prime minister’s underlings control broadcasting and maintain a choke-hold on other media.
Four years ago this month, Zenawi’s Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Party (EPRDF) suffered its worst loss at the polls since the former guerrilla overthrew a ruthless, Soviet-backed regime in 1991.
Rather than accept its losses, the EPRDF-run government responded with a brutal crackdown, claiming outright victory and accusing the opposition of trying to stage an insurrection.
Security forces attacked peaceful protesters, jailed opposition leaders, sent thousands of their supporters to gruesome detention camps, and accused independent journalists of treason – a crime punishable by death.
Some journalists and politicians sought asylum in other countries.
During several months of unrest, roughly 200 people were killed.
It was a disgraceful snub for donor nations that had invested time and capital in supporting Ethiopia’s democratic transition.
Many of the journalists and opposition figures were eventually released or granted clemency, but there has been no letup to the torment.
In late April 2009, security forces arrested 40 opposition figures, accusing them of trying to topple the government.
Meanwhile, the authorities continue their assault on independent media through capricious licensing rules, interrogations, and, on occasion, revoking the permits of reporters for international broadcasters like the Voice of America.
Leading journalists have been assaulted, the culprits never found.
“There is only fear, not freedom, of expression in Ethiopia,” says one leading journalist.
Ethiopia’s journalists are not entirely innocent.
Some newspapers have stoked the country’s ethnic and regional animosities, and can be wildly inaccurate in their reporting.
Yet badgering or jailing journalists is no way to resolve what could be handled through a voluntary media council or independent ombudsman.
Furthermore, the government effort to portray independent journalists as vicious enemies unfairly condemns the many Ethiopian reporters and editors who take their responsibilities seriously.
Zenawi has largely escaped sanction from his Western allies, in part because the erudite ex-Marxist had a friendly relationship with former British Prime Minister Tony Blair and cooperated closely with the Bush administration in counter-terrorism efforts in the Horn of Africa.
There has not been total silence.
Donald Payne, a leading member of the US House Foreign Affairs Committee, and Ana Gomes, a member of the European Parliament from Portugal and head of the EU’s observation team in the 2005 elections, have sought to tie non-humanitarian aid more closely to Ethiopia’s conduct on press freedom and other human rights.
Britain and some other European governments responded to the post-election crackdown by temporarily withholding aid.
But Ethiopia poses a dilemma for anyone who cares about human rights and democracy.
Cutting off aid could have calamitous humanitarian consequences for the nation’s 80 million people. It could also destabilize a fragile region, sparking fresh wars with neighboring Somalia and Eritrea.
Nevertheless, there are ways to pressure Zenawi:
·        Donors should deny Ethiopian ministers a seat at diplomatic tables, such as the coveted spot Zenawi got at the G-20 summit in London as head of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;
·        While the Development Assistance Group, created by the EU and other principal donors to coordinate aid projects in Ethiopia, has improved the efficiency of donor contributions, a vigorous monitoring component is needed to ensure that international resources do not support policies that are anathema to human rights values;
·        As a leading donor, the EU wields considerable power in Ethiopia and should be more willing to use it.
The EU should aggressively enforce the Cotonou Agreement, which requires Ethiopia and other nations that receive European assistance to respect “human rights, democratic principles, and the rule of law.” Cotonou is due for revision in 2010, so now is the time to develop enforcement mechanisms that establish clear penalties for failing to uphold human rights and freedom of the press.
·        The EU and the US should wield more of their clout at the World Bank and other international organizations to link development grants to progress on press freedom and human rights.
The aid that Ethiopia receives from its friends may be a small price to pay to keep Africa’s second largest country from descending into chaos.
But Ethiopia’s people deserve more from their government. Press freedom is a start, not just because it is a fundamental human right, but also because vigorous media are essential to keeping societies alert to the kinds of crises that are all too common in Ethiopia.
Rethinking Fortress Europe
LONDON – There is something rotten about the European Union’s debate on migration.
The continent’s political leaders, paralyzed by the rise of anti-immigrant populism, are turning their backs on desperately vulnerable people fleeing war, human-rights abuses, and economic collapse.
Nowhere is the human cost of European policies more visible than in the Mediterranean Sea.
The waters between Europe and Africa are the world’s deadliest migration route.
Roughly 300,000 people are estimated to have made the crossing in 2014 – more than twice as many as in 2013.
Some 3,000 died from drowning, hunger, exposure, or asphyxiation.
Most migrants set out from Libya, which has emerged as the center of a multi-million-dollar human-trafficking industry.
Until recently, most migrants setting out for Italy made the crossing on small vessels.
But, in a new twist, Italian authorities at the beginning of this year rescued hundreds of migrants, including pregnant women and dozens of children, aboard an aging steel-hulled freighter.
The crew had jumped ship.
Given its close proximity to a deadly conflict in Syria and countries marked by extreme poverty, human-rights abuses, and weak or collapsed states and economies, the EU is inevitably a magnet for migrants and asylum-seekers.
That is why it needs a migration policy that reflects the values on which it was founded.
Unfortunately, respect for human life has taken a back seat to baser political calculations.
Consider Europe’s approach to search and rescue operations.
Last November, Italy suspended its Mare Nostrum rescue operation (which it launched in 2013, after more than 300 migrants drowned off the coast of the Italian island of Lampedusa), because other EU member states refused to share the costs – some €9 million ($10.6 million) a month.
In its place, the EU border agency, Frontex, has begun conducting a limited coastal mission called Operation Triton.
Why the reluctance to share the cost of humanitarian rescue operations?
Senior ministers in the United Kingdom and other northern European countries, relying on little more than armchair behavioral economics, argued that Mare Nostrum encouraged more migrants to attempt the dangerous sea crossing.
In other words, allowing children to drown is a legitimate deterrent.
Back in the real world, the desperation and aspiration driving people to flee outweigh the risks posed by the crossing – meaning that the closure of Mare Nostrum will do nothing to reduce the number of people attempting the journey to Europe.
But Europe’s debate on migration is so toxic that the forces actually causing people to move are seldom discussed.
According to Frontex, roughly a quarter of the migrants who crossed the Mediterranean in 2014 were Syrian families escaping the civil war there.
Young Eritreans – fleeing a country that imposes indefinite military conscription on dissidents – made up another quarter.
Many others came from poor, violence-prone countries: Palestine, Somalia, Sudan, Mali, and Nigeria.
Faced with a humanitarian crisis in the Mediterranean, the EU has responded by trying to build a fortress.
It has invested heavily in a fenced border between Turkey and Greece.
Amnesty International has documented the widespread practice of pushing back migrants and refugees attempting to cross into Greece and Bulgaria – a practice that contravenes international law.
But the fortress has merely rechanneled, rather than stemmed, the flow of people, forcing migrants and refugees to attempt dangerous sea crossings – even as search and rescue operations are being scaled back.
The only beneficiaries are the human traffickers that charge Syrian refugees some €6,000 for space in a dangerous boat or freighter.
The EU’s efforts to develop a coherent approach to the crisis have bordered on farce.
What drives people to Europe is a complex set of forces, ranging from conflict and political persecution to poverty and economic pressures.
Europe’s institutional response is to view all migration as a border-management issue.
The EU Commission’s various departments – notably, those that focus on development – are barely consulted.
Meanwhile, the patchwork of national asylum and migration policies makes a cohesive framework impossible to devise.
This challenge was reflected in the EU foreign ministers’ recent declaration on migration, which was so vague that it defied practical interpretation.
Correcting these policy failures is made more difficult by the rise of populist political forces.
The National Front in France, the United Kingdom Independence Party, and far-right anti-immigration parties in Sweden, Denmark, and Italy are picking up votes and shutting down informed public debate on a tough policy question that has no easy answers.
Europe desperately needs to have a mature, fact-based conversation about migration.
Strict border controls can never be more than one part of the solution to the EU’s migration challenge.
The crises in Syria, Iraq, and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa are likely to lead to yet more dislocation.
Higher fences, more vigilant surveillance, and increased policing will not be enough to address the increase in migration that is almost certain to result.
Instead, acting on the EU’s founding values, member states should co-finance a search and rescue operation along the lines of Mare Nostrum; strengthen their efforts to protect the rights of refugees; and share the burden of granting asylum.
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Sweden took in 70% of those granted refugee status in the EU last year.
Others – notably Spain – need to do more.
Wider responses are also needed.
For example, more coherent and generous approaches to the provision of temporary work visas would benefit both migrants and Europeans.
And EU member states could use their aid budgets to provide greater support for the Syrian refugees living in dire circumstances in neighboring countries.
The lesson of the migration crisis in the Mediterranean is clear: Fortress Europe is not working.
The EU must map out a new approach.
When it does, its own values will be the best guide.
Britain’s Last EU Straw?
LONDON – Is £1.7 billion ($2.7 billion) a lot of money for the British government to fork out?
It is when it is a European Union budget demand that comes out of the blue.
But the impact of the EU’s unexpected budget invoice is not just financial, for it has arrived at a time when the anti-EU, United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) is riding high in opinion polls.
The episode reveals the arbitrary nature of EU budget setting, which puts the EU itself in a bad light – and could be the last straw for Britain’s EU membership.
The bill originates from a statistical recalculation by Eurostat, the EU statistical office, of the UK’s economic performance over the past 20 years.
The longer-terms costs, however, could be much greater than the relatively small amount (0.1% of GDP) involved.
The political crisis – which originated with the calculation of national budget surcharges and rebates from the EU budget – stems from an institutional arbitrariness that seems unjust and fosters immense resentment.
Like friendships or marriages that break down over seemingly trivial issues that in fact signify fundamental problems, this budget crisis has highlighted a serious flaw in the UK-EU relationship.
The new financial demand surprised UK Prime Minister David Cameron, who called it “completely unacceptable.”
For many Euroskeptics, this was yet another sign of a conspiracy by the European Commission against Britain.
Referring to a children’s murder-detective board game, Cameron declared: “You don’t need a Cluedo set to know that someone has been clubbed with the lead piping in the library.”
A better comparison might have been with the “Chance” cards in Monopoly, the Great Depression-era board game that highlighted the random injustice of capitalism.
The timing of the spat could not be better for Britain’s EU opponents.
UKIP could conceivably hold the balance of power following next May’s general election, and force the government to hold its promised “in-out” referendum on EU membership.
Under electoral pressure, Britain’s two main parties – Conservatives and Labour – are already advocating limits on immigration that are incompatible with EU law and the core principles of European integration.
The emotional escalation may lead many people, on both sides of the English Channel, to conclude that the UK and the EU would each be better off without the other.
Pre-existing tensions have inevitably played a large part in the current flare-up.
But is the EU’s budget calculation method also at fault?
It is rational for a country’s EU budget contribution to reflect its real level of economic activity.
In any case, the total EU budget, at around 1% of EU output, is relatively small, and has not changed for more than 30 years.
The recalculation simply attempts to achieve a more accurate picture of the EU economy, correcting for activity not officially measured in national accounts, such as charity, drugs, and prostitution.
Moreover, Britain was not the only EU member to fall foul of the recalculation.
Italy’s economic performance also looked better than previously assumed, necessitating an additional payment.
Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi duly joined the chorus of outrage, calling the recalculation a “lethal weapon.”
To be sure, it is fundamentally sensible for governments to monitor and tax as much domestic economic activity as possible.
An external assessment that attempts to account for the whole of the economy – and calculates the budget contribution on this basis – should increase tax efficiency.
Poor taxation capacity has, after all, been an endemic problem in southern Europe, including in Italy (and especially in Greece), while France and Germany, which both received large rebates, are better tax collectors.
Italy, like Greece, has been trying to broaden its tax base.
Aerial surveys now detect garden swimming pools; tax assessors investigate yachts moored in harbors; and no transactions above €1,000 ($1,268) may be made in cash.
Yet why should the EU’s budget calculations place such importance on national accounts, which constitute a set of arbitrary conventions?
If, for example, wages were paid for housework, GDP would increase without any more activity taking place.
In a rational world, EU budget contributions would not be arbitrarily set, but would be automatically determined, say, as a fixed proportion of value-added tax (VAT) receipts.
Only a relatively small share would be needed, requiring no periodic recalculations.
Assessing, and then reassessing, members’ dues in the current way damages the EU.
Taken to its logical extreme, member countries would demand recalculations to reflect the different ways they measure income and wealth, thereby pitting potential beneficiary countries against contributors.
Such a fiscal set-up has already threatened to break up member states – consider Scotland or Catalonia.
If the EU is seen as being little more than a treasure chest that allots fiscal resources to its members, it is bound to fail.
As geopolitical challenges mount, and Europe faces its first systemic security threat since the end of the Cold War, the stakes could not be higher.
Europe cannot get bogged down in what should be a simple bureaucratic process.
Rather, the EU must be able to explain what it truly represents, and these ideals must be reflected in actions that are clear, predictable, and non-arbitrary.
Europe’s Pointless Deficit Targets?
BRUSSELS – The fiscal rules of the European Union have undergone some much-needed improvements in recent years, but much more needs to be done.
In addition to suffering from a lack of clarity on key issues, EU fiscal policy remains overly focused on short-term goals, reflected in its needless emphasis on nominal deficit targets within annual budget cycles.
To be sure, all EU countries have a real interest in the fiscal sustainability of their fellow members.
But annual deficits are poor approximations of the likelihood that one member may have to repay another’s debt.
The fact that the existence of exceptional circumstances can now be invoked to distribute the burden of any needed adjustments over more than one year is helpful.
But it does not eliminate the short-term bias embedded in the EU’s fiscal rules.
In a fully integrated market, the annual financing of government deficits should not be an issue, provided the stock of debt is sustainable.
That is why the EU should strive to create a fiscal framework that has the sole objective of ensuring that its members’ debts are sustainable.
By definition, this target would be country-specific.
It would not require a headline deficit of below 3% of GDP in each and every year, in each and every country.
But it would require a more sophisticated analytical framework than the current one, which merely distinguishes between countries on the basis of whether they meet the EU’s 60%-of-GDP ceiling on public debt.
The eurozone is much better positioned to manage fiscal pressures than it once was.
The European Central Bank’s “outright monetary transactions” scheme provides an important backstop for debt sustainability.
And a banking union, once completed, should contain the risk of financial crisis and contagion.
Meanwhile, quantitative easing by the ECB has reduced fears that governments will run out of cash, at least for the time being.
Efforts to make the rules more flexible are a welcome development, but shortcomings remain, particularly given that implementation risks make the macroeconomic effects of rule changes difficult to quantify.
For example, it is not obvious how to deal with the fact that decisions by large countries have larger externalities, both positive and negative, than those made by their smaller peers, setting the ground for different treatment in a monetary union of supposed equals.
Nor is it clear what room for discretion has been provided to the European Commission to address such outcomes.
Above all, long-term fiscal outlooks must be fully embedded in the EU and its member states.
Institutions will have to be redesigned to accommodate this approach and resolve some of the ambiguities in the current framework, while avoiding discrimination or politicization.
One possible vehicle for accomplishing this is the independent councils that the EU’s so-called fiscal compact has now made mandatory for every country in the eurozone.
These councils are tasked with assessing the accuracy of macroeconomic forecasts, overseeing compliance with targets, and ensuring long-term fiscal sustainability.
But it remains unclear exactly how they fit into the overall fiscal framework; indeed, the complexity of EU rules may limit the councils’ capacity to fulfill their function.
Fiscal councils should not be put in the position of trying to interpret the letter of the fiscal compact.
It would be far better to provide them with the sole task of assessing debt sustainability and advising governments in this regard.
Their recommendations should be binding, but they should also be focused on the medium term, rather than on annual fiscal outcomes.
In a few cases, fiscal councils might impose conditions that are even more stringent than current EU rules stipulate, but they would be limited to enforcing the structural balance that each signatory of the fiscal compact has enshrined in its constitution or in equally binding legislation.
In other cases, the councils’ recommendations are likely to be more relaxed on an annual basis than current EU rules. Either way, the recommendations would have the advantage of being better adapted to local needs – especially if the councils are accountable to national parliaments.
The best way to preserve the councils’ independence over time would be through top-down monitoring and control at the eurozone level, for example through the establishment of a European Fiscal Council, which would be responsible for ensuring that every national council fulfills its mandate.
The EFC would be authorized to request an amended assessment of a country’s fiscal trajectory and requirements.
With such limited authority, there would be no need for the EFC to be accountable or democratically legitimated at the European level.
In addition to favoring a long-term perspective, this governance structure would also answer some of the questions that arise with increased flexibility.
Independent national authorities would be better placed not only to assess implementation risks, but also to advocate for structural reforms.
Moreover, such a system would imply little risk of top-down discrimination against smaller countries.
As national governments took responsibility for the European objective of fiscal sustainability, annual budget targets imposed by the EU would become obsolete, at which point that should be abandoned altogether.
The Silent Death of Eurozone Governance
BRUSSELS – Sometimes the most important thing that happens is what doesn’t happen – or, to paraphrase Sherlock Holmes, it’s the dog that doesn’t bark in the night.
The lack of response to the European Commission’s non-enforcement in Spain and Portugal of the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) is one of those times.
According to SGP rules, the Commission should have proposed a fine to be levied on Spain and Portugal for overshooting their fiscal deficit targets by a wide margin.
The fine would have been largely symbolic, but the Commission seems to have decided that the symbolism wasn’t worth it.
And it was not only the Commission that chose not to bark; the rest of Europe remained silent as well.
Not even Germany, the European Union’s leading austerity watchdog, perked up.
In fact, there have been reports that German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble lobbied several commissioners not to impose fines on Spain or Portugal.
The German financial press, which often criticizes the European Commission for being too lax, barely registered the decision.
What explains the silence?
There is precedent for fiscal leniency in the EU.
In 2003, all three large eurozone countries (France, Germany, and Italy) were running deficits in excess of 3% of GDP, the upper limit established by the SGP.
Toward the end of that year, it was clear that France and Germany (then with record-high unemployment) were not fulfilling their deficit-reduction commitments.
But, unlike today, the Commission did bark (even if it could not really bite).
It proposed ratcheting up the SGP’s so-called excessive deficit procedure.
The proposal did not entail any fines; rather, it focused on the stage before fines would be considered.
Nonetheless, EU finance ministers strenuously opposed it, largely for political reasons.
The clash occupied the front pages of newspapers all over Europe, especially in Germany, where the press, like the political opposition, was eager to chastise Chancellor Gerhard Schröder’s government for its failure to uphold fiscal rectitude.
There were heated debates on the fiscal rules, and the Commission’s role in enforcing them.
In short, everyone was howling.
Despite the resistance, the Commission decided to plow ahead and censure Germany and France.
With that decision, it sent a clear message that it took seriously its responsibility to administer the EU treaties – so seriously, in fact, that it would enforce rules with which it did not necessarily agree.
Indeed, the Commission’s then-president, Romano Prodi, had already harshly criticized the SGP’s rigidity.
Ultimately, however, political interests won the day, and the EU finance ministers voted down the proposal.
The ministers subsequently moved to reform the SGP, shifting the focus from headline deficits to a measure of the fiscal position that takes into account the state of the economy.
The Commission accepted the reform, and has since made several additional changes, each time proudly declaring that the SGP is more “flexible” and “intelligent” than ever.
Today, Spain and Portugal are not adhering even to the new flexible rules.
Yet the current Commission, led by President Jean-Claude Juncker, was divided on whether to enforce them, with some commissioners favoring leniency.
Schäuble’s intervention, it seems, settled the matter.
Clearly, when it comes to allowing political considerations to affect enforcement of the rules, not much has changed.
And, in fact, this time around, the Commission had more power to override resistance from finance ministers.
After the 2008 economic crisis, Europe introduced a “reverse majority rule,” under which any Commission proposal to impose a fine is final, unless EU finance ministers can muster a two-thirds majority against it.
And herein lies a key difference between today and 2003: the Commission’s commitment to enforcing SGP rules has waned.
The relative silence of the public and the media drive the point home.
Support for the fiscal rules has faded.
Perhaps, with a surge in terrorist attacks, particularly in Germany and France, citizens and leaders are too preoccupied with security issues.
The United Kingdom’s impending “Brexit” from the EU is also consuming much attention.
And continuing high unemployment in many countries may seem to be a more urgent economic issue than reducing deficits.
But the decline in support for European fiscal rules carries serious risks.
If the most concrete elements of the eurozone’s governance framework are not applied rigorously, what will compel member states to undertake reforms and stabilize their debt levels?
Vague exhortations will not work.
It seems that the crisis, and the untenably large risk premia for highly indebted governments that followed, has already been forgotten.
Officially, the Commission is still working to realize the blueprint for a “genuine” Economic and Monetary Union.
But in the wake of the Commission’s decision not to enforce the SGP, this effort has become meaningless.
It is now clearer than ever that EU member states prioritize domestic political imperatives over common rules – and Europe’s common good.
European Jobs Wanted
BERLIN – When the European Union held its first summit on growth and jobs in 1997, EU-wide unemployment stood at 11%.
Last autumn, when it held another, not much seemed to have changed.
Unemployment in the eurozone was 11.5% – up from a low of 6.8% in the first quarter of 2008.
If the EU is to fulfill its promise of peace and prosperity, it will need to find ways to create opportunities for more of its citizens.
Youth unemployment is a particularly serious concern, even in countries with otherwise positive employment statistics; in countries with worse labor-market conditions, it represents a potential source of social and political instability.
Participation in the workforce is linked not only to income levels, but also to self-esteem, social inclusion, and social status.
Being left out of the labor market increases the risk of poverty and poor health, and the longer unemployment lasts, the more damaging the effects.
Young people who are unemployed have fewer opportunities later in life – representing a waste of education and skills that has a detrimental effect on national economies.
To be sure, some EU countries have managed to weather the crisis reasonably well.
According to a new Social Justice ranking by the Bertelsmann Stiftung’s Sustainable Governance Indicators (SGI) project, Austria, Denmark, and Germany top the list in terms of labor-market access, followed by Sweden and Finland.
But even in these countries, there is room for improvement.
The German system of vocational training has matched the skills of the country’s workforce to the needs of its firms, contributing to low youth unemployment.
But one troubling factor remains: the emergence of a dual labor market, in which low-wage and temporary workers find it hard to transfer out of inadequate working conditions into the mainstream labor market.
Dual labor markets are a problem throughout the EU.
Austria has dealt with the issue best, according to the SGI study: only 8.1% of temporary employees surveyed had taken temporary work because they could not find permanent positions.
Germany ranks a distant second, with 21% of those surveyed saying they would prefer a permanent position.
In crisis-stricken southern Europe, the problem is even worse.
In Spain and Cyprus, more than 90% of people in temporary positions cannot find permanent employment.
Another problem in top-ranked Germany and Austria is the lack of educational opportunities for certain groups, which contributes to a lack of opportunity and mobility in the labor market.
In Austria, children are divided from fourth grade into separate education streams.
As a result, their later educational development is set in stone from an early age.
The social status of parents often determines their children’s ability to access higher education.
Children of higher-income parents and of parents who attended tertiary institutions are far more likely to graduate from university.
In Germany, educational opportunities for children from immigrant and low-income families are fewer than in many other economically advanced countries.
Labor-market conditions for immigrants are also a troublesome issue in Scandinavian countries, which otherwise perform well in enabling access to employment.
In Denmark, non-Western immigrants experience higher unemployment rates and lower educational achievement than others.
Similarly, despite Sweden’s excellent record on non-discrimination in general, immigrants find it difficult to integrate into Swedish society and face disadvantages in the labor market relative to native Swedes.
Moreover, though Sweden has one of the EU’s highest employment rates, it has failed to tackle its longstanding problem of youth unemployment, which currently stands at 23%.
In Spain and Greece, youth unemployment is above 50%, and the situation is not much better in crisis-hit Cyprus, Portugal, Italy, and Croatia.
In the EU as a whole, youth unemployment stood at a dispiriting 21.9% in November.
According to one study, this costs the EU €150 billion ($183 billion) per year in lost wages and spending, in addition to the hardship suffered by the many young people who are unable to find work.
In February 2013, EU leaders launched a Youth Employment Initiative, with a budget of €6 billion, to help alleviate the problem.
But German Chancellor Angela Merkel admitted in June 2014 that the initiative has so far been a failure.
The EU’s most recent jobs summit did not provide much in the way of new ideas.
The EU has said that young people should not be out of employment or education for more than four months; but no progress has been made toward making this a reality.
Unless new thinking is adopted soon, Europe’s many unemployed young people risk becoming a lost generation.
Europe’s Sovereignty Illusion
MADRID ‒ The European Union has taken democratic integration – driven by the free will of its members, rather than military force – to unprecedented levels, securing its place at the forefront of institutional innovation.
But today, sentiment in the EU seems to lean toward “conflict," rather than “cooperation."
Some member states are touting their sovereign right to embrace unilateral action, even as they request financial assistance, while others are acting as mere creditors, ignoring the social suffering that the current debt crisis has caused.
To return to the path of innovative integration, the EU needs a new framework for public debate that underpins effective cooperation among partners and friends, instead of fueling conflict among seemingly irreconcilable rivals.
Overall, European integration has been a harmonious, ordered, and just process.
Less wealthy member countries benefited from tools like the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund, which provided considerable resources to enable them to boost their per capita income.
But protracted economic crisis has changed their citizens' perspective, with a rising proportion viewing EU membership as more costly than beneficial.
Not surprisingly, that change has fueled demands for more “national sovereignty," which populist parties, such as Greece's newly elected Syriza, have translated into electoral success.
All of these parties, whether on the right or the left, place national sovereignty at odds with the so-called “external powers," and seek to tilt the EU's political axis accordingly.
This reductionist view is the only glue holding the Greek ruling coalition together.
In this trendy discourse, sovereignty means “empowerment," and EU institutions are “undemocratic."