Honor thy father and thy mother admits of gradations.”
The same is true of cosmopolitanism versus insularity.
As the world watches the US presidential candidates wrestle with issues of protectionism, immigration, global public health, climate change, and international cooperation, we should ask what aspect of American identities they are appealing to and whether they are educating followers about broader meanings.
Are they stretching Americans’ sense of identity as best they can or just appealing to their narrowest interests?
Trump’s proposal to bar Muslims from entering the US and his demands that Mexico pay for a wall to stop migration would be unlikely to pass constitutional or political muster were he elected President.
Then again, many of his proposals are not policies designed to be implemented, but slogans crafted to appeal to an insular populist mood among a segment of the population.
Given his lack of a strong ideological core and his celebration of “the art of the deal,” Trump might even prove to be a pragmatic president, despite his narcissism.
But good leaders help us define who we are.
On that score, Trump has already failed.
A New-Model Trump?
BERLIN – On the 27th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, the United States elected a president who plans to build an even bigger wall, this time on the border with Mexico.
Now, President-elect Donald Trump must decide whether he wants to plow forward with his divisive agenda or actually advance America’s best interests.
There are strong parallels between Trump’s victory and the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union last June.
Republicans interviewed after the election result was known looked almost as shocked as the architects of the UK’s “Leave” campaign on the morning after the referendum.
But no one was more dumbfounded than those on the losing side, which in both cases had been widely expected to come out on top.
One effect of the Brexit vote that has already emerged in the US as well is a surge in hate crimes, including an alarming number of incidents being reported at schools and on college campuses.
Trump’s win has emboldened some of his supporters to move from the anonymity of abusing targets on social media to accosting them openly on the street.
This is not surprising: Trump’s campaign was marked by nearly 18 months of vitriol, aimed not just against his opponent, but also at US government institutions, the press, and many segments of the US population, particularly immigrants, refugees, supporters of the Black Lives Matter movement, and Muslims.
He attracted the endorsement of the Ku Klux Klan and surrounded his campaign with the white nationalists of the so-called alt-right.
In fact, many of the promises Trump made to his supporters during the campaign are highly divisive and even dangerous, and their implementation could have serious adverse effects on the lives of ordinary Americans, triggering civil unrest.
Conversely, abandoning some of the policies he promised could trigger a backlash – perhaps violent – among his supporters.
However busy Trump is planning the transition to the White House – selecting his cabinet and prioritizing his many promises – he must not ignore this risk.
If he hopes to be anything remotely close to a responsible leader, he must move urgently to address the deep divisions that he so enthusiastically fueled during his campaign.
That means becoming more presidential, by advocating a calm and reasonable approach that emphasizes, above all, upholding the US Constitution and the rule of law.
He should start by speaking out firmly against violence, and taking proactive measures to protect immigrants and minorities, who are understandably fearful of attacks by his supporters.
More broadly, Trump must avoid triumphalism, and acknowledge, with uncharacteristic humility, the magnitude of the challenge ahead.
And he must convey a credible message about a consensual approach, discarding the partisan hostility that has dominated US politics in recent years and, in particular, during the just-concluded campaign.
Of course, Trump is not in this alone, and a leader is only as good as his or her team.
To build credibility, Trump will need to be transparent about how he crafts his administration, ensuring that it includes the knowledge and experience that he lacks.
He does not have a deep bench to draw from, but he must find a way to make it work, assembling a group that can advise him wisely.
It is vital that Trump takes these steps quickly, so that his administration can hit the ground running.
Only then can he hope not only to meet his commitments for the first 100 days in office, but also – and more important – to begin easing the fear and anger that his campaign has brought to fever pitch.
All legislators – whether pro- or anti-Trump, Republican or Democrat – must participate fully in the effort to reduce tensions, improve cooperation, and protect the US political system’s checks and balances.
They must recognize that the US today is a tinderbox.
The time for playing with fire is over.
Cool heads must prevail.
The business, culture, and non-profit sectors, as well as the press and pundits, must remain calm as well, resisting the lure of hyperbole and scare tactics, and look toward a shared future.
Most important, community leaders must not allow their constituents to be manipulated or goaded into behavior that risks dangerous knock-on effects.
Judging by Trump’s long history as a public figure, the idea that he would help to bridge the divides in the US probably seems ludicrous.
His victory speech did include the traditional pledge to be “president for all Americans.”
The American people need to hold him to that sentiment – and uphold it themselves.
Some – indeed many – will never support him; but it is his job, as president, to reach out to all and appeal to the country’s shared values.
Being president and running for president require very different skills.
President-elect Trump must use his first 100 days in office not just to make appointments and prioritize legislation, but also to set a reassuring tone for his administration.
Stability and trust must be the order of the day.
In his second inaugural address, following a period of extreme division and civil war, Abraham Lincoln declared, “let us strive on” and “bind up the nation’s wounds.”
Trump is no Lincoln, but he did invoke the same spirit in his victory speech.
One hopes that he meant it.
The Many Extremes of Donald Trump
WASHINGTON, DC – Much attention in the United States and elsewhere is focused on whether US presidential candidate Donald Trump will shift away from the anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim, and anti-rational rhetoric that carried him to the Republican Party nomination.
Some of his advisers are reportedly recommending that he move toward “mainstream” Republican positions, such as those held by the leadership of the House of Representatives.
It is entirely possible that Trump will follow their counsel.
After all, his current positions are not generating enough support to make victory in November likely (the widely cited FiveThirtyEight website puts his odds at around 20%).
And Trump’s running mate, Mike Pence, Governor of Indiana, served in the House from 2000 to 2012 and has close ties to Speaker Paul Ryan and other Republican leaders.
The Republican establishment, deeply divided over Trump’s candidacy, certainly hopes for such a shift.
But, if it comes about, no one should mistake it for a move toward more “moderate” positions.
In any other year, the House Republicans would be regarded as irresponsible extremists.
To see this, consider the record from a recent hearing of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, chaired by Representative Jason Chaffetz.
The ostensible focus of the hearing was the policies of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), particularly with regard to the creation of new banks.
As the hearing unfolded, however, it became clear that most Republican members were intent on broad-ranging deregulation of finance – rolling back all of the reforms put in place after the 2008 financial crisis.
(I testified at the hearing at the invitation of House Democrats.)
In effect, most of the senior Republicans who spoke wanted to return to the pre-crisis world – or even to less financial regulation than existed under President George W. Bush.
This is a recipe for repeating the boom-and-bust cycle that created the worst crisis since the 1930s and caused at least a decade of damage to the US economy.
Moreover, while sitting officials are typically treated with respect, the Republicans on the committee were extraordinarily uncivil toward Martin Gruenberg, the FDIC chairman.
Worse, in addition to their rudeness and confrontational manner, the Republican members displayed a striking lack of interest in even the most basic facts.
For example, some of them claimed that low interest rates should make it attractive for new banks to be created – so, in their view, the lack of banking start-ups is an indication that the FDIC is doing something profoundly wrong.
But researchers at the Federal Reserve have examined this closely and established, beyond any reasonable doubt, that the achievable interest-rate spread (the difference between deposit rates and loan rates) for potential start-up banks is extremely low.
This lack of expected profitability – a side effect of monetary policy – is the primary reason people do not want to start new banks.
Unfortunately, the House Republicans simply do not want to be confronted with the findings of social science (on banking) – or apparently of science (for example, on climate change).
If you put the facts before them, as happened in that hearing, they become aggressive and unpleasant – sounding rather like smaller versions of Trump.
A civilized exchange of ideas and information is impossible.
The House Republicans have another big economic idea on their agenda about which we will likely hear more from Trump: a massive tax cut.
If enacted, a few people at the top of the income distribution would do well; everyone else, not so much.
Meanwhile, the deficit and government debt would soar, just like they did during the pre-2008 period.
Any growth that resulted would prove illusory, with the inevitable hard landing leading to austerity, which would be imposed disproportionately on less well-off Americans.
Good luck having a sensible discussion about those issues with House Republicans.
Anyone wishing for Trump to “move to the middle” in today’s Republican Party is really just asking for a more dangerous version of George W. Bush, at home and abroad.
Bush pushed through a big tax cut, along with other major increases in government spending – including for two disastrous foreign wars – and funded it all with debt.
He also presided over a more complete form of financial deregulation than the US had ever seen, resulting in the largest economic contraction in almost 80 years.
With Trump in the White House, the United States might get the white-supremacist agenda of his “alt-right” allies: massive discrimination against minorities and other groups, and probably some form of police state to detain and expel millions of residents.
Or it might get complete financial deregulation and a return to the most irresponsible fiscal policies the US ever experienced.
The most likely scenario is that it would get both.
Trump’s Fiscal Follies
CAMBRIDGE – This year’s presidential election campaign in the United States is certainly unique.
Donald Trump has shaken up the way a campaign is run, how a nominee communicates with voters, and the Republican Party’s platform, with many of his positions deviating from GOP tradition.
But, on tax policy, Trump has toed the party line – and that’s not a good thing.
Of course, any assessment of Trump’s declared positions risks being rendered meaningless within a few hours.
He changes his positions with head-spinning frequency, repeatedly disavowing statements soon after making them.
After two days of insisting, absurdly, that President Barack Obama “founded” the Islamic State, he finally tried to play the whole thing off as mere sarcasm.
Even for a more typical candidate, promises made during a campaign rarely match actions taken once in office.
During his presidential campaign in 2000, George W. Bush promised to renounce nation-building adventures abroad, to maintain fiscal discipline, and to treat greenhouses gases as pollutants under the Clean Air Act.
Once in office, he did precisely the opposite.
Nonetheless, we cannot simply ignore candidates’ policy promises.
Otherwise, the national discussion would focus entirely on the current week’s poll results, which is not particularly valuable for helping voters make informed decisions.
This is why it is important to examine Trump’s recent tax proposal, which has four salient features – all of which amount to tax cuts for the rich.
First, Trump proposes to abolish the estate tax – a long-cherished Republican goal.
Trump, like his predecessors, tries to hide the fact that only the very wealthy would benefit from this change, because the tax does not apply to estates worth less than $5.45 million for an individual and $10.9 million for a married couple.
Second, Trump wants to cut America’s corporate tax rate sharply, to 15%.
In theory, there is some merit to reducing the rate, which, at 35%, is one of the world’s highest (and probably spurs companies to keep profits overseas).
But, as most tax policy experts will tell you, a reduction in the overall rate should be accompanied by moves to broaden the base.
In particular, the US should abolish deductions, such as those designed to encourage corporate debt and oil drilling.
Third, Trump would reduce the highest rate for personal income tax from 39.6% to 33%.
This is significant, but not nearly as large as the previous proposal to cut the rate to 25% – which, according to independent analysts, would have led to about $10 trillion in revenue losses over the course of just one decade.
Finally, Trump has proposed tax deductions for average childcare costs.
That might seem widely beneficial, but it would help only those in high enough tax brackets to itemize deductions – mostly households with annual income above $75,000 (median US household income was $54,462 in 2015).
The question of whether Trump’s tax policies would benefit him directly remains unanswered, because, unlike all other presidential candidates since Richard Nixon, he has refused to release his income-tax records.
What is certain is that Trump’s tax policies are fiscally irresponsible.
Indeed, there is no indication how any of his tax policies would be financed, and every indication that they would sharply expand the budget deficit.
The budget balance equals government outlays minus revenues.
It’s a simple equation, but one that Republican presidential candidates, including Trump, have seemingly had trouble understanding since 1980.
They propose large specific tax cuts, without specific spending cuts, and yet claim they will reduce the deficit.
Instead, they have produced record increases in budget deficits, particularly during the terms of Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush.
To be sure, Trump’s budget plans are still too vague – particularly with respect to discretionary spending, Social Security, and Medicare – to arrive at an informed estimate of their actual impact on the federal deficit and national debt.
But he may face pressure to become more specific as the election approaches.
And, judging by his tendency to offer pie-in-the-sky ideas, rather than realistic policies, it seems likely that he will respond to that pressure with more manipulation.
Fortunately for Trump, the self-proclaimed “fiscal conservatives” who preceded him have already established four magic tricks to use when making impossible fiscal promises – tricks that he is likely to imitate.
· The “Magic Asterisk.”
The candidate promises to cut taxes while balancing the budget with as-yet-unidentified spending cuts.
(This is basically what Trump is already doing, as he has specified no spending cuts.)
· The “Rosy Scenario.”
The candidate (or incumbent) forecasts an increase in tax receipts, based on forecasts that national income will grow faster.
One of the three economists who have signed on as advisers to the Trump campaign has suggested that, with Trump in the White House, the rate of GDP growth will somehow double.
· The “Laffer Proposition.”
Reagan, Bush, and others declared that their tax cuts would spur so much economic activity that total tax revenue would actually increase.
This proposition has been disproved many times, and the economic advisers to those presidents have disavowed it.
Still, the temptation to square the budgetary circle with this claim may prove too strong for Trump to resist.
· “Starve the Beast.”
After the other justifications for big tax cuts were proved wrong, Reagan and Bush fell back on the theory that the decline in tax revenue was actually a good thing, because it would force Congress to approve spending cuts.
Again, the key to this gambit is that the president never actually gets around to proposing the cuts that Congress is supposed to approve.
Perhaps it is inevitable for candidates to ignore the real-world constraints of domestic politics or international circumstances as they try to sell themselves to voters.
But they shouldn’t be able to ignore the constraints of arithmetic, especially not when the same sleight of hand has been tried before – with profoundly adverse consequences.
The Ethics of Ebola
LONDON – As the Ebola virus grips an unprecedentedly wide swath of Africa, many are asking whether it is time to begin administering untested drugs and vaccines.
Given that the disease can kill up to 90% of its victims – higher than the mortality rate from the bubonic plague – there seems to be little to lose from relaxing clinical norms.
But the suggestion raises difficult ethical questions – and the urgency of the situation does not leave much time for deliberation.
One reason that there is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola hemorrhagic fever is the wiliness of crossover diseases.
These viruses are transmitted from animal populations, which can act as reservoirs where the pathogens can develop and mutate, making it difficult for researchers to keep pace with the diseases’ variations.
But another reason is pharmaceutical companies’ declining interest in manufacturing vaccines.
Indeed, only four companies today make vaccines, compared to 26 companies 50 years ago.
These firms know that the return on their investment will be relatively low, owing to the long lead-in time that results from slow manufacturing processes (though new, faster methods offer some hope).
Public distrust of vaccines has also played a major role in this decline.
In the late 1990s, anti-vaccine sentiment manifested itself in a backlash against the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine.
Similarly, a 2004 New York Academy of Medicine survey indicated that twice as many people were worried about the side effects of the well-established smallpox vaccine as were concerned about the disease itself.
The comparative docility of infectious diseases like smallpox has contributed to a degree of complacency about the magnitude of the risks of refusing vaccination.
When an epidemic actually begins, people quickly change their minds, and demand the rapid production and distribution of vaccines.
That is probably a good thing, but it is also unrealistic.
The British pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline recently announced that, together with the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, it is developing an experimental vaccine for Ebola.
But it is just entering phase I clinical trials to test toxicity.
With two more trial stages to go, the vaccine would not be ready for deployment before 2015.
The duration of the trial process has provoked complaints of excessive red tape.
But such criticism is unfounded, given the potential of proposed drugs to cause serious illness or even death.
Indeed, phase I trials – also called “first-in-man studies” – are extremely risky and ethically knotty, meaning that they must be handled with the utmost care.
In 2006, phase I trials of the drug TGN1412 had to be suspended when previously healthy volunteers developed multiple organ failure, with some barely escaping death.
University College London pharmacologist Trevor Smart believes that they may never fully recover.
But what about when a population is already ill?
In 1996, during a major meningitis epidemic in northern Nigeria, the drug company Pfizer supplied doctors with the oral antibiotic Trovan, which was being tested against another drug, ceftriaxone.
Eleven children died during the Trovan trial, and others were left permanently disabled.
Still, the death rate in the Trovan trial was much lower than the rate from untreated meningitis, bolstering the case for administering untested Ebola drugs today.
In fact, the World Health Organization has already pronounced the use of the experimental serum ZMapp – a mixture of genetically engineered antibodies intended to help patients fight the disease – ethical.
ZMapp never made it to human trials and is not yet licensed by the US Food and Drug Administration.
As it stands, only a few doses of ZMapp exist, and it will take months to produce even a modest supply.
This raises another ethical dilemma: Who should receive such a scarce resource?
The first three doses of ZMapp were administered to the American medical missionaries Kent Brantly and Nancy Whitebol, who have recovered, and the Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, who has since died.
Some offered a practical justification for the widely criticized selection of Brantly and Whitebol: It makes sense to treat health workers first, so that they can continue to help others.
But this argument largely fell apart with the selection of the 75-year-old Pajares.
The credibility of claims that practicality drove the selection was, to some extent, revived by the decision to provide doses to three African doctors.
In any case, the available supply of ZMapp has been exhausted.
It is important to note that even pragmatic arguments about rationing scarce medical resources can be highly controversial.
During World War II, when army doctors were forced to ration doses of penicillin, they decided to give first priority to men with sexually transmitted diseases, who would be ready to return to the battlefield more quickly.
But many contended that men who had been wounded in battle were more deserving.
Putting such a moral spin on the allocation of Ebola treatments, it could be argued that Africans should be selected over Westerners, because Africa’s health-care systems are less able to combat the disease.
But one might also contend that Western medical workers deserve higher priority because they volunteered to expose themselves to the disease, in order to help those who had no choice.
Such arguments make reaching agreement virtually impossible.
Worse, using social, rather than medical, criteria for rationing treatments is a slippery slope.
One need only recall Seattle’s notorious “God” committee, which in the early 1960s allocated then-scarce kidney dialysis on the basis of criteria like earnings, church involvement, and even Scout membership.
The use of social criteria for treatment allocation has had a bad name ever since – and rightly so.
Genetics for the People?
LONDON – “Your genetic information should be controlled by you,” declares an advertisement for the American direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic-testing firm 23andMe.
Amid the current furor over electronic eavesdropping, the notion that individuals should decide who can access their personal data is particularly appealing.
But whether 23andMe is practicing what it preaches remains dubious, at best.
Just five days after the FDA sent its letter, a California woman, Lisa Casey, filed a $5 million class-action lawsuit against the firm, alleging false and misleading advertising.
Doubts about 23andMe’s PGS go back a long way.
In 2008, the American Society of Clinical Oncology commissioned a report that declared that the partial type of genetic analysis offered by 23andMe had not been clinically proved to be effective in cancer care.
Two years later, the US Government Accountability Office concluded after a lengthy investigation that DTC genetic tests provide “misleading” results – a situation that is complicated further by “deceptive marketing.”
What 23andMe offered was a $99 test for some 250 genetically linked conditions, based on a partial reading of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) – points where individuals’ genomes vary by a single DNA base pair.
Given that DTC genetic tests target only a fraction of the human genome’s three billion markers, and various companies sample different SNPs, different tests may return disparate results for the same customer, who might then make serious medical decisions based on inaccurate information.
In this context, it is unsurprising that even those who oppose regulation in general see the need for it in the case of DTC testing.
But the issue goes beyond inaccuracy.
As the journalist Charles Seife has pointed out, the retail genetics test is “meant to be a front end for a massive information-gathering operation against an unwitting public.”
Indeed, when 23andMe customers log in to their accounts, they are invited to fill out surveys about their lifestyle, family background, and health, adding epidemiological value to the genetic data, which are then used by the firm’s research arm, 23andWe.
In providing this information, 23andMe’s customers are building a valuable “biobank” for the company.
Given that the United States decided not to create a national biobank like the United Kingdom’s, owing to the high set-up costs – estimated at about a billion dollars – 23andMe may well view its growing biobank as saving it a massive outlay.
Some 60% of 23andMe customers have agreed to provide the requested information.
Of course, one could argue that they are not “an unwitting public,” but altruistic volunteers – so generous, in fact, that, beyond paying for the service, they hand over the value of their subsequent labor in providing epidemiological data.
Tom Sawyer pulled off that business strategy when he persuaded his friends to pay him for the privilege of taking over his hated chore, painting the picket fence.
But most scientific research subjects either receive compensation or contribute their time free of charge; they do not pay to participate.
Casey’s lawsuit has latched onto this practice, which her attorney calls, “a very thinly disguised way of getting people to pay [23andMe] to build a DNA database.”
“By parceling out that information to help advertisers target you, with or without your consent, Google makes more than $10 billion every quarter,” Seife writes.
In other words, users have become the product.
To be sure, the 23andMe Privacy Statement stipulates that it “uses Genetic and Self-Reported Information [only] from users who have given consent.”
But it also includes a less prominently displayed qualifier: “If you do not give consent…we may still use your Genetic and/or Self-Reported Information for R&D purposes.”
This “may include disclosure of Aggregated Genetic and Self-Reported Information to third-party non-profit and/or commercial research partners who will not publish that information in a peer-reviewed scientific journal.”
In other words, commercial use of non-identifiable information is still allowed without donors’ explicit consent.
That is what worries libertarians – and anyone else who is concerned about the expansion of online efforts to gather information about individuals.
As a 23andMe blog post by Wojcicki puts it, “Wikipedia, YouTube, and MySpace have all changed the world by empowering individuals to share information.
We believe this same phenomenon can revolutionize health care.”
But if individuals share information involuntarily, it is the company – not its customers – that will be empowered.
Don Quixote, Dissident
It is now four centuries since the birth of a masterpiece whose author and hero both seem younger than we do.
The simplest explanation for this may be found in Flaubert’s words about Don Quixote : “I found my origins in this book, which I knew by heart before I learned how to read.”
Indeed, at the core of Don Quixote is something essential that we knew even before we read it but which became part of our nature only after we completed its mesmerizing journey.
This is the unmistakable stamp of greatness in a writer.
Hunting after his own ghost – an obvious sign of inner unhappiness – Hidalgo searched for a place where dreams, reality, sainthood, love, and justice coexist.
In their burlesque approach to humanity, Don Quixote and Sancho Panza are the most enduring and endearing clownish couple in world literature.
It is no surprise, then, that for the last 400 years Don Quixote and Panza have bred many relatives and successors, including countless buffoonish boss-and-servant couples.
Even the history of the circus is focused on such a pairing: the vain, dignified White Clown and Augustus the Fool, the humble loser who is kicked in the pants by his stiff, pompous partner.
For an East European like myself, it is not easy to ignore the history of the circus – or history itself.
The solemn Communist Manifesto announced the specter of the Great Utopia haunting Europe, but failed to warn us of the bloody tyranny.
The gullible Sancho Panza was meant to adopt the revolution’s deceptive dogma as entitlement to wage a brutal war against all.
The dream of improving the world disguised a farce that affected not only a single life, as in Cervantes’ story, and affected not only the misleading army of buffoons believed to be missionaries.
This dream destroyed generations of victims.
In the world circus, the poet looks like a Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, and Augustus the Fool appears ill-equipped for everyday life.
Like Don Quixote – and Cervantes himself – the artist dreams of other rules and rewards than his fellow men, who are content to digest their everyday lives.
In the socio-political arena, Augustus the Fool faces the Clown of Power.
Cervantes’ political parody can be read in many twentieth-century East European stories.
Its incomparable vitality and language, for example, find their way into the work of the Soviet writer Andrei Platonov.
A communist who considered himself an honest proletarian writer, but called by Stalin, the Red Clown of Power, “svoloc” (scoundrel) and “balagancik” (buffoon), Platonov lived a lifelong ordeal.
His carnivalesque odyssey of totalitarianism displays a world of misery, boredom, and obedience in its dark journey to an unreachable paradise.
The communist Knight, the new “caballero de la triste figura,” a kind of enlightened idiot, blinded by his loyalty to the unreal and by his harsh political correctness, considers Lenin a new Moses.
He rides the Rosinante of the Proletarian Force, falls in love with the dead Rosa Luxemburg in her role as Comrade Dulcinea and has intercourse with a locomotive.
In today’s free-market carnival, nothing seems visible unless it is scandalous and nothing is scandalous enough to be memorable.
So we pay homage to Cervantes at a time when we routinely co-habit with a very different outrageousness: religious fanaticism and terrorism, political manipulation, the cacophony of perverted simplification, the belligerent marriage between a new messianism and an aggrandizing quixotic blindness.
So long as we celebrate Cervantes, however, perhaps all is not lost.
Don’t Blame it on Rio
PARIS – We are little more than a decade into the twenty-first century, but a terrible precedent has already been set: all of the major international negotiations and cooperative efforts initiated in this century thus far have ended in failure.
With regard to the environment, the fight against global warming has come to a standstill, with the United Nations’ last three annual climate-change conferences, in Copenhagen, Cancún, and Durban, failing to renew the Kyoto Protocol.
The consequence of the international community’s increasing balkanization is that consensus-oriented conferences tend to end in impasses.
These failures do not mean that most people around the world do not see eye-to-eye on these issues, or that they are unprepared to make timely, even courageous, decisions.
Unfortunately, ordinary people’s sentiments rarely triumph when governments meet.
The conclusion is unavoidable: it is the quest for absolute consensus – unanimity – that is undermining progress on major global concerns.
Consensus-oriented negotiations can work when a treaty is being struck between victors and vanquished –ampnbsp;the strong and the weak.
After World War I, the Allied Powers tried to promote international peace by creating the League of Nations.
But the League’s unanimity requirement effectively gave all members veto power, and the United States Senate’s refusal to ratify its Covenant condemned the effort to a premature death.
The League’s abject failure to prevent World War II resulted in a second effort to build international comity after the fighting ended.
The new UN was much better structured than its predecessor, and the world gained an institution that fosters debate and deliberative decision-making much more vigorously than is possible in consensus-driven organizations.
But a shift that contradicts the UN Charter’s spirit has occurred.
In an effort to avoid resolutions or measures that expose their disagreements, the world’s great powers have adopted the habit of organizing worldwide debates and conferences that revert to decision-making by consensus.
According to the UN Charter, the primary focus of the General Assembly and the Security Council is to promote international security.
But the UN has become the “general operator” for global conferences, acting as administrator and furnisher of services and facilities (such as locations and interpreters) for events that are not officially part of its core operations.
As a result, the UN is increasingly taking the blame for these conferences’ failures, which not only leave the issues unresolved, but also undermine the UN’s authority.
The Rio+20 conference, which will examine the progress made since the first “Earth Summit” in Rio de Janeiro 20 years ago, will take place there this June.
Designed with a wide range of objectives, including a focus on both the green economy and sustainable development, the conference seems destined to fail.
Without consensus, no action can be taken, and consensus will be impossible.
Of course, there is a chance that the world will recognize its quandary at Rio.
If a majority of the countries present dares to declare that demanding consensus is equivalent to enforcing paralysis, and if they insist upon following the voting procedures enshrined in the UN Charter, we could see enormous progress.
Global warming and economic crisis are threatening international security.
This alone justifies referring these issues to the UN General Assembly, which, unlike the Security Council, knows no veto power.
A strong declaration and a call for binding measures to address these issues would then be possible.
The economic and environmental crises before us are too urgent to play games that give the appearance of international unanimity.
It is past time to address not only global warming and the economic crisis, but also the international decision-making process.
Why not start with Rio?
Don’t Cripple the Tigers
COPENHAGEN – This December, global leaders will meet in Copenhagen to negotiate a new climate change pact to reduce carbon emissions.
Yet, the way that it has been set up, it will inevitably fail.
The best hope is that we use this lesson finally to deal with this issue in a smarter fashion.
The United States has made it clear that developing countries must sign up to substantial reductions in carbon emissions in Copenhagen.
Developing nations – especially China and India – will be the main greenhouse gas emitters of the twenty-first century – but were exempted from the Kyoto Protocol because they emitted so little during the West’s industrialization period.
Europe, too, has grudgingly accepted that without developing nations’ participation, rich nations’ cuts will have little impact.
Some would have us believe that getting China and India on board will be easy.
According to former US Vice President Al Gore, “developing countries that were once reluctant to join in the first phases of a global response to the climate crisis have themselves now become leaders in demanding action and in taking bold steps on their own initiatives.”
But Gore’s fellow Nobel laureate, Rajendra Pachauri, the chair of the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, is not so sure.
He recently told an Indian audience, “of course, the developing countries will be exempted from any such restrictions, but the developed countries will certainly have to cut down on emissions.”
It is likely that Pachauri is right and Gore is wrong: neither China nor India will commit to significant cuts without a massive payoff.
Their reasons are entirely understandable.
The biggest factor is the massive cost and the tiny reward.
Reducing emissions is the only response to climate change that environmental campaigners talk about, despite the fact that repeated attempts to do so – in Rio in 1992 and in Kyoto in 1997 – failed to make a dent in emission levels.
Some believe that past agreements did not go far enough, but Kyoto actually turned out to be overly ambitious.
And Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao recently said, “it’s difficult for China to take quantified emission reduction quotas at the Copenhagen conference, because this country is still at an early stage of development.
Europe started its industrialization several hundred years ago, but for China, it has only been dozens of years.”
Some environmental campaigners argue that, given the effects of global warming, every nation must act.
But if one takes a closer look at China, this argument disintegrates.
Climate models show that for at least the rest of this century, China will actually benefit from global warming.
Warmer temperatures will boost agricultural production and improve health.
The number of lives lost in heat waves will increase, but the number of deaths saved in winter will grow much more rapidly: warming will have a more dramatic effect on minimum temperatures in winter than on maximum temperatures in summer.
There are few arguments for China and India to commit to carbon caps – and compelling reasons for them to resist pressure to do so.
Kyoto’s successor will not be successful unless China and India are somehow included.
To achieve that, the European Union has made the inevitable, almost ridiculous proposal of bribing developing nations to take part – at a cost of €175 billion annually by 2020.
In the midst of a financial crisis, it seems unbelievable that European citizens will bear the financial burden of paying off China and India.
The sadder thing, though, is that this money would be spent on methane collection from waste dumps in developing nations, instead of on helping those countries’ citizens deal with more pressing concerns like health and education. 
There is an alternative to spending so much to achieve so little.
Cutting carbon still costs a lot more than the good that it produces.
We need to make emission cuts much cheaper so that countries like China and India can afford to help the environment.
This means that we need to invest much more in research and development aimed at developing low-carbon energy.
If every country committed to spending 0.05% of its GDP exploring non-carbon-emitting energy technologies, this would translate into $25 billion per year, or ten times more than what the world spends now.
Yet, the total also would be seven times cheaper than the Kyoto Protocol, and many times cheaper than the Copenhagen Protocol is likely to be.
It would ensure that richer nations pay more, taking much of the political heat from the debate.
Decades of talks have failed to make any impact on carbon emissions.
Expecting China and India to make massive emission cuts for little benefit puts the Copenhagen meeting on a sure path to being another lost opportunity.
Yet, at the same time, the Chinese and Indian challenge could be the impetus we need to change direction, end our obsession with reducing emissions, and focus instead on research and development, which would be smarter and cheaper – and would actually make a difference.
Don’t Cry for Doha
CAMBRIDGE – Will they or won’t they?
Will the world’s trade ministers eventually sign a new multilateral trade agreement that reduces agricultural subsidies and industrial tariffs, or will they walk away empty-handed?
The saga has been ongoing since November 2001, when the current round of negotiations was launched in Doha, Qatar, with numerous subsequent ups and downs, near-collapses, and extensions.
The latest round of talks in Geneva has once again failed to produce an agreement.  Judging by what the financial press and some economists say, the stakes could not be higher.
Conclude this so-called “development round” successfully, and you will lift hundreds of millions of farmers in poor countries out of poverty and ensure that globalization remains alive.
Fail, and you will deal the world trading system a near-fatal blow, fostering disillusionment in the South and protectionism in the North.
And, as the editorialists hasten to remind us, the downside is especially large at a time when the world’s financial system is reeling under the sub-prime mortgage crisis and the United States is entering a recession.  
But look at the Doha agenda with a more detached set of eyes, and you wonder what all the fuss is about.
True, farm-support policies in rich countries tend to depress world prices, along with the incomes of agricultural producers in developing countries.
But for most farm products, the phasing out of these subsidies is likely to have only modest effects on world prices – at most a few percentage points.
This is small potatoes compared to the significant run-up in prices that world markets have been experiencing recently, and it would in any case be swamped by the high volatility to which these markets are normally subject.
While higher world farm prices help producers, they hurt urban households in developing countries, many of which are also poor.
That is why the recent spike in food prices has led many food-growing countries to impose export restrictions and has caused near panic among those concerned about global poverty.
It is hard to square these fears with the view that the Doha trade round could lift tens, if not hundreds, of millions out of poverty.
The best that can be said is that farm reform in rich countries would be a mixed blessing for the world’s poor.
Clear-cut gains exist only for a few commodities, such as cotton and sugar, which are not consumed in large quantities by poor households.
The big winners from farm reform in the US, the EU, and other rich countries would be their taxpayers and consumers, who have long paid for the subsidies and protections received by their farming compatriots.
But make no mistake: what we are talking about here is domestic policy reform and an internal redistribution of income.
This may be good on efficiency and even equity grounds.
But should it have become the primary preoccupation of the World Trade Organization?
What about industrial tariffs?
Rich countries have demanded sharp cuts in import tariffs by developing countries such as India and Brazil in return for phasing out their farm subsidies.
(Why they need to be bribed by poor countries to do what is good for them is an enduring mystery.)
But here, too, the potential benefits are slim.
Applied tariff rates in developing countries, while higher than in advanced countries, are already at an all-time low.
According to World Bank estimates, complete elimination of all merchandise trade restrictions would ultimately boost developing-country incomes by no more than 1%. The impact on developed-country incomes would be even smaller.
And, of course, the Doha Round would only reduce these barriers, not eliminate them altogether.
The Doha Round was constructed on a myth, namely that a negotiating agenda focused on agriculture would constitute a “development round.” This gave key constituencies what they wanted.
It provided rich-country governments and then-WTO Director General Mike Moore with an opportunity to gain the moral high ground over anti-globalization protesters. It gave the US a stick with which to tear down the EU’s common agricultural policy.
And it was tailor-made for the few middle-income developing countries (such as Brazil, Argentina, and Thailand) that are large agricultural exporters.
But the myth of a “development” round, promoted by trade officials and economists who espouse the “bicycle theory” of trade negotiations – the view that the trade regime can remain upright only with continuous progress in liberalization – backfired, because the US and key developing countries found it difficult to liberalize their farm sectors.
What ultimately led to the collapse of the latest round of negotiations was India’s refusal to accept rigid rules that it felt would put India’s agricultural smallholders in jeopardy.
More importantly, the fears underlying the bicycle theory are wildly inflated.
We live under the most liberal trade regime in history not because the WTO enforces it, but because important countries – rich and poor alike – find greater openness to be in their best interest.
The real risks lie elsewhere.
On one side is the danger that today’s alarmism will prove self-fulfilling – that trade officials and investors will turn the doomsday scenario into reality by panicking.
On the other side is the danger that a completed “development round” will fail to live up to the high expectations that it has spawned, further eroding the legitimacy of global trade rules over the longer run.
In the end, it may well be the atmospherics – psychology and expectations – rather than the actual economic results on the ground that will determine the outcomes.
So don’t cry for Doha.
It never was a development round, and tomorrow’s world will hardly look any different from yesterday’s.
Don’t Feed the Dragon
The European Union, after a three-year spat with President Bush, is keen to be regarded as a world player to be reckoned with.
Many EU leaders see newfound respect coming in the form of a “strategic partnership” with China that is designed to balance the power of the United States.
Some want that partnership to include trade in advanced weaponry—witness the recent push to remove the EU’s 15-year-old ban on arms sales to China.
Although America objects strongly, a number of Europeans shrug off any opposition.
But China is no ordinary trading partner.
If not openly committed to opposing Western values and interests, China’s interests in cowing Taiwan and in asserting regional hegemony across Asia certainly are not those of Europe and the West, not to mention Japan, India, and the rest of Asia.
Indeed, China stood with Russia, Belarus, and a few other despotic regimes in prematurely recognizing the thuggish, ballot-stuffing Viktor Yanukovych as President of Ukraine.
This should come as no surprise, as the Chinese government does not plan to hold free and fair elections soon. Indeed, perhaps Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, with those thousands of protesters in Kiev’s Independence Square served as a potent reminder to China’s leaders of the Tiananmen Square protests 15 years ago, and – in contrast to Ukraine – their own strategy of brutal repression.
If not as dark as 15 years ago, China’s human rights record remains abysmal.
The British Foreign Office’s annual human rights report for 2004, the most comprehensive in the EU, condemns China’s extensive use of the death penalty (even for such crimes as corruption, pimping, drug offenses, and tax fraud), its systematic torture of dissidents, and its restrictions on freedom of speech – including the Internet – and religion.
All of these abuses are raised repeatedly at EU-China summits, to little or no avail.
So is this the time to end the arms ban imposed by both Europe and America after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989?
China’s human rights record is not the only problem.
It is bad enough that no mechanism exists to prevent China’s government from using EU arms for internal repression. But nor does any mechanism exist that would stop China from re-exporting the weapons to places like North Korea.
Indeed, China has a track record as a serial proliferator, having helped Pakistan build its atomic bomb.
Its role in providing missile and rocket propulsion materials to Iran remains unclear.
Yet France and Germany, with Britain and Italy not far behind, say such criticism is outdated. (They are strongly opposed by Holland, the Scandinavian countries, and the former Communist countries of Eastern Europe, which are familiar with communist repression.)
Supporters of lifting the arms export ban argue that this litany of sins does not reflect China’s real improvements in human rights and penalizes European armaments jobs to the benefit of Russia, which enjoys a lively arms trade with its neighbor (something it might one day regret).
For France, lifting the embargo is also an important symbol, one that recognizes China’s role in fighting Islamist terrorism.
Libya had such EU restrictions lifted last October ostensibly for joining the fight against terrorism and abandoning its weapons of mass destruction.
In addition, those in favor of reviving EU-China arms trade see such sales as a stabilizer in bouts of political turbulence and are loath to let bad politics interfere with good business.
China apologists claim that the 1998 EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports is sufficient to limit arms sales. But they conveniently ignore the fact that the Code of Conduct is voluntary and thus not enforceable.
This is why the European Parliament voted across party and national lines in November against lifting the ban until the EU Code of Conduct is made binding.
Can anything pull the Atlantic alliance’s policies on arms exports together?
Trade with a country with China’s human rights record must not only make economic sense; it must also fit the wider aims of foreign policy.
That means, above all, avoiding trade that makes it more difficult to pursue those aims.
Just as American presidents looked foolish when they bent US foreign policy to the dictates of American wheat farmers in the 1970’s and 1980’s, European governments that are prepared to mortgage Asian security to a restless China also command no respect.
The lesson is clear: security interests must come before business interests.
So transatlantic coordination is needed, to ensure that any trade of sophisticated arms and weapons-related technologies with China does nothing to enhance China’s military power, and that competition between Western producers of goods that may legitimately be sold to China does not damage Western political unity.
The 2008 recession is not the only reason for this staggering figure; long-term political and policy choices are also to blame.
Globally, but especially for rapidly growing economies, the lesson is simple: avoid America’s private health-care model.
The US is one of the few high-income countries that does not finance health care through a publicly funded prepaid system.
On average, wealthier countries spend roughly 11% of their GDP on health, with more than 80% publicly financed and only 14% of spending taking place on a fee-for-service basis.
Public finance (or, in some cases, government-regulated cooperative insurance funds that amount to public financing) pays for most discretionary medical services, with private insurance supplementing only minimal extra services.
Most rich countries choose to finance their health care publicly for several reasons.
First, free-market health care is usually inequitable and inefficient.
Individual needs vary significantly, and private companies are often unwilling to insure the very people who need the most care (such as those who are already ill, or who have conditions like diabetes, which predispose them to other health problems).
Moreover, those who buy care – insurers and patients – are unlikely to have the information necessary to choose the safest and most effective treatments.
At the same time, public spending acts as a brake on overall spending, and prevents the rapid cost escalation to which America’s private insurance companies contribute.
The US spends 1% of its GDP annually simply to administer its complex, unwieldy insurance system.
Without reform of the type now before the Supreme Court, total US health expenditures will rise from 16% of GDP today to 25% by 2025.
The economic impact of the current system already is severe.
The last US census showed a marked increase in the number of Americans living below the poverty line, a fact closely related to lack of health insurance, which in turn reflects over-reliance on employer-based insurance coverage.
In emerging-market economies, governments should bear in mind five considerations when devising health-care systems.
First, investments in health provide an important safety net against poverty traps, especially in times of economic upheaval.
For example, each year, 37 million uninsured Indians fall below the poverty line because of catastrophic health expenditures (generally defined as costs exceeding 10% of a household’s total expenditures).
Second, public financing of health care frees the poor to use their money to satisfy other needs.
In low-income countries, half of all health-care spending (about 2.5% of GDP) is out-of-pocket (compared to 2% in middle-income countries).
This spending consumes a large proportion of poorer households’ income, precludes more productive household investments, creates few jobs, and often remains untaxed, as doctors and hospitals are frequently paid under the counter.
Third, publicly financing health could increase overall employment.
Canada’s provinces phased in national health insurance from 1961 to 1975.
Employment and wages rose where the program was introduced, even though average working hours were unchanged.
Provinces with high levels of private insurance coverage, on the other hand, had lower employment rates and slower wage growth.
More recently, Canada beat the US in a bid for a new Toyota plant, in part because private health-insurance costs in the US add several thousand dollars to the cost of manufacturing a car there.
Fourth, existing national health-care systems in wealthier countries can serve as models for emerging-market economies that choose to adopt similar systems.
Importantly, public finance need not mean only public delivery; private hospitals and clinics can sometimes deliver services more effectively.
Taiwan initiated a single-payer system in 1995, significantly curbing health-care costs and improving the population’s quality of life.
Mexico’s new universal health-insurance system was implemented first in the poorest parts of the country.
China, on the other hand, provides a sobering example of the consequences of withdrawing publicly financed health insurance.
In the early 1980’s, market reforms left roughly 100 million rural citizens without insurance, almost overnight.
Out-of-pocket costs skyrocketed, infant mortality rates stopped declining, and the disease surveillance system was weakened, which may have contributed to the SARS epidemic in 2002-2003, which took more than 900 lives worldwide and caused economic losses worth an estimated $60 billion.
The Chinese government has acknowledged that the reforms were a flop, and has committed to spending several billion dollars on publicly financed health care.
Finally, following the principle, “everyone is covered, but not everything is covered,” governments must investigate which services are most cost-effective, and which should not be publicly financed, because they are both expensive and ineffective.
The list of insured services can always grow in step with incomes and government revenues.
In particular, higher tobacco taxes yield a double benefit: they reduce smoking, a leading cause of adult death, and raise revenue.
China, India, and South Africa have all committed to adopting national health insurance.
Which country achieves this goal first will depend not only on revenue, but also on the political will to overcome vested interests.
It will also depend on institutions’ ability to design rational health care, monitor delivery, and properly assess new treatments.
Health-care costs in the US are exorbitant, with low value for money. One can only hope that “Obamacare,” together with the models being implemented by the US’s future competitors, will nudge the US to adopt a long overdue universal, publicly financed health-care system.
Don’t Follow The Fed
The US Federal Reserve faces a dilemma, for it needs to continue raising interest rates in the face of a hurricane-devastated economy.
The Fed’s failure to raise rates earlier thus holds a powerful lesson for the European Central Bank: after a prolonged period of monetary stability at unusually low interest rates, waiting too long to raise rates to more normal and appropriate levels holds dangerous consequences.
The Fed was late in beginning the interest-rate normalization process, and it is now paying a price.
The ECB must not make the same mistake, even bearing in mind that the two central banks operate in different milieus and under different constraints.
Warning signs of impending inflation abound across the euro zone.
Money-supply growth has been well above target levels for some time now, indicating excess liquidity.
September headline inflation, at 2.6%, is above the ECB’s 2% target ­– as is the latest forecast for 2006 inflation (updated forecasts will be released at the beginning of December).
“The period of wage moderation may be coming to an end,” warns Otmar Issing, the ECB’s chief economist, implying that soaring energy prices may now be feeding through into the overall price level (so-called “second-round effects”).
In these circumstances, there is no good reason to wait to raise interest rates.
The longer energy prices remain at their current lofty levels, the greater the probability that inflationary expectations will increase and that second-round effects will materialize.
Further procrastination on interest-rate normalization by the ECB could well lead to a nasty bout of inflation. This would be disastrous for Europe’s economic recovery, as the ECB would have no choice but to slam down hard on the monetary brakes.
No one wants this.
Better a 50-basis-point increase now – thereby allowing the economic recovery to continue by keeping inflation in check – than triple or quadruple that figure down the road.
The old adage that “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure” applies with particular force to monetary policy.
Judging from the outcome of last month’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council, that “ounce of prevention” appears to be right around the corner for the euro-zone economy.
Indeed, the pace of ECB warnings about the risks of inflation has quickened in recent months – the earlier “We are vigilant” became “We are particularly vigilant” in September, which became “Strong vigilance with regard to upside risks to price stability is warranted” in October.
The Governing Council is in danger of running out of adjectives – as well as credibility – if it does not act soon.
The tone of ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet’s comments in the Q & A section of the press conference following the October meeting was unusually hawkish.
Trichet appeared to be calling for a pre-emptive approach when he said, “We must not allow second-round effects to materialize.”
For the first time, the ECB president was willing to admit publicly that the Governing Council had discussed the pros and cons of a rate hike at the meeting.
Nonetheless, current interest rates were described as “still appropriate” in October, signaling that the ECB has not yet reached a decision to bite the bullet.
To be sure, an unexpected slowdown in economic activity or a strong rise in the value of the euro could postpone the inevitable rate hike.
But what seems clear is that the ECB used the October press conference to warn politicians, trade unions, and the markets that its long period of monetary-policy inactivity is coming to an end.
The exit process has begun.
Not everyone is happy with this news.
Politicians – like Jacques Chirac in France, Silvio Berlusconi in Italy, and ECOFIN (the finance ministers of the European Union’s member states) – continue to press for fixed, even lower, interest rates.
But it’s easy for politicians to be irresponsible about monetary policy.
They are not the ones who will be blamed for soaring prices, nor are they the ones who will have to force the inflation genie back into the bottle.
By constantly pushing for lower interest rates than the ECB can deliver, politicians set the central bank up as a scapegoat for Europe’s poor economic performance.
Europe is doing badly, they argue, not because of their own failure to lead the structural reform process, but because interest rates are too high.
At the same time, the ECB does not need to go nearly as far as the Fed, which has raised interest rates in increments of 25 basis points at 12 consecutive meetings, with still more to come.
For the ECB, an increase of 50 basis points could do the job at this point – after which rates could probably be put on hold for some time.
The Fed waited too long to start the normalization process, and, because it was more aggressive in lowering rates in the downward phase of the interest-rate cycle, it has had to be more aggressive in raising them in the upward phase.
This is not the type of volatile monetary policy that Europe wants or needs.
Don’t Forget Wim Duisenberg’s Legacy
The most surprising and controversial thing about last December’s rate hike by the European Central Bank was that, after two and a half years of keeping interest rates at exceptionally low levels, the bank ventured an increase of only 25 basis points with no promise of more to come.
Political pressure on Europe’s central bank may be the reason for that timid move.
Jean-Claude Trichet, the current ECB president, may be in the same job but not the same environment as his predecessor Wim Duisenberg, who famously remarked, “I hear the politicians, but I don’t listen.”
Political pressure on the ECB today is much greater than in Duisenberg’s time.
The political environment is much more hostile.
Some of this pressure may be seeping through and affecting ECB policy decisions.
This is an extremely negative development ­– and one of the central bank’s biggest challenges for 2006.
Not only will politicians’ influence be towards monetary excess, which of course is a serious enough matter for a bank whose primary mandate is price stability, but also the excess will constitute a serious barrier to structural reform, which is essential for European prosperity in a competitive global economy.
Increasingly, Europe’s politicians regard excess liquidity and economic reform as substitutes for one another.
The more the bank gives on liquidity, the less the politicians will do on reform.
Duisenberg recognized this linkage and held firm.
The ECB’s paltry rate hike in December, together with the supine promise of no plans for further monetary tightening, demonstrates that Trichet is no Duisenberg.
Europe’s finance ministers have played a clever game with the ECB.
Even though they were already resigned to a 25-basis-point rate increase, the politicians made a big show of being opposed to it, aiming to prevent what they really feared and what was certainly more warranted: a 50-basis-point hike and a warning of more on the way.
Their strategy worked.
Luxembourg’s finance minister, Jean-Claude Juncker, diplomatically declared after the December meeting that, “The result could have been worse.”
Indeed, even the markets were fooled, giving the ECB a good grade for its unremarkable rate hike.
Inflationary expectations, as measured by the rates on certain market instruments, actually fell after the hike, indicating increased confidence that the ECB will keep a lid on price pressures.
Although the meager rate hike was presented as a consensus of the ECB’s Governing Council, it soon became apparent that the decision had been controversial.
Some Council members, unhappy with Trichet’s dovish stance at the December press conference, made their displeasure known via the press soon after.
In an interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, for example, Bundesbank president Axel Weber made it clear that future rate hikes were very much on the table.
Others spoke out as well, and the futures markets quickly predicted another 25-basis-point rate hike in March.
The consensus alleged at the December press conference simply did not exist.
With political pressures encroaching on the bank’s policy decisions and a faux consensus, it is not surprising that there is now nostalgia in Frankfurt for earlier times and for Wim Duisenberg, even among his former critics.
Duisenberg’s great skills – under-appreciated by the press and public alike – were genuine consensus-building in a potentially divisive body and, in Trichet’s own words, “an exceptional ability to keep his nerve in some highly demanding and extremely hostile environments.”
In particular, the stubborn Dutchman understood the extreme danger if Europe’s top monetary authority became too cozy with Europe’s politicians, especially at a time when many EU finance ministers view economic reform and excess liquidity as being essentially the same thing.
Wim Duisenberg died last year, but his values, philosophy, and wisdom must not be allowed to die with him.
The New Year provides a perfect opportunity for Jean-Claude Trichet to resolve that, despite the more trying circumstances in which he must operate, his own policies and procedures will more faithfully reflect Duisenberg and his legacy.
Europe deserves no less.
Don’t Shut the Door on Africa
VIENNA – These days, a dollar won’t get you very far in a rich economy.
But in a poor country like the one I come from, Sierra-Leone, even half a dollar can save a life or feed an entire family.
Every penny invested in Africa counts today and to secure Africa’s future.
Experts are unanimous: the financial, food and energy crisis will hammer the “bottom billion” – the poorest in some 60 countries that survive on around a dollar a day – the hardest.
Because of the crisis, many African countries are likely to miss the 2015 deadline for the Millennium Development Goal of poverty reduction.
The continent has made some significant socio-economic gains over the last decade.
I’ve seen this for myself during recent travels to Benin, Ghana, Ethiopia, Egypt, Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, and South Africa.
These gains include, to name a few: free-market reforms, liberalization of economies, the steady introduction of pro-business environments, empowerment of women, education.
But most of these gains are now seriously threatened.
The financial crisis has dealt a blow to remittances.
Migrants are losing their jobs or struggling to set aside cash for their relatives back home.
The World Bank's latest global economic outlook suggests remittances will fall by 5% to 8% this year.
But this is just the tip of the iceberg of the tens of millions that can be tracked.
Foreign companies are pulling back capital, drying import and export financing.
Trade is declining.
The unemployment rate, especially among disadvantaged groups – young people and women – is staggering.
In Sierra-Leone alone, over 60% of the country’s youth are jobless.
A failure to help the &quot;bottom billion&quot; could fuel mass migration and global insecurity.
Ignoring the poorest nations means postponing a much larger crisis which will lead to famine, unrest, and massive migration.
Poverty is also an incubator for diseases, and the flow of legal and illegal migrants will carry them to rich nations.
Poverty is not just ‘their’ problem. It is ‘our’ problem too.
If developing countries collapse, there will be millions knocking on our front doors, and the first port of call will be Europe.
Such mass migration will severely hurt already strained social relations in some countries and lead to unpredictable consequences.
Only a coordinated global response can guarantee that in the long run people from the poorest billion will visit Europe as tourists and business partners, not as asylum seekers.