The point of carefully negotiating international agreements is that once they become law, they cannot be changed, except through formally agreed amendment processes.
That permanence gives them authority.
Yet the 195 signatories to the Paris agreement created a non-binding system for raising their individual obligations every five years.
In other words, the parties are encouraged – but not required – to submit increasingly stringent revisions of their so-called Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs), based on their own judgment.
The Paris agreement also abandons the idea of “compliance” as a stamp of legality or illegality.
The historic job of international lawyers and tribunals has been to determine whether a signatory to an international agreement is complying with its obligations.
The Paris agreement essentially substitutes transparency for compliance, creating an “enhanced transparency framework” designed “to build mutual trust and confidence and to promote effective implementation.”
A subsequent article of the agreement does create a compliance mechanism, but specifies that it will be “expert-based” – meaning that assessment teams will include climate scientists and policy experts, as well as lawyers.
Furthermore, it will be “facilitative,” functioning in a manner that is “transparent, non-adversarial, and non-punitive.”
That sounds more like a support group than a disciplinary committee.
In short, by traditional international legal standards, the Paris agreement is essentially a statement of good intentions, setting forth aspirational goals to limit global temperature rise to 2° Celsius – or, ideally, 1.5°C – above pre-industrial levels.
It is as far as could be from the Treaty of Vienna, the Treaty of Versailles, or even the treaties banning landmines and establishing the International Criminal Court.
And that is precisely why it has a good chance of working.
For starters, tackling a problem as complex and fast-moving as climate change would be impossible with permanent, binding commitments.
By the time an agreement could be hammered out – if it could be hammered out – the scale and features of the problem, not to mention the technologies that could be used to address it, would have changed.
The new kind of global governance that the Paris agreement exemplifies, which substitutes rolling processes for fixed rules, is far better suited to the kinds of global problems we face today.
Likewise, in a world of 195 diverse countries – from the desperately poor or conflict-ridden to the highly developed – top-down obligations can never be uniform enough to work.
Relying on bottom-up INDCs, which require the citizens and governments of each individual country to come together to determine what they can reasonably achieve, is far more promising.
But perhaps the most important shift made in the Paris agreement is from selective coercion to collectively supported competition.
Instead of suing one another for failure to comply with a legal obligation, countries will try to outdo one another in their efforts to help address a shared problem.
The transparency mechanism supports this shift, by allowing journalists, activists, scientists, concerned citizens, and climate-friendly businesses to engage in debates, publicize successes and failures, solicit help and advice, and offer support to lagging countries.
This highlights the final crucial feature of the new global governance model exemplified by the Paris agreement: The deal reached earlier this month, like the Conference of the Parties itself, is not only for governments.
Although the agreement calls on governments to continue providing public finance through the official Green Climate Fund, individuals and entities are also playing a major role.
For example, Bill Gates made global headlines during the negotiations when he announced a $2 billion fund to invest in clean energy, financed by the Breakthrough Energy Coalition, a group of 26 global philanthropists and the University of California.
The BEC heralds a new level of public-private partnership, with the investors working with the governments of some 20 countries – including the China, India, and the US – that already account for roughly 80% of global investment in clean energy and have now pledged to double their investments.
Negotiators in Paris recognized that business, philanthropy, civil society, academia, and ordinary people all have a role to play in addressing a major global challenge.
Change is happening even on the government side, with municipal authorities often significantly outpacing their national counterparts, operating through vehicles like the C-40, a “network of the world’s megacities committed to addressing climate change.”
The Paris agreement is a sprawling, rolling, overlapping set of national commitments brought about by a broad conglomeration of parties and stakeholders. It is not law.
It is a bold move toward public problem solving on a global scale.
And it is the only approach that could work.
Mengejar Pemenuhan Target Iklim yang Layak
BERLIN – Bulan Desember lalu di Paris, 195 negara mencapai konsensus tentang rencana pengendalian perubahan iklim di masa mendatang.
Akan tetapi, seperti kesepakatan lain yang terjadi di PBB, perjanjian yang disepakati memang memuat ambisi besar, namun jauh lebih sederhana ketika menyangkut komitmen dalam aksi nyata.
Perjanjian Paris tentang perubahan iklim memuat sebuah janji untuk mengendalikan pemanasan agar “tidak melebihi 2 derajat Celcius di atas tingkat pra-industri”.
Selain itu, berdasarkan permintaan negara-negara paling rentan di dunia, rumusan tersebut dilengkapi dengan kehendak untuk “mengedepankan upaya-upaya untuk menekan kenaikan suhu hingga 1,5º derajat Celcius.”
Permasalahannya adalah aspirasi-aspirasi yang ada tidak sejalan dengan komitmen yang terkandung di dalam perjanjian.
Bahkan sebaliknya, janji akan sistem mitigasi sukarela yang ditetapkan berdasarkan perjanjian tersebut justru membiarkan emisi global meningkat hingga tahun 2030 dan kemungkinan besar mengakibatkan pemanasan mencapai 3-3.5ºC pada tahun 2100.
Ini contoh terbaik adanya inkonsistensi dalam pembuatan kebijakan.
Permasalahannya terletak pada target-target yang diuraikan di dalam perjanjian.
Target seperti pembatasan pemanasan maksimum 1.5º or 2ºC tidak bisa secara efektif memandu pembuat kebijakan dan masyarakat.
Target tersebut ditujukan kepada keseluruhan sistem Bumi, bukan masing-masing aktor atau pemerintah.
Kegagalan dalam menyatakan secara eksplisit hal-hal yang harus dipenuhi masing-masing negara menjadikan pemimpin mendukung target-target yang tampak ambisius, padahal hanya mengejar upaya-upaya mitigasi yang pada kenyataannya tidak signifikan.
Tidak ada satu rumus ilmiah yang bisa menguraikan cara pembagian beban mitigasi global dengan adil diantara negara-negara di dunia yang memungkinkan setiap pemerintah menyatakan dengan penuh keyakinan bahwa kebijakan negaranya sejalan dengan target pembatasan suhu yang diberikan.
Evaluasi mengenai pemenuhan target hanya bisa dilaksanakan di tingkat global jadi negara tidak akan dipersalahkan jika luput dari target.
Akibatnya, setiap pertemuan puncak PBB tentang perubahan iklim ditutup dengan pernyataan kekhawatiran besar bahwa upaya keselurahan dinilai tidak memadai.
Hal ini perlu diubah.
Pendekatan konvensionalnya adalah menuntut konsistensi lebih besar dalam setiap diskusi, keputusan, dan tindakan.
Namun inkonsistensi ini inheren dalam pembuatan kebijakan.
Diplomat dan politisi memperlakukan diskusi, keputusan, dan tindakan secara terpisah demi menjawab tuntutan dari beragam pemangku kepentingan dan memaksimalkan dukungan eksternal terhadap lembaganya.
Dalam hal kebijakan perubahan iklim, sebagian besar pemerintah memilih posisi progresif selama diskusi dan pengambilan keputusan, namun sikap kehati-hatian ketika tiba waktunya untuk bertindak.
Target-target iklim yang ditetapkan PBB belum berfungsi sebagai prasyarat, melainkan sebagai pengganti tindakan.
Tapi ini bukan dalih untuk meninggalkan segala target iklim.
Pembuatan kebijakan jangka panjang yang rumit akan berhasil apabila sasaran-sasaran yang ambisius diberlakukan.
Tapi target tidak bisa berupa sasaran inspirasional yang samar; sebuah target harus tepat, bisa dievaluasi, mampu dicapai, dan memberi semangat.
Perjanjian Paris sendiri menawarkan satu pendekatan yang layak.
Bersembunyi di balik rumusan yang tidak diatur dengan jelas, target mitigasi ketiga telah ditetapkan: mewujudkan emisi nihil pada pertengahan abad.
Target emisi nihil menyerukan kepada pembuat kebijakan dan masyarakat tentang tindakan-tindakan yang harus dilakukan dan target ini menyangkut aktivitas manusia.
Tingkat emisi di masing-masing negara akan mencapai puncaknya, menurun, dan pada akhirnya mencapai nol.
Target tersebut memungkinkan adanya sistem yang transparan untuk mengevaluasi tindakan yang dilakukan, tidak terbatas pada pemerintah pusat saja, tapi juga pemerintah daerah, sektor perekonomian, perusahaan, dan bahkan individu.
Kelemahan atau kegagalan sangat dihindari sebab mudah sekali terlihat – dan harus dijelaskan kepada publik – apakah kadar emisi naik atau turun.
Target tersebut akan menempatkan seluruh infrastruktur baru berbasis bahan bakar fosil dalam pengawasan ketat; jika kita ingin menurunkan emisi, untuk apa membangun PLTU batubara lagi atau insulasi gedung yang buruk?
Visi bersama mengenai emisi nihil bahkan mungkin memacu kompetisi untuk mencapai garis finis tercepat.
Swedia hendak menyelesaikannya pada tahun 2045.
UK sudah mengumumkan bahwa negaranya siap merumuskan target emisi nihil sesegera mungkin.
Jerman pun sama barangkali setelah pemilihan umum.
Para ilmuwan lebih menyukai adanya ambang batas kestabilan iklim dan pembuat kebijakan lebih memilih simbol-simbol yang berpengaruh.
Itu sebabnya target penurunan suhu mendominasi diskursus iklim global.
Namun sejarah menunjukkan bahwa itu tidak serta-merta mengarah kepada tindakan.
Mengganti  ambang suhu suhu dengan upaya  mengurangi emisi hingga nol akan menjamin akuntabilitas dan meminimalisasi inkonsistensi pada politik.
Terdapat preseden mengenai pendekatan tersebut.
Protokol Montreal tentang perlindungan lapisan ozon umumnya mengatur tentang zat-zat berbahaya, berupaya untuk mempercepat penghapusannya, daripada menetapkan target kestabilan lapisan ozon.
Kesenjangan antara emisi dunia nyata dan tindakan yang diperlukan untuk menekan pemanasan agar tidak melampaui ambang batas yang ditetapkan sudah semakin besar.
PBB menugaskan Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change untuk melakukan kajian mendalam tentang cara-cara pemenuhan target 1.5°C yang kini tidak realistis.
Hal ini menyiratkan risiko bahwa kita akan menyia-nyiakan waktu berharga untuk lagi-lagi memperdebatkan sasaran di awang-awang.
Apapun target suhu yang kita tetapkan, emisi global harus segera memuncak dan lalu berkurang hingga mencapai angka nol.
Perjanjian Paris tentang perubahan iklim akan dikenang sebagai suatu keberhasilan jikalau kita berhasil mengalihkan fokus kita dari sekedar bicara menjadi aksi yang efektif.
Terrorism and Trust
LONDON – As the world comes to terms with the wider implications and consequences of the terrorist atrocity in Paris, an important story risks being lost in the welter of coverage and analysis: The increasingly vital role that private companies play in planning for and responding to emergencies.
And there’s more to the story than that.
As the wave of synchronized attacks unfolded, people around the world followed it in real time via Twitter, and Parisians reached out to those who found themselves stranded by posting offers of safe havens with the hashtags #PorteOuverte and #OpenDoor.
Those who wanted to be assured of the safety of family and friends looked to Facebook’s new Safety Check feature.
Google announced that calls to France were free of charge via Google Hangouts.
Governments around the world communicated with their citizens using social-media platforms: the United Kingdom’s embassy in France tweeted information for travelers, and the United States’ embassy there provided updates via Facebook.
But it wasn’t just technology companies that stepped up.
Ride-sharing companies get a lot of press nowadays, but when people needed to make their way safely out of areas where attacks were taking place, it was Paris taxi drivers who responded to the emergency by making their services available for free, supplementing public transportation.
More and more in our daily lives – communications, transportation, health care, energy, and much else – depends on services provided by the private, rather than the public, sector.
These companies have become a part of the fabric of our societies.
Emergencies merely call attention to it.
But with great power comes greater responsibility, and companies continue to find it difficult to grapple with this.
They have a responsibility to prepare for crises, including natural and manmade disasters, more diligently than ever before.
They have a responsibility to ensure that they are part of solutions to broader national and international challenges.
They have a responsibility, in short, to fulfill the obligations that arise from our dependence on them and from the trust we place in them, implicitly or explicitly.
The challenge is that the extent of companies’ responsibility has become clear at a time of growing distrust toward the private sector.
There are strong concerns about the amount of personal data we give to Facebook, Google, and other companies, enabling them to know too much about where we go, what we do, and whom we talk to.
And it isn’t just technology companies.
There are also the companies we depend on to make safe and reliable cars, generate our energy, and mine the raw materials to produce the things we use every day.
According to unpublished Ipsos MORI research that was made available to me recently, when it comes to judging a company, honesty and integrity are more important than ever.
Consumer confidence is being steadily eroded by a number of factors that lead people to question the extent to which they are valued.
So, even as we need companies to provide more and more vital services, from transportation to health care to evacuation plans, we trust them less and less.
That is hardly an overreaction to a few rare cases.
On the contrary, people are justifiably shocked at the steady stream of stories calling into question whether the companies that provide so many essential services in countries around the world deserve their confidence.
Most disturbing is the extent to which companies, so often stalwart defenders of the rule of law when it comes to their own rights, deliberately flout the law – heedless of the consequences – when it comes to maximizing profits.
The case of Volkswagen continues to beggar belief.
How could a major multinational company incorporate criminal behavior into its business strategy?
The recent investigations into whether Exxon Mobil deliberately covered up that it knew more about the risks of climate change are similarly damning.
As the responses to the terrorist attacks in Paris demonstrated, companies can do so much good and be responsible corporate citizens.
But there is an almost Jekyll and Hyde quality to them: The companies that make our low-cost clothes may produce them in dangerous sweatshops.
And the people companies helped so capably and generously during the emergency in Paris are the same people they betray and conceal information from at other times.
Of course, the attacks in Paris should be viewed, above all, in terms of geopolitics and security.
But there is a lesson for business – and the rest of us – as well.
We will all be better off when companies’ impulse to do the right in the worst of times defines how they behave all the time.
Realisme Radikal mengenai Perubahan Iklim
BERLIN – Politik arus utama, terlihat dari definisinya, tidak mampu mencerminkan perubahan mendasar.
Namun, Desember yang lalu di Paris, 196 pemerintah setuju untuk membatasi pemanasan global menjadi 1.5°C di atas suhu pra industri – sebuah tujuan yang menjaga janji untuk melakukan perubahan tersebut.
Untuk mencapainya, dibutuhkan penyelesaian tantangan-tantangan politik yang serius, yang tercermin dari fakta bahwa beberapa penyelesaian memberikan solusi yang akhirnya akan lebih merugikan daripada menguntungkan.
Satu strategi yang telah mencapai banyak momentum fokus pada keperluan untuk membuat intervensi teknologi berskala besar untuk mengendalikan termostat global.
Para pihak yang setuju dengan teknologi geo-engineeringberpendapat bahwa adaptasi konvensional dan upaya-upaya mitigasi tidak dapat mengurangi emisi secara cepat untuk mencegah pemanasan yang membahayakan.
Teknologi-teknologi seperti “penangkap dan penyimpan karbon” atau “carbon capture and storage” (CCS), menurut pendapat mereka, penting untuk membatasi kerusakan dan penderitaan manusia.
Panel Antar Pemerintah mengenai Perubahan Iklim juga terlihat setuju.
Dalam laporan penilaian kelimanya , panel tersebut membuat skenario untuk memenuhi tujuan-tujuan iklim Paris mengenai konsep “emisi negatif” – yang mana adalah kemampuan untuk menyedot kelebihan karbon dioksida ke luar atmosfer.
Namun pendekatan ini tidak memperhatikan masalah-masalah serius dalam pengembangan dan penggunaan teknologi-teknologi geo-engineering.
Pertimbangkanlah CCS, yang adalah proses menangkap buangan CO2 dari sumber-sumber besar seperti pembangkit listrik bertenaga bahan bakar dari fosil dan menyimpannya, misalnya, di dalam sebuah bentuk geologis bawah tanah, maka mencegahnya memasuki atmosfer.
Ini terdengar baik.
Namun yang membuatnya ekonomis adalah hal tersebut mampu meningkatkan pemulihan minyak kembali.
Dengan kata lain, satu-satunya cara untuk membuat CCS efektif secara biaya adalah untuk menggunakannya guna memperbesar masalah yang seharusnya diselesaikan.
Teknologi yang seharusnya menjadi penyelamat ini – bioenergi dengan penagkap dan penyimpan karbon atau bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) – tidak lebih baik .
BECCS dimulai dengan menghasilkan sejumlah besar biomass dari, katakanlah, pohon-pohon yang tumbuh dengan cepat yang secara alami menangkap CO2; tumbuhan-tumbuhan tersebut lalu diubah menjadi bahan bakar melalui pembakaran atau penyuilingan, dan emisi karbon yang dihasilkan ditangkap dan disembunyikan.
Namun, bionergi tidak netral karbon, dan peningkatan permintaan di Eropa terhadap biomass telah meningkatkan harga komoditas makanan dan pengabilan tanah di negara-negara berkembang.
Kenyataan-kenyataan ini membantu membujuk para ilmuwan seperti Kevin Anderson dan Glen Peters baru-baru ini untuk menyebut penghilangan karbon adalah “taruhan yang tidak adil dan beresiko tinggi.”
Bagaimana dengan proposal-proposal geo-engineering yang lain?
Solar Radiation Management (SRM) bertujuan untuk mengendalikan jumlah matahari yang menjangkau bumi, pada dasarnya menirukan efek letusan gunung api.
Ini dapat dicapai dengan memompa sulfat ke dalam stratosfer atau melalui “pencerahan awan lautan,” yang dapat membuat awan memantulkan lebih banya sinar matahari ke luar angkasa.
Namun melepaskan sulfat ke dalam stratosfer tidak mengurangi konsentrasi CO2; ini hanya menunda dampak sepanjang penyemprotan terus dilakukan.
Kemudian, suntikan sulfat ke belahan udara dapat menyebabkan kekeringan yang serius di kawasan Sahel Afrika, karena adanya pengurangan hujan yang tajam, sedangkan beberapa negara di Afrika akan mengalami lebih banyak hujan.
Dampak dari sistem musim hujan Asia juga bisa menjadi lebih besar.
Singkatnya, SRM dapat menghancurkan penghidupan jutaan orang.
Jika geo-engineering tidak dapat melindungi kita, apa yang dapat melindungi kita?
Pada dasarnya, ada beberapa langkah yang dapat diambil saat ini.
Langkah-langkah tersebut akan lebih merepotkan dan lebih menantang secara politis dibandingkan dengan geo-engineering.
Namun, akan bekerja.
Langkah pertama adalah moratorium tambang-tambang batu bara baru.
Jika semua pembangkit listrik yang bertenaga batu bara dibangun dan dioperasikan lebih lama dari tenggang pelayanan normal mereka selama 40 tahun, maka pembangkit-pembangkit tersebut sendiri akan mengeluarkan 240 miliar ton CO2 – lebih besar dari anggaran karbon yang tersisa .
Jika investasi tersebut dialokasikan kembali ke prduksi energi terbarukan yang terdesentralisasi, maka keuntungannya akan besar.
Kemudian, dengan hanya 10% populasi dunia bertanggung jawab atas hampir 50% emisi CO2 global, maka ada sebuah alasan yang kuat untuk mengimplementasikan strategi-strategi yang menargetkan penghasil-penghasil karbon dioksida terbesar.
Contohnya, tidak masuk akal bahwa maskapai penerbangan – yang hanya melayani 7% dari populasi dunia – dikecualikan dari pembayaran pajak bahan bakar, apalagi pada waktu-waktu di mana harga tiket sedang rendah-rendahnya.
Perubahan penggunaan lahan juga diperlukan.
Penilaian Internasional tahun 2009 mengenai Pengetahuan Pertanian, Ilmu dan Teknologi untuk Pembangunan membuka jalur menuju sistem pertanian yang baru – dengan keuntungan-keuntungan yang dapat diperluas selain di dalam kebijakan iklim saja.
Kita harus mengaplikasikan pengetahuan ini di seluruh dunia.
Di Eropa, sektor sampah akan berkontribusi terhadap ekonomi karbon rendah.
Dalam penelitian  terbaru yang dikomisikan oleh Zero Waste Europe, ditemukan bahwa implementasi optimal dari target sampah “paket ekonomi sirkular” Komisi Eropa dapat menghemat 190 juta ton CO2 per tahun bagi Uni Eropa.
Ini setara dengan emisi tahunan Belanda!
Cara-cara yang tersedia di sektor transportasi termasuk meningkatkan transportasi umum, meningkatkan penggunaan kereta untuk lalu-lintas pengangkutan, membuat jalur sepeda, dan mensubsidi sepeda untuk pengiriman barang.
Di Jerman, sebuah tindakan pintar dalam hal transportasi dapat mengurangi emisi sektor tersebut sampai dengan 95% pada tahun 2050.
Pesan kuat lainnya lagi adalah untuk melindungi dan memulihkan kembali ekosistem alami, yang dapat menyimpan  220-330 gigaton CO2 seluruh dunia .
Solusi-solusi di atas tidak ada yang akan langsung menyelesaikan masalah; namun, bersama-sama, hal-hal di atas dapat mengubah dunia menjadi tempat yang lebih baik.
Solusi-solusi geo-engineering bukanlah alternatif satu-satunya.
Hal-hal tersebut adalah respon terhadap ketidakmampuan politik dan ekonomi arus utama untuk mengatasi masalah tantangan iklim.
Daripada melakukan apa yang biasanya kita lakukan – sebuah tujuan yang tidak mungkin dicapai dan menghancurkan – kita harus membuktikan memampuan kita untuk membayangkan dan mencapai perubahan radikal.
Jika kita gagal, kita tidak boleh terkejut jika, hanya beberapa tahun dari sekarang, termostat planet ini ada dibawah kendali beberapa negara atau militer dan kepentingan-kepentingan ilmiah beberapa pihak saja.
Saat para pemimpin dunia bersidang untuk Konvensi Kerangka PBB Ke- 22 mengenai Perubahan Iklim untuk melaksanakan persetujuan Paris, mereka harus menolak perbaikan-perbaikan singkat geo-engineering – dan menunjukkan komitmen terhadap solusi-solusi yang sebenarnya.
A Fair, Efficient, and Feasible Climate Agreement
CAMBRIDGE – How should one evaluate the agreement reached in Paris this month at the United Nations climate change conference?
No sooner was the deal announced on December 12 than the debate erupted.
Some avid environmentalists were disappointed that the agreement did not commit firmly to limiting global warming to 1.5º Celsius above pre-industrial levels by 2050.
But such a commitment would not have been credible.
What emerged in Paris was in fact better, because the negotiators were able to agree on practical steps in the right direction.
Individual countries pledged to limit their emissions in the near term, with provisions for future monitoring and periodic reviews of targets.
This is far better than setting lofty goals for the distant future while giving little reason to think that they would be met.
The important thing is to get started.
In four key respects, the agreement is a good one for those who regard global climate change as an important problem and want to take feasible steps to address it.
First, and most important, participation is comprehensive, with 188 countries offering individual commitments, called Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs).
In the past, only rich countries were expected to reduce their greenhouse-gas emissions; developing countries were explicitly spared that within the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.
That had to change, partly because it is in developing countries, not the advanced economies, that emisssions are growing the fastest.
Furthermore, countries like the United States would not agree to limit their emissions if they feared that carbon-emitting industry would simply migrate to developing countries.
Second, the agreement includes a process of future assessment and revision of targets.
Every five years, the parties will take stock and renew the commitments.
Targets can be adjusted in light of future developments to be more or less aggressive, (probably more, if the scientists’ predictions are borne out).
Negotiations on the INDC revisions are to begin in 2018, even though the first set of targets is scheduled to take effect in 2020.
Third, the Paris deal takes steps toward transparency in monitoring, reporting, and verifying countries’ progress.
Starting in 2023, countries are to report every five years on compliance with their emissions targets.
The US and Europe had to push China and India to agree to this.
But without transparency, the INDCs would not be credible.
Fourth, the agreement contains mechanisms to facilitate international linkage, including scope for residents of rich countries to finance emissions reductions in poor countries.
This is important because it is cheaper to pay a poor country to refrain from building new coal-fired power plants than it is to shut down an existing plant in a rich country.
And achieving the first period’s INDCs at low cost will be an important determinant of countries’ willingness to take further steps in future periods.
Achieving more aggressive environmental goals, particularly limiting warming to 1.5ºC, or zero greenhouse-gas emissions in the second half of the century, would of course be desirable in terms of minimizing the risk of disaster scenarios.
In fact, the first INDCs, by themselves, are nowhere near enough even to limit warming to 2ºC (the global goal that was agreed in Cancún in 2010).
But proclaiming ambitious targets is very different from achieving them.
It is almost beside the point that the economic cost of pursuing a goal of 1.5ºC would be very high.
In any case, leaders can’t make credible commitments 35 years into the future.
And the plan needs to be credible if it is to influence myriad business decisions made today.
Some developing-country leaders may be displeased for another reason: the figure of $100 billion in finance from rich countries does not appear in the legally binding body of the agreement.
The rich countries did admit their moral responsibility to help small island states, for example, cope with “loss and damages” from sea-level rise.
But they rejected demands for formal acceptance of legal liability.
This was a reasonable outcome in a difficult situation.
Rich countries can’t deny that their past emissions have inflicted harm on the world.
In a domestic legal system, an entity whose land was, say, flooded would have a claim to compensation from the entity that had caused the damage.
But sovereign countries are not operating in such a system.
The $100 billion in finance has always seemed problematic.
The developing countries fear that the rich countries won’t deliver the money, at least not cash; and they are right.
The rich countries fear that such “reparations” would disappear into the pockets of local elites; and they, too, are right.
So it is better not to make promises.
The poor countries do have a strong case.
The average American still accounts for ten times the emissions of the average citizen of India, and India should not be deprived of the right to develop economically.
But the best way to address these fairness concerns is through the agreed emissions targets.
The efforts that richer countries promised should be – and generally are – greater than the efforts of poor countries. The richer a country is, the earlier the date at which its emissions should peak.
The richer it is, the more sharply its target should cut emissions relative to the baseline.
With targets that take into account their stage of development, poor countries can be paid for additional emissions cuts under the international linkage mechanisms.
In such ways, the Paris agreement ensures both fairness and efficiency.
Achieving it was a daunting challenge, and more challenges lie ahead.
But the negotiators’ success in converging on a plan that offers hope of practical progress is an unambiguous triumph.
Mengapa Energi Terbarukan Saja Tidak Cukup
NEW DELHI – Di Markas PBB di New York pada tanggal 22 April, para pemimpin dunia meratifikasi perjanjian perubahan iklim yang disepakati di Paris bulan Desember lalu.
Sebanyak 195 negara, dari negara terkaya hingga termiskin, kini sepakat untuk menekan pemanasan global di bawah 2°C dibandingkan masa pra-industri, dengan tujuan tidak melampaui 1.5°C. Mereka juga berkomitmen pada rencana aksi nasional (“intended nationally determined contributions” (kontribusi nasional), atau “INDCs”) untuk membatasi atau menurunkan emisi gas rumah kaca pada tahun 2030.
Ini merupakan prestasi besar namun dianggap belum mencukupi.
Faktanya, meskipun seluruh target INDC berhasil diwujudkan, bumi tetap akan mengalami pemanasan sekitar 2.7-3.4°C di atas tingkat pra-industri.
Untuk menjaga kenaikan suhu di bawah 2°C, penurunan emisi karbon pada tahun 2030 harus lebih dari target yang ditetapkan dalam INDC yaitu di atas 30%.
Ini merupakan tantangan besar, mengingat adanya kebutuhan atas pertumbuhan ekonomi yang tinggi di saat yang sama.
Sebelum menginjak akhir abad ini, kita harus berusaha memastikan semua penduduk dunia – mungkin nantinya berjumlah 10 miliar jiwa – mempunyai standar kehidupan yang saat ini hanya dinikmati oleh kaum 10% terkaya di dunia.
Ini memerlukan kenaikan konsumsi energi secara besar-besaran.
Rata-rata penduduk Afrika misalnya hanya menggunakan 10% energi dibandingkan rata-rata di Eropa.
Namun pada tahun 2050, kita harus mengurangi emisi GRK yang terkait dengan sektor energi sebanyak 70% dari tingkat di tahun 2010 dengan penurunan lebih besar perlu dilakukan demi mencapai emisi nihil pada tahun 2060.
Pemenuhan target-target ini memerlukan perbaikan dalam produktivitas energi (jumlah energi yang dihasilkan per unit energi yang dipakai) setidaknya 3% setiap tahun dan dekarbonisasi pasokan energi secara cepat, yang mana porsi energi nihil karbon bertambah setidaknya satu poin persentase per tahun.
Hal ini berarti percepatan upaya nasional secara besar-besaran.
Biaya tenaga surya turun 80% sejak tahun 2008.
Di beberapa tempat, kontrak-kontrak suplai baru menetapkan harga cukup rendah hingga $0.06 per kilowatt-jam dan menjadikan tenaga surya sepenuhnya bersaing dengan batubara dan gas alam.
Antara kini dan tahun 2030, INDC menunjukkan bahwa kapasitas energi terbarukan akan tumbuh empat kali lebih cepat dibandingkan kapasitas bahan bakar fosil, dimana 70% investasi baru pada energi terbarukan akan dilakukan di negara-negara berkembang dan emerging.
Investasi tersebut perlu disesuaikan dengan kemajuan cepat dalam teknologi baterai atau perangkat lain untuk memenuhi kebutuhan listrik dengan suplai yang bersifat intermiten.
Namun tidak diragukan lagi, pada pertengahan abad nanti, kita bisa membangun sistem listrik nihil karbon yang hemat biaya.
Akan tetapi energi nihil karbon, meskipun sangat penting, tidak cukup sebab listrik saat ini hanya menyumbangkan 20% dari total konsumsi energi global.
Perubahan yang lebih besar perlu dilakukan terhadap sistem energi global.
Transportasi darat dan udara, yang saat ini hampir sepenuhnya mengandalkan bahan bakar fosil berbentuk cair, menyumbangkan 30% dari total konsumsi energi.
Dekarbonisasi atas aktivitas-aktivitas tersebut memerlukan elektrifikasi atau penggunaan hidrogen atau biofuel.
Hal ini sangat mungkin dilakukan tapi membutuhkan waktu.
Penghangat ruangan/gedung adalah salah satu bidang lain yang memerlukan perubahan besar.
Disini, penggunaan listrik nihil karbon yang lebih tinggi, dibandingkan energi berbasis bahan bakar fosil, bisa berdampak besar.
Tapi juga ada peluang-peluang penting untuk merancang dan membangun gedung dan kota-kota yang lebih efisien.
Dengan penambahan jumlah populasi pada tahun 2050 yang diperkirakan mencapai 2.5 miliar jiwa, realisasi peluang yang ada menjadi sangat penting.
Akan tetapi, penggunaan energi oleh industri berat memunculkan tantangan-tantangan yang disering diabaikan.
Logam, bahan kimia, semen, dan plastik merupakan kerangka vital dalam ekonomi modern dan melibatkan proses-proses yang tidak bisa dielektrifikasi.
Dekarbonisasi mungkin memerlukan pemakaian teknologi carbon capture and storage (CCS), tapi materi-materi bangunan desain terbaru bisa mengurangi permintaan atas input yang tinggi emisi karbon.
Mengingat tantangan-tantangan di atas, tidak diragukan lagi bahan bakar fosil akan tetap berperan di sektor transportasi dan industri berat dalam beberapa waktu, walaupun perannya berkurang dalam hal pembangkitan listrik.
Bahkan untuk pembangkitan listrik, INDC negara-negara emerging economy menyiratkan investasi baru pada kapasitas gas dan batubara.
Secara total, INDC tersebut menunjukkan bahwa batubara masih akan berkontribusi pada 35% pembangkitan listrik di dunia pada tahun 2030.
Melihat besarnya porsi pembangkitan listrik dari batubara, kemungkinan besar itu tidak kompatibel dengan target di bawah 2°C. Selain itu, karena pembangkit listrik tenaga batubara dan gas bisa beroperasi selama 50 tahun atau lebih, investasi tersebut meningkatkan risiko mengunci tingkat emisi yang tidak kompatibel dengan target emisi atau memaksa write-off aset utama.
Kini tantangannya adalah mencari jalur yang masuk akal secara ekonomi sehingga memungkinkan negara-negara emerging economy untuk memenuhi kebutuhan energi nasional yang meningkat, sembari memastikan bahwa target-target iklim terpenuhi secara global.
Hal ini dimungkinkan secara teknologi, namun perlu adanya tindakan oleh berbagai aktor yang berbeda.
Pemerintah harus memainkan peran vital, namun perusahaan-perusahaan energi berbasis bahan bakar fosil yang sekarang beroperasi dan pendatang baru yang mengerahkan atau mengembangkan teknologi baru juga memiliki peranan yang sama.
LSM bisa membantu mengidentifikasi kebijakan-kebijakan yang diperlukan dan mendesak pemerintah dan industri untuk bertanggung jawab.
Konsumen individu juga penting sebab perilaku mereka membentuk permintaan atas energi.
Walaupun berbeda latar belakang, kepentingan ekonomi, dan sudut pandang, semua aktor ini harus terlibat dalam perdebatan intelektual yang mengakui segala kompleksitas dalam tantangan yang ada dihadapan mereka.
Tujuan bersamanya jelas: membangun perekonomian rendah karbon yang bisa menekan suhu global agar tidak melebihi 2°C dari suhu pra-industri, sembari mewujudkan kesejahteraan bagi 10 miliar penduduk dunia atau lebih.
Pasca-berlakunya Perjanjian Iklim Paris
KOPENHAGEN – Setelah diratifikasi India dan Uni Eropa, perjanjian Paris tentang perubahan iklim siap diberlakukan.
Namun bagian sulitnya segera muncul: mengubah komitmen politik yang terkandung di dalam perjanjian menjadi aksi nyata untuk mengurangi pemanasan global.
Perjanjian Paris, disepakati bulan Desember lalu, merupakan prestasi besar dan menampilkan kesatuan politik yang belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya sebagai upaya melawan salah satu ancaman terbesar dan paling pelik terhadap kemakmuran kita di masa depan.
Melalui keikutsertaan seluruh komunitas internasional dalam kerangka kerja yang relatif mengikat, perjanjian tersebut membentuk paradigma baru dalam tata kelola global.
Tetapi secara praktis, perjanjian tersebut tidak menjamin keberhasilan.
Naskah perjanjian tidak memuat perangkat untuk memastikan implementasi kebijakan dan tindakan yang diperlukan untuk mengendalikan pemanasan global agar tidak melebihi dua derajat Celcius di atas tingkat pra-industri, batas yang menjadi jantung perjanjian Paris.
Perjanjian tersebut hanya memberi kerangka kerja pelaporan dan pemeriksaan implementasi agenda nasional yang berbeda-beda, serta ketentuan-ketentuan yang bertujuan mendorong negara mencapai penurunan lebih besar.
Alih-alih menetapkan mekanisme penegakan untuk mengawal negara memenuhi targetnya, perjanjian Paris mengandalkan “facilitative dialogue” untuk memantau progres demi menjaga momentum.
Meskipun demikian, ketentuan tersebut belum diuji hingga tahun 2018 nanti.
Mengingat rumitnya kerja sama antar pemerintah di skala besar, penyusunan perjanjian global yang lebih ambisius dan bersifat mengikat akan sulit diraih, setidaknya tidak dalam waktu dekat.
Tetapi perubahan iklim tidak akan menunggu.
Efek-efeknya sudah dirasakan di seluruh penjuru dunia, bahkan kondisi cuaca ekstrem semakin sering bermunculan.
Faktanya, bukti menunjukkan bahwa efek-efek konsentrasi dari emisi gas rumah kaca mencapai tingkat tertinggi pada skenario pemodelan.
Para ilmuwan iklim kini memperingatkan bahwa peluang menjaga batas pemanasan hingga dua derajat semakin menipis, bahkan mungkin sudah terlambat.
Apabila kita ingin punya peluang mewujudkan target-target perubahan iklim, diperlukan aksi kuat sekarang untuk menurunkan emisi secara besar-besaran – aksi yang berjalan di luar perjanjian Paris.
Kita harus mengubah praktik bisnis secara fundamental dalam menghadapi para investor dan perusahaan yang mengabaikan pendekatan kehati-hatian menuju transisi rendah karbon.
Terdapat sejumlah tanda bahwa pergeseran pola pikir tengah berlangsung.
Berbagai upaya dan prakarsa untuk membangkitkan peralihan lebih cepat menuju praktik-praktik lebih hijau oleh perusahaan, investor, dan pasar modal semakin marak, dipelopori oleh pemimpin-pemimpin perusahaan yang bersemangat meraih profit dari transformasi tersebut.
Namun momentum yang tercipta masih jauh dari cukup, dan umumnya pasar modal masih belum memasukkan faktor-faktor iklim dan karbon ketika menetapkan harga aktiva dan menilai resiko.
Melalui pendekatan yang tepat, setiap perusahaan bisa membantu meraih target-target emisi yang dimuat dalam perjanjian Paris dan berkontribusi untuk merangsang kembali pertumbuhan dan mewujudkan Tujuan-tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan atau SDGs, yang disahkan PBB tahun lalu.
Sebagaimana ditegaskan dalam laporan terbaru yang dikeluarkan the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate (Komisi Global untuk Ekonomi dan Iklim), pendekatan tersebut harus berpusat pada investasi pada infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan.
Jelas bahwa investasi yang dilakukan sekarang di sektor infrastruktur, serta ekstraksi dan utilitas – akan berpengaruh besar pada emisi jangka panjang.
Pendekatan yang salah bisa dengan mudahnya mengekalkan dunia dalam perekonomian berbasis karbon untuk sepuluh tahun ke depan atau lebih, membuat kita menjauhi batas dua derajat.
Sebaliknya infrastruktur hijau atau green infrastructure akan membangun landasan bagi perekonomian yang lestari.
Laporan dari Komisi Global mengidentifikasi hambatan-hambatan utama dalam pembiayaan infrastruktur hijau dan merumuskan agenda untuk mengatasinya.
Dengan demikian, ini mewakili pendekatan baru untuk menghadirkan perubahan sistemis yang menampilkan dua macam cara unik.
Pertama, usulan agenda mengadopsi perspektif lebih holistik atas transformasi hijau.
Laporan tersebut memasukkan beberapa rekomendasi khusus mengenai hal-hal seperti cara beralih ke sistem rendah karbon; tapi dihadirkan dalam konteks prioritas lebih luas, seperti SDGs.
Dengan kata lain, agenda tersebut menghendaki penetapan transisi menuju ekonomi hijau atau green economy sebagai prioritas agenda politik, sekaligus menjadi komponen pokok dalam respon terhadap berbagai tantangan politik, sosial, dan ekonomi.
Kedua, rekomendasi-rekomendasi di dalamnya menekankan peluang bisnis yang muncul dari kekacauan ekonomi dunia saat ini.
Jika para investor menyadari manfaat keterlibatan sejak dini pada ekonomi baru, mereka akan lebih siap merangkul perubahan-perubahan yang diperlukan, sehingga membantu mempercepat transisi iklim yang sangat penting.
Pendekatan terbaru ini bisa membuat perbedaan, tidak terbatas pada bisnis saja.
Sebab yang saat ini dipertaruhkan adalah kemampuan kita memegang kendali atas masa depan kita dan dunia.
Pragmatisme Kebijakan Perubahan Iklim
BERLIN – Upaya diplomatik untuk menyusun perjanjian internasional tentang mitigasi perubahan iklim sedang mengalami perubahan fundamental.
Pendekatan top-down yang memandu upaya ini sejak tahun 1992 secara perlahan digantikan oleh model bottom-up.
Alih-alih mencoba untuk merumuskan kesepakatan berdasarkan pembatasan emisi gas rumah kaca yang mengikat secara hukum, pendekatan baru bergantung pada komitmen sukarela masing-masing negara untuk mengurangi kontribusi mereka terhadap perubahan iklim.
Di satu sisi ini ibarat pengakuan kalah; pendekatan semacam ini tidak mungkin bisa menekan kenaikan suhu global kurang dari 2° Celsius, yakni target yang ditetapkan PBB pada tahun 2010.
Akan tetapi, mengingat lambatnya kemajuan yang dicapai sejauh ini, langkah-langkah pragmatis yang diterapkan masing-masing negara mungkin jauh lebih produktif dibandingkan upaya mewujudkan grand bargain yang mustahil bisa dicapai.
Para negosiator internasional telah membuat kemajuan yang signifikan selama lima tahun terakhir, namun jauh dari keberhasilan mencapai perjanjian yang dapat memenuhi target 2°C. Akibatnya, para diplomat yang khawatir bahwa kegagalan mencapai kesepakatan global akan justru mendiskreditkan seluruh proses perundingan, kini menurunkan ambisi mereka.
Secara khusus, upaya menetapkan batas emisi yang lebih ketat perlahan dikesampingkan.
Fokusnya tidak lagi pada upaya yang diperlukan bagi lingkungan atau upaya yang dibutuhkan untuk mengendalikan perubahan iklim; namun pada upaya yang politically feasible – peluang dan keterbatasan dalam proses perundingan, terutama dengan tujuan memastikan partisipasi lebih luas.
Mengingat lambatnya kemajuan sejak konferensi perubahan iklim PBB yang pertama pada tahun 1995, perjanjijan apapun yang melibatkan semua anggota Konvensi Kerangka Kerja Perubahan Iklim PBB akan dianggap sebagai kesuksesan bersejarah.
Itu sebabnya, ketika para pemimpin dunia dan menteri lingkungan hidup sedang mempersiapkan diri untuk menghadiri konferensi perubahan iklim di Paris pada bulan November dan Desember, upaya membujuk negara-negara emitor terbesar untuk berkomitmen pada target penurunan emisi yang ambisius dan mengikat secara hukum tidak lagi realistis.
Pencemar terbesar di dunia – khususnya Tiongkok, India, dan Amerika Serikat – telah menyatakan dengan jelas bahwa mereka akan memutuskan sendiri tindakan-tindakan apa yang akan diambil.
Dengan menetapkan target mereka secara sepihak, kecil kemungkinan bagi negara-negara tersebut untuk terlibat lebih jauh dalam perundingan multilateral.
Tentu saja hanya sedikit diplomat yang akan membuat penyataan secara blak-blakan, sebab itu berarti mereka mengakui kegagalan kebijakan iklim PBB selama 20 tahun terakhir.
Sebaliknya, mereka cenderung menyusun pendekatan bottom-up bukan untuk menghapuskan paradigm top-down, tapi sebagai pelengkap pragmatis yang mengakomodasi beberapa emitor terbesar dan menciptakan kerangka kerja prakarsa iklim bagi pelaku di tingkat daerah, seperti kota-kota besar dan perusahaan.
Tetapi kenyataannya adalah pendekatan top-down sudah dikesampingkan.
Bagaimanapun juga, ciri khasnya bukan arena politik dimana kesepakatan akan dihasilkan (sistem PBB); tapi tujuan kebijakan yang menyeluruh (mencegah perubahan iklim yang berbahaya).
Dan jelas bahwa perundingan di Paris akan gagal memenuhi target 2°C yang ditetapkan pada tahun 2010 – atau ambang batas lainnya yang mengikat.
Ketika kontribusi lebih dari 160 negara yang telah menyerahkan komitmen mitigasi sukarelanya meningkat – disebut “intended nationally determined contributions” – skala kegagalan menjadi nyata.
Meskipun semua negara bersungguh-sungguh memenuhi janjinya, dunia akan mengalami kenaikan suhu setidaknya 3°C.
Memang, tujuan yang dinyatakan dalam perjanjian Paris akan berupaya “mempertahankan pencapaian target 2°C”.
Para diplomat berencana memasukkan “ratcheting-up mechanisms” yang memungkinkan peningkatan aspirasi secara bertahap.
Namun berkaca dari pengalaman sebelumnya, kecil kemungkinannya mekanisme tersebut dapat diberlakukan dalam sepuluh tahun ke depan; fungsi utamanya adalah memberikan penafsiran positif pada hasil yang mengecewakan dan memberi harapan pada kebijakan-kebijakan yang lebih ambisius.
Meskipun demikian kita perlu bersikap optimis: pragmatisme terbukti lebih kuat dibanding idealisme.
Setelah banyak tindakan untuk menetapkan batasan emisi yang ketat diupayakan selama lebih dari satu dekade, jelas bahwa pendekatan top-down telah gagal.
Penerapan pendekatan bottom-up merupakan pengakuan diam-diam bahwa negara tidak dapat dipaksa untuk mematuhi rezim yang ketat dan terpusat, walaupun rezim itu dibentuk berdasarkan bukti ilmiah.
Penerapan tindakan sukarela telah memicu kemajuan, terutama komitmen terkoordinasi oleh Amerika Serikat dan Tiongkok.
Karena pendekatan bottom-up menghormati cara-cara negara berdaulat akan bertindak di kancah internasional, maka pendekatan ini berpotensi menghasilkan momentum positif.
Sebagai besar pemerintah memprioritaskan kelangsungan hidup politik dan keberhasilan ekonomi jangka pendek, sehingga mereka akan berkontribusi pada aksi iklim global apabila pesaing-pesaing utama mereka melakukan hal yang sama.
Dengan demikian, kebangkitan pendekatan bottom-up dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim merupakan kemajuan yang berharga.
Dunia dengan suhu 3°C lebih hangat memang tidak sempurna, tapi masih lebih baik dibandingkan dunia yang menderita perubahan iklim yang terjadi di luar kendali.
The Climate’s Point of No Return
MADRID – When it comes to climate change, the world has reached a point of no return.
That may sound ominous, but it is precisely where we need to be: unable to continue retreading old ground, we must resolutely set our future path.
An important first step will come at the United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP 21) in Paris in November and December, where world leaders will agree on the most important international agreement on climate governance in more than 20 years.
Yet important decisions remain to be made in charting a course toward a new and dynamic low-carbon economy, one capable of supporting a fast-growing and increasingly prosperous global population in the long term.
With citizens, business, and governments worldwide finally recognizing the universal nature of climate change, the outlook for this year’s conference is substantially more positive than it was prior to the last attempt to reach a comprehensive global agreement, at the 2009 Copenhagen summit (COP 15).
To be sure, the challenge ahead is as broad as it is complex; but it is becoming increasingly clear that making the transition to a low-carbon economy will bring considerable economic benefits.
Consider urbanization.
In the next 15 years, the world’s cities are set to grow dramatically, becoming home to 60% of the world’s 8.5 billion people.
How those cities are designed will matter for both the environment and the economy.
The difference between Atlanta and Barcelona is a case in point.
The two cities have a similar number of residents, but Atlanta’s transport-related carbon-dioxide emissions exceed Barcelona’s by a factor of six.
A key reason for this is urban sprawl: with a built-up area nearly 12 times larger than Barcelona, Atlanta implicitly encourages widespread private-vehicle use, boosting emissions, congestion, and air pollution.
Compact, well-connected cities that feature efficient public transportation systems – cities like Barcelona – are healthier and more sustainable.
Moreover, the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate estimates that such cities could reduce capital requirements for urban infrastructure by more than $3 trillion over the next 15 years.
Cutting-edge technological developments – in renewable energy and hybrid or electric vehicles, for example – will be indispensable in building these cities (and, more broadly, a clean and efficient economy).
Although much research remains to be done, such technologies are increasingly accessible.
In bringing about change, however, vested interests are a formidable sparring partner.
Upending the status quo will be no easy feat.
As Bank of England Governor Mark Carney recently warned, when the world takes serious action to stop climate change – as it is expected to do this December – vast fossil-fuel assets will be left stranded.
The fact that those assets are a key tranche of many investment portfolios is an unavoidable reality, not a reason to reconsider.
Fortunately, public awareness of the effects of fossil-fuel consumption is growing.
On a macro level, the World Health Organization recently revised its estimate of the number of premature deaths due to air pollution to seven million annually.
On a micro level, the masks commonly worn in heavily polluted cities, such as in China, are a visible sign of the need for change.
Another challenge stems from the global nature of climate change.
It is a classic public-goods problem: in principle, it is in individual countries’ self-interest not to take action, while the rest of the world does.
Compounding the challenge further is the fact that the benefits of actions taken today accrue in the distant future.
Here, too, changing perceptions of climate change offer renewed hope for progress.
Spurred by increased public awareness and mounting evidence that national economies can reap net benefits from policies to mitigate climate change, governments worldwide are pledging to do so – and taking to multilateral forums to display those commitments.
So far, 155 countries – including large emitters – have submitted to the UN plans describing their “intended nationally determined contributions” (INDCs) to the fight against climate change.
India, the world’s third-largest emitter, has pledged to reduce emissions intensity by 33-35% from 2005 levels, and generate 40% of its power from non-fossil-fuel sources, by 2030.
Brazil promises that its greenhouse-gas emissions in 2025 will be 37% lower than in 2005, and 43% lower by 2030.
And the European Union has committed to a minimum emissions reduction of 40% from 1990 levels.
Perhaps most important, the United States and China – the world’s top two emitters, which together account for more than one-third of global greenhouse-gas emissions – have finally stepped up, announcing concrete climate commitments in a joint statement last year.
This injected significant momentum into global climate efforts.
Last month, Chinese President Xi Jinping went a step further, pledging to establish by 2017 a national market to set prices for CO2 emissions.
The document signed in Paris will be the first treaty of a new era.
Its hybrid governance structure – which combines top-down elements (primarily in monitoring and verification) with bottom-up commitments (the voluntary INDCs) – is revolutionary, as it enables us to avoid the deadlock that often characterizes large-scale multilateral governance processes.
Already, this new model has helped to encourage national participation and enhance transparency, with national policies being published openly on the UNFCCC website.
But one critical question remains unresolved: How can we ensure that these voluntary individual pledges add up to a collective solution to a global problem?
Current calculations indicate that if the submitted INDCs, covering nearly 90% of global emissions, are implemented, global warming will probably still exceed 2° Celsius (3.6° Fahrenheit) – the threshold beyond which climate change’s most disastrous consequences would be triggered.
It is therefore vital that negotiators in Paris work together to determine how to boost policy ambition.
At this point of no return, we must link national plans to global goals – and thereby ensure that we move in the right direction.
From Good Intentions to Deep Decarbonization
NEW YORK – In the run-up to the United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP21) in Paris, more than 150 governments submitted plans to reduce carbon emissions by 2030.
Many observers are asking whether these reductions are deep enough.
But there is an even more important question: Will the chosen path to 2030 provide the basis for ending greenhouse-gas emissions later in the century?
According to the scientific consensus, climate stabilization requires full decarbonization of our energy systems and zero net greenhouse-gas emissions by around 2070.
The G-7 has recognized that decarbonization – the only safe haven from disastrous climate change – is the ultimate goal this century.
And many heads of state from the G-20 and other countries have publicly declared their intention to pursue this path.
Yet the countries at COP21 are not yet negotiating decarbonization.
They are negotiating much more modest steps, to 2025 or 2030, called Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs).
The United States’ INDC, for example, commits the US to reduce CO2 emissions by 26-28%, relative to a 2005 baseline, by 2025.
Though the fact that more than 150 INDCs have been submitted represents an important achievement of the international climate negotiations, most pundits are asking whether the sum of these commitments is enough to keep global warming below the agreed limit of 2º Celsius (3.6º Fahrenheit).
They are debating, for example, whether the INDCs add up to a 25% or 30% reduction by 2030, and whether we need a 25%, 30%, or 40% reduction by then to be on track.
But the most important issue is whether countries will achieve their 2030 targets in a way that helps them to get to zero emissions by 2070 (full decarbonization).
If they merely pursue measures aimed at reducing emissions in the short term, they risk locking their economies into high levels of emissions after 2030.
The critical issue, in short, is not 2030, but what happens afterward.
There are reasons to worry.
There are two paths to 2030.
We might call the first path “deep decarbonization,” meaning steps to 2030 that prepare the way for much deeper steps after that.
The second path could be called the way of “low-hanging fruit” – easy ways to reduce emissions modestly, quickly, and at relatively low cost.
The first path might offer little low-hanging fruit; indeed, the low-hanging fruit can become a distraction or worse.
Here is the reason for worry.
The simplest way to reduce emissions to 2030 is by converting coal-fired power plants to gas-fired power plants.
The former emit about 1,000 grams of CO2 per kilowatt-hour; the latter emit around half of that.
During the coming 15 years, it would not be hard to build new gas-fired plants to replace today’s coal plants.
Another low-hanging fruit is great gains in the fuel efficiency of internal combustion engines, taking automobile mileage from, say, 35 miles per gallon in the US to 55 miles per gallon by 2025.
The problem is that gas-fired power plants and more efficient internal-combustion vehicles are not nearly enough to get to zero net emissions by 2070.
We need to get to around 50 grams per kilowatt-hour by 2050, not 500 grams per kilowatt-hour.
We need to get to zero-emission vehicles, not more efficient gas-burning vehicles, especially given that the number of vehicles worldwide could easily double by mid-century.
Deep decarbonization requires not natural gas and fuel-efficient vehicles, but zero-carbon electricity and electric vehicles charged on the zero-carbon electricity grid.
This more profound transformation, unlike the low-hanging fruit eyed today by many politicians, offers the only path to climate safety (that is, staying below the 2ºC limit).
By pursuing coal to gas, or more efficient gas-burning vehicles, we risk putting ourselves into a high-carbon trap.
The figure above illustrates the conundrum.
The low-hanging-fruit pathway (red) achieves a steep reduction by 2030.
It probably does so at lower cost than the deep-decarbonization pathway (green), because the conversion to zero-carbon electricity (for example, wind and solar power) and to electric vehicles might be more costly than a simple patch-up of our current technologies.
The problem is that the low-hanging-fruit pathway will achieve fewer reductions after 2030. It will lead into a dead end.
Only the deep-decarbonization pathway gets the economy to the necessary stage of decarbonization by 2050 and to zero net emissions by 2070.
The allure of the short-term fix is very powerful, especially to politicians watching the election cycle.
Yet it is a mirage.
In order for policymakers to understand what’s really at stake in decarbonization, and therefore what they should do today to avoid dead-end gimmicks and facile solutions, all governments should prepare commitments and plans not only to 2030 but also at least to 2050.
This is the main message of the Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project (DDPP), which has mobilized research teams in 16 of the largest greenhouse-gas emitters to prepare national Deep Decarbonization Pathways to mid-century.
The DDPP shows that deep decarbonization is technically feasible and affordable, and it has identified pathways to 2050 that avoid the traps and temptations of low-hanging fruit and put the major economies on track to full decarbonization by around 2070.
The pathways all rely on three pillars: major advances in energy efficiency, using smart materials and smart (information-based) systems; zero-carbon electricity, drawing upon each country’s best options, such as wind, solar, geothermal, hydro, nuclear, and carbon capture and storage; and fuel-switching from internal combustion engines to electric vehicles and other shifts to electrification or advanced biofuels.
A key question for Paris, therefore, is not whether governments achieve 25% or 30% reductions by 2030, but how they intend to do it.
For that, the Paris agreement should stipulate that every government will submit not only an INDC for 2030 but also a non-binding Deep Decarbonization Pathway to 2050.
The US and China have already signaled their interest in this approach.
In this way, the world can set a course toward decarbonization – and head off the climate catastrophe that awaits us if we don’t.
The French 9/11
PARIS – “France’s 9/11.” In the immediate aftermath of the massacre at the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, the comparison with Al Qaeda’s 2001 attack on the United States has taken hold across France.
Indeed, the January 7 attack was the most murderous France has known since the end of the Algerian War in 1962.
But how accurate is the analogy?
At first blush, the comparison seems artificial and far-fetched.
Twelve people died in Paris, whereas nearly 3,000 were killed in the attacks on New York and Washington, DC.
The attackers used Kalashnikovs, not hijacked planes.
And, unlike the 9/11 attackers, they were all citizens of the country they were attacking.
That is why the attack in Paris 2015 looks more like a combination of two other attacks: the London Underground bombing in 2005 (the terrorists were all national citizens) and the plot executed in Mumbai in 2008 (the terrorists used small arms and targeted people individually).
Yet, despite the major differences, the attacks in Paris and in New York share the same essence.
Both cities incarnate a similar universal dream.
Both are metaphors for light and freedom.
Both belong to the world, not only to their respective countries.
Moreover, in both cases, the targets chosen by the terrorists were highly symbolic.
In New York, the Twin Towers embodied capitalist ambition and achievement.
In Paris, Charlie Hebdo has given form to the spirit of democratic freedom: the ability to write, draw, and publish anything – even extreme (and at times vulgar) provocations.
There is a strong sense in Paris, as there was in New York, that the real target was Western civilization itself.
Like most Frenchmen, I say, out of disgust for the attack and empathy for the victims, Je suis Charlie – a phrase that recalls the newspaper Le Monde’s declaration, immediately after 9/11: Nous sommes tous Américains.
But I must admit that I did not always feel that way.
In 2005, I had reservations about the decision by the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten to publish a series of caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad – and about Charlie Hebdo’s choice to reproduce the cartoons the following year.
At the time, I felt that it was a dangerous and unnecessary – and thus politically irresponsible – provocation.
One does not play with matches next to a gas pipeline or a bundle of dynamite.
Our era is probably much more religious than the eighteenth century ever was.
To invoke Voltaire is one thing, I thought at the time, but to act responsibly may presuppose refraining from insulting what is most sacred to others, whether it be Christ, Muhammad, or the Shoah.
Today, given the nature of the attack, I leave those reservations behind, though I resist the temptation to sacralize the victims’ memories, as so many Frenchmen are doing.
In France, laïcité, wrongly translated in English as “secularism,” is the equivalent of a religion – the religion of the Republic.
For the cartoonists of Charlie Hebdo, religion was just another ideology, and they took aim at all three major monotheistic faiths (though perhaps with a greater emphasis on Islam, probably owing to its more visible fundamentalist face).
So far, a climate of national unity is prevailing in France, just as it did in America immediately after 9/11.
And that is as it should be, for unity is crucial to countering terrorists, whose priority is to create division, incite confrontation, and marginalize moderates.
Indeed, even Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, initially warned against the dangers of an anti-Muslim backlash, stating that a few lost young men were in no way representative of the majority of French Muslims.
But how long will national unity prevail?
The scars of colonialism are fresher in France than anywhere else in Europe; the country has Europe’s largest Muslim minority; and, with moderates seeming particularly weak and divided, the extreme right is cresting in opinion polls.
These ingredients could constitute a recipe for disaster.
Already, Le Pen appears to be reverting to form.
“National unity is a pathetic political maneuver,” she complained, after she was not invited to a rally the day after the attack.
But, if the right leaders are at the helm, the January 7 attack could spur a renewed sense of collective purpose and political revival.
We French must face this terrorist attack the same way the Americans did after 9/11: firmly and clearly, but also with responsibility.
That means, above all, that we must avoid becoming like America in 2003, when President George W. Bush extended the “global war on terror” to Iraq.
France’s task now is to uphold the values that have made it a target.
The Parkinson’s Mystery
JOHANNESBURG – Parkinson’s disease is a degenerative neurological disorder that affects around seven million people globally, and one million in the United States alone, usually afflicting people older than 50.
The disease strikes 2% of those over age 65, and 5-10% of cases occur in people under 50.
The cause remains unknown, preventing us from arresting the disease’s development – though environmental and occupational factors loom large in recent research.
Chinese and Indian texts from 1000 BC appear to describe a similar affliction.
But James Parkinson was the first to describe the disease in detail, in 1817.
Those developing Parkinson’s suffer slow movement, tremors, stiffness, difficulty walking, and gait instability.
As the disease progresses, it may affect thinking and can also cause behavioral and psychological problems, including dementia, sleep disturbances, and depression, as well as low blood pressure.
Though many of these symptoms can be ameliorated, therapeutic efficacy often wanes over time.
The symptoms result from the loss of brain cells generating the neurotransmitter dopamine.
Many studies demonstrate that these cells’ degeneration is preceded by cell loss in other brain regions, and even nerve cells in the gastrointestinal system.
This occurs decades before symptoms of motor impairment develop.
Ultimately, people with Parkinson’s develop progressive disability and die prematurely.
There is no treatment to slow the inevitable progression of the disease, and we do not know why the dopamine-generating brain cells begin to die off.
It is likely that Parkinson’s develops as a result of multiple risk factors.
Demographic traits are one major influence, with the highest rates found in older white men; those with African or Asian ancestry face a much lower risk.
Several gene mutations account for 5-10% of cases.
Certain diseases or symptoms – including constipation, loss of smell, malignant melanoma, and impaired rapid eye movement (REM) sleep – also appear to be associated with a higher risk of developing the disease.
However, most Parkinson’s cases arise without a known cause.
Interestingly, the variable most strongly associated with Parkinson’s is smoking, which actually reduces the risk, even after accounting for early death from smoking-related diseases.
Caffeine also appears to be associated with a modest reduction in Parkinson’s risk.
Despite our frustrating lack of knowledge about the causes of Parkinson’s, there are many promising areas of research.
Exposure to environmental and occupational factors – including pesticides, heavy metals, and solvents – probably play an important causal role, either independently or in tandem with a genetic predisposition to the disease.
In the 1980s, six drug addicts developed acute Parkinson-like symptoms after accidentally injecting drugs contaminated with MPTP, which is structurally similar to the pesticide paraquat.
Numerous studies then investigated the link between Parkinson’s risk and exposure to pesticides and herbicides; several, though not all, studies demonstrated an increased risk.
The most consistently implicated pesticides are paraquat, a broad-spectrum herbicide, and maneb, a fungicide that contains manganese.
The association between occupational exposure to manganese and Parkinson’s-like symptoms was first described in the early 1800s in four manganese-ore crushers.
Exposure to manganese can occur through dust, fumes, and air pollution.
It is used extensively in the steel and welding industries, where there is a high risk of overexposure to fumes.
Workers in ferromanganese smelters and nearby communities are at particular risk of developing Parkinson’s-like symptoms.
Lead, copper, and mercury have also been implicated as risk factors, though more research is needed to confirm these findings.
Overexposure to certain solvents may also increase the risk of Parkinson’s.
Occupational exposure to hydrocarbon-containing solvents, such as n-hexane, has been associated with earlier-age onset of Parkinson’s.
There is some evidence of increased risk associated with exposure to trichloroethylene, commonly used in the textile industry and in the manufacture of pesticides and other chemicals.
Up to one-third of America’s water supplies contain trichloroethylene, the most common organic contaminant of groundwater.
It is only by identifying the various causes of Parkinson’s that we will be able to develop preventive strategies.
For example, as studies begin to show consistent associations between the disease and environmental toxins, researchers will design long-term studies to demonstrate the benefit of reducing exposure to these agents, especially in high-risk communities.
Much work remains to be done.
But the benefits of solving the two-century-old mystery of Parkinson’s causes are potentially enormous.
Parties and Populists
This is not a good time for political parties, especially those with traditional orientations.
Gone are the times in the older democracies when one could count on two major parties – one social democratic, the other more to the right of center – dominating the political scene.
In the new democracies of the postcommunist world, such two-party systems never came into being.
Nowadays the two largest parties can rarely hope to muster two-thirds of the popular vote. Not infrequently they have to form a “grand coalition.”
The rest of the vote is split many ways – unless a political force emerges to cut right through the old party structures by arousing popular nationalist or socialist sentiments, or a combination of the two.
The decline of parties reflects the decline of class.
The old proletariat and the old bourgeoisie are gone. Instead we see what has sometimes been called a “levelled-in middle-class society,” albeit one with an important elite of the super-rich at one end and an underclass at the other.
The very structure of society has come to be shaky.
There are no social groups on which lasting organizations can be built.
People are, in a sense, socially homeless.
This means that their interests vary as situations change.
It also means that they no longer find a political home in parties, but react to situations, to vague moods, and above all to appeals to sentiments, if not resentments.
This is the condition in which populists thrive.
In some cases, they are individuals like President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela (and other Latin American leaders) or Italy’s ex-Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. Mostly they enter the political scene from the fringes but manage to form a highly personalized grouping, like Jörg Haider and his Austrian Freedom Party, Jean-Marie LePen and his French Nationalists, Andrzej Lepper and his Polish Peasant Party, or Prime Minister Robert Fico and his Direction in Slovakia.
Many other names could be added to the list.