Finally, to finance the plan, the EU could use its AAA borrowing capacity to issue long-term bonds.
The burden of servicing the bonds would be assigned to member states in inverse proportion to the number of asylum-seekers they accept.
Those countries that can successfully integrate refugees would reap an economic advantage; already, the German economy is growing significantly faster as a result of its willingness to accept Syrian refugees.
The ongoing exodus from Syria and other war-torn countries was long in the making, easy to foresee, and eminently manageable.
Fear-mongering nativists are taking advantage of the lack of a coordinated response to peddle a vision that runs counter to the values upon which the EU was built.
Their vision, if realized, would violate European law; already, it threatens to divide and destroy the EU.
For this reason, it is all the more urgent that the EU backs a comprehensive strategy to end the panic and stop the unnecessary human suffering.
Depression’s Advocates
BERKELEY – Back in the early days of the ongoing economic crisis, I had a line in my talks that sometimes got applause, usually got a laugh, and always gave people a reason for optimism.
Given the experience of Europe and the United States in the 1930s, I would say, policymakers would not make the same mistakes as their predecessors did during the Great Depression.
This time, we would make new, different, and, one hoped, lesser mistakes.
Unfortunately, that prediction turned out to be wrong.
Not only have policymakers in the eurozone insisted on repeating the blunders of the 1930s; they are poised to repeat them in a more brutal, more exaggerated, and more extended fashion.
I did not see that coming.
When the Greek debt crisis erupted in 2010, it seemed to me that the lessons of history were so obvious that the path to a resolution would be straightforward.
The logic was clear.
Had Greece not been a member of the eurozone, its best option would have been to default, restructure its debt, and depreciate its currency.
But, because the European Union did not want Greece to exit the eurozone (which would have been a major setback for Europe as a political project), Greece would be offered enough aid, support, debt forgiveness, and assistance with payments to offset any advantages it might gain by exiting the monetary union.
Instead, Greece’s creditors chose to tighten the screws.
As a result, Greece is likely much worse off today than it would have been had it abandoned the euro in 2010.
Iceland, which was hit by a financial crisis in 2008, provides the counterfactual.
Whereas Greece remains mired in depression, Iceland – which is not in the eurozone – has essentially recovered.
To be sure, as the American economist Barry Eichengreen argued in 2007, technical considerations make exiting the eurozone difficult, expensive, and dangerous.
But that is just one side of the ledger.
Using Iceland as our measuring stick, the cost to Greece of not exiting the eurozone is equivalent to 75% of a year’s GDP – and counting.
It is hard for me to believe that if Greece had abandoned the euro in 2010, the economic fallout would have amounted to even a quarter of that.
Furthermore, it seems equally improbable that the immediate impact of exiting the eurozone today would be larger than the long-run costs of remaining, given the insistence of Greece’s creditors on austerity.
That insistence reflects the attachment of policymakers in the EU – especially in Germany – to a conceptual framework that has led them consistently to underestimate the gravity of the situation and recommend policies that make matters worse.
In May 2010, Greece’s GDP had fallen by 4% year on year.
The EU and the European Central Bank predicted that the first bailout program would drive Greek GDP down by another 3% below 2010 levels, before the economy began to recover in 2012.
By March 2012, however, reality had set in.
With GDP headed to 12% below 2010 levels, a second program was put in place.
By the end of the year, GDP had fallen to 17% below 2010 levels.
Greece’s GDP is now 25% below its 2009 level.
And while some predict a recovery in 2016, I fail to see how any analysis of demand flows can justify that forecast.
The main reason the forecasts were so wrong is that those making them chronically underestimated the impact of government spending on the economy – especially when interest rates are near zero.
And yet the clear failure of austerity to restart the economy in Greece or the rest of the eurozone has not caused policymakers to rethink their approach.
Instead, they seem to be doubling down, on the theory that the deeper the crisis, the more successful the push for structural reforms will be.
Such reforms are needed to boost long-term growth, the thinking goes, and if that growth does not rapidly emerge, it is because the need for them was even greater than originally thought.
This, sadly, is the story of the 1930s as well.
As the American commentator Matthew Yglesias points out, Europe's major center-left parties at that time recognized that what was being done was not working, but nonetheless failed to offer an alternative.
“It was left to other parties with less worthy overall agendas – Hitler, for example – to step in and say that if the rules of the game led to prolonged spells of mass unemployment, then the rules of the game had to be changed.”
Today, Yglesias adds, Europe’s center-left politicians similarly “don’t have a strategy for changing the rules, and they don’t have the guts to tear up the rulebook.”
As a result, austerity reigns, and dissent is left to populists like France’s Marine Le Pen or Italy’s Beppe Grillo – whose economic proposals seem even less likely to be effective.
One would have thought we were capable of learning from the past, and that the Great Depression was important enough in European history that policymakers there would not be repeating its mistakes.
And yet, at the moment, that is precisely what seems to be happening.
Europe’s 4% Solution
WASHINGTON, DC – This is a momentous summer for Europe, because both the eurozone and the European Union could be in danger of unraveling, despite the important steps toward a banking union and direct recapitalization of Spanish banks taken at the June meeting of eurozone leaders.
Implementation of the proposed reforms is lagging; there may be legal challenges to the European Stability Mechanism in Germany; and the Netherlands and Finland seem to be backtracking on some parts of the agreement.
Even in a worst-case scenario, some degree of intra-European cooperation will surely survive.
But it is hard to see how the EU as we know it could survive even a partial disintegration of the eurozone.
Those who argue that one or more countries on the eurozone’s periphery should take a “holiday” from the euro underestimate both the economic and political repercussions of such a move.
The sense of failure, loss of trust, and the damage inflicted on so many if two or three countries had to leave would shake the entire Union.
One of the key challenges is the negative feedback loop between the weaknesses of many banks and the doubts about the peripheral countries’ sovereign debt.
The sovereign-debt and banking crises have become even more closely interlinked as banks bought greater amounts of their home countries’ sovereign debt.
That said, Europe’s disparities in production costs and competitiveness, reflected in the “problem” countries’ substantial current-account deficits, may prove to be an even more difficult problem to resolve.
Unit labor costs in Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Italy grew 20-30% faster than in Germany in the euro’s first decade, and somewhat faster than unit labor costs in northern Europe as a whole.
This disparity reflected some differences in productivity growth but even more so differences in wage growth.
Broadly speaking, capital inflows led to real revaluation and a lower domestic savings rate relative to investment in the southern countries, resulting in structural current-account deficits.
In Greece, large fiscal deficits accompanied and exacerbated this trend.
In Spain, the counterpart to the current-account deficit was private-sector borrowing.
The eurozone crisis will not be resolved until this internal imbalance is reduced to a sustainable level, which requires not only fiscal adjustment in the troubled peripheral economies, but also balance-of-payments adjustments across the eurozone as a whole.
That, in turn, implies the need for a real exchange-rate adjustment inside the eurozone, with peripheral countries’ production costs falling relative to those in the core.
Real exchange-rate adjustments inside a monetary union, or among countries with fixed exchange rates, can take place through inflation differentials.
The real value of the Chinese renminbi, for example, has appreciated considerably relative to the US dollar, despite limited nominal exchange-rate changes, because China’s domestic prices have risen faster than have prices in the United States.
A similar adjustment within the eurozone, assuming similar productivity performance, would require wages in the troubled peripheral countries to rise more slowly than in Germany for a number of years, thus restoring their competitiveness.
But, because Germany and the other northern surplus countries remain hawkish on price stability, real exchange-rate adjustment within the eurozone requires actual wage and price deflation in the distressed southern economies.
This pressure on the peripheral countries to deflate their already stagnant economies is turning into the eurozone’s greatest challenge.
The ECB’s provision of liquidity can buy time, but only real adjustment can cure the underlying problem.
That could be achieved with less wage contraction and loss of real income if productivity in the peripheral economies were to start growing significantly faster than in the core, thereby allowing prices to fall without the need for lower wages.
But, while structural reforms could undoubtedly lead over time to faster productivity growth, this is unlikely to happen in an environment in which credit is severely constrained, investment is plummeting, and many skilled young people emigrate.
Price deflation is not conducive to bringing about the sort of relative price changes that could accelerate reallocation of resources within the countries under stress and increase overall productivity.
Relative prices are much easier to change when there is modest inflation than when nominal price reductions are required.
The need for higher productivity in the troubled countries is undeniable; but achieving it in the current climate of extreme austerity and deflation is unlikely, given an atmosphere of latent, or open, social conflict.
These economic adjustments could occur much more smoothly if the eurozone as a whole were to pursue a more expansionary policy.
If the target inflation rate for the eurozone were to be set temporarily at, say 3.5%, and if the countries with current-account surpluses encouraged domestic inflation rates somewhat above the eurozone’s target, there could be real price adjustment within the eurozone without price deflation in the troubled countries.
There are finally some signs that Germany will welcome more rapid domestic wage growth and somewhat higher inflation.
This could and should be accompanied by an overall depreciation of the euro, though that would be no panacea.
High public-debt levels would still have to be reduced to create fiscal space and keep interest rates low enough to restore long-term confidence.
That means that courageous structural reforms must still be pursued in the peripheral countries – indeed, throughout Europe.
Similarly, the eurozone would still need to strengthen its firewalls, as well as its mechanisms for cooperation.
But a temporary and modestly higher inflation rate would facilitate the adjustment process and give reforms a chance to work.
Deflation discourages optimism about the future.
Shifting the entire adjustment burden onto peripheral countries with current-account deficits, while core countries continue to run surpluses, obstructs adjustment.
The eurozone’s inflation target is not a magic number, and it is irrational to let it determine the overall macroeconomic framework.
If lower is always better, why not set the target at 1%, or even zero?
In fact, there are times when 3-4% is better than 2%.
Europe is at such a moment.
Europe\u0027s Anchor of Stability
FRANKFURT – At less than ten years old, the euro is by all measures a young currency.
Yet it has become a reality of daily life for almost 320 million people in 15 European countries.
In the wake of the euro’s performance during this year’s global financial crisis, even its strongest critics cannot deny that the euro is an astounding success. 
This past summer, millions of travelers avoided paying cumbersome and expensive charges to change their currency.
But the advantage for trade and investment implied by the absence of foreign-exchange risks within the euro area is of greater economic importance.
The common currency completes the single market for the euro area’s member states.
The years 1992-1993 witnessed a dramatic crisis in the European Exchange Rate System.
Since that period the amount of capital ready to exploit any opportunity in foreign exchange markets has multiplied, which would make any comparable situation today much more dangerous.
Indeed, the crisis of the early 1990’s put the status quo within the EU common market at risk.
It is hard to believe that, with today’s vast capital flows, the single market would have survived a series of sharp and abrupt exchange-rate changes.
Changes in exchange rates of the type seen in 1991-1992 have a strong impact on relative prices for goods traded between different countries.
In countries that experienced strong currency appreciation, companies (and unions, for that matter) are exposed to a sudden and severe loss in competitiveness.
Such firms undoubtedly start to clamor for protection against supposedly “unfair” conditions.
True, the euro did not prevent risky investment decisions by European financial institutions or the consequences for financial markets of these decisions.
But it was never intended to do that.
Instead, the euro achieved what it was meant to achieve: the crisis was contained, because it could not inflict damage on foreign-exchange markets within the euro area.
After the outbreak of turbulence in financial markets last year, the European Central Bank immediately provided ample liquidity to calm the situation, and has continued to do so ever since.
At the same time, the ECB never lost sight of its main goal – maintaining price stability.
Today, however, it is hard to find anybody who does not consider the euro a great success, and the ECB has been so sure-footed that people now take that success for granted. 
But this was not a matter of good luck.
The fundamentals of the euro’s success are hard work, dedicated commitment to the common currency’s unique historical mission, and, not least, a well chosen monetary policy strategy.
But this success is no reason for complacency.
Major challenges lie ahead.
In the context of weakening growth, the Stability and Growth Pact will face a severe new test.
And, just as important, reforms aimed at ensuring greater flexibility of markets still lag behind what is needed to exploit fully the advantages of the single monetary policy.
Europe’s Anti-Ideological Election
PARIS – In each of the 27 states of the European Union, the campaign for the just concluded elections for the European Parliament occurred in an atmosphere of indifference, with voters, candidates, and the media focusing mostly on domestic issues.
Perhaps for precisely this reason, the abstention rate (an average of  57%), was the highest since the first vote in 1979, while the composition of the Parliament, with its right-wing majority, underwent no significant changes.
Following the 2004 elections, the European People’s Party (EPP), which regroups right and center right parties, held 288 MPs of the Parliament’s 785 seats.
In 2009, it is still the first force in the new parliament, with 267 deputies out of a total of 736: the decrease in its membership is also due to the stated commitment of the British Conservatives and the Czech right party to defect from the EPP to create their own party, with a stronger right-wing line. That opens the way to the possible return for a second term of José Manuel Barroso as president of the Commission.
This situation is paradoxical, as Europe is experiencing one of the worst economic crises in its history, with falling employment and living standards and rising worries about the future.
One should have expected the right-wing to be punished in countries where they govern. But that threat did not materialize.  The latest returns, indeed, show quite the opposite – in France, Italy, Poland, Denmark, and even Germany, where the CDU had won a large number of representatives in the 2004 elections.
Where the right is in opposition, such as in Spain and Portugal, it has improved its position.
On the other hand, the Socialist Party lost support almost everywhere, especially in countries – Spain, Portugal, Hungary, and the Netherlands – where it is in power.
The European socialist party (ESP), which held 215 deputies in the old parliament, secured only 160 seats.  In France and Denmark, where the Socialist Party is in opposition, it did no better.
The only exception is Greece. In France, the Socialist Party is almost outnumbered by Europe Ecologie, a green coalition gathered by the charismatic Daniel Cohn-Bendit.
The liberals remain the third force of the European parliament, with around 80 deputies, less than its previous 100 members.
The Greens appear to be the main beneficiaries of the elections and become the forth force: they will get around 55 seats, a gain of more than 10 seats.
Extreme parties also benefited from the elections, as well as some “eurosceptic” parties.
In France, Jean-Marie Le Pen’s party has been substantially weakened, but in the Netherlands, the anti–Islam party led by Geert Wilders won 17% of the votes, and in Austria, Denmark, Hungary, Slovakia, and even in the UK the far right did better than expected.
Indeed, the far-right British National Party won its first ever seat. But those worried about the rise of extremism in Europe should take some heart from the fact that there are many differences of views between these parties.
The predominance of the right in the future European Parliament calls for some explanation.
The main reason might be the poor fortunes of social-democratic parties, which now head only eight governments in the EU, despite their efforts since 2000 to minimize their waning influence within their traditional electorate – blue-collar workers and white-collar public-sector employees, middle managers, and civil servants.
This is true for Northern Europe’s large social-democratic parties (Denmark and Sweden) but also for parties that attempted to “modernize” themselves by combining socialism and liberalism (the UK and Spain), and even for Europe’s more traditional socialist parties (Belgium and France), which, despite local successes, have found it difficult to re-gain national power.
Meanwhile, those parties that intend to move left, such as die Linke in Germany, risk being overwhelmed by the radical anti-capitalist left.
It all seems as if, in the face of a crisis that calls into question decades of finance– driven capitalism and the dominance of free-market ideology, and despite widespread expectations of a revival of the welfare state, the social-democratic ideal has failed to convince a majority of Europeans that it can provide effective solutions.
When it comes to managing a deep and complex crisis, indeed, European voters tend to prefer the experience of conservative politicians.
This is all the more remarkable at a time when right-wing governments embrace regulation and even state intervention – the cornerstones of leftist ideologies.
At the same time, a request for transparency and a care for ecology are growing in the youngest generations across Europe, which explains the progress of the Green vote in many countries. 
In short, the global economic crisis has destabilized the ideological divides that have long defined the European political scene and has created new dividing lines. These new chasms might be the most important long term outcome of the European Parliament elections.
Europe\u0027s Calamity
It has happened.
After France and the Netherlands rejected the European Constitutional Treaty, Ireland’s “No” vote is the second and probably decisive blow against a united and strong Europe.
June 12, 2008, will have to be remembered as the day that made European history.
No matter what desperate rescue efforts will be undertaken, they cannot hide the fact that the European Union has left the world stage as a serious foreign policy player for at least ten years (if not for much longer).
This has happened at a time when the problems on the Balkans remain unresolved, America is experiencing a relative decline, Russia is regaining strength, Turkey’s domestic policy is taking a wrong turn, the Near East – the EU’s direct neighbor – threatens to explode, and the speed of China’s and India’s rise as emerging powers will define the global economy and politics of tomorrow.
Poor Europe!
With the Irish referendum, it has blindly and needlessly thrown itself into a political calamity.
Certainly, the EU will continue to exist and its institutions will continue to function, for better or worse, on the foundation of the Treaty of Nice.
But a proactive, strong Europe capable of determining its own fate will not be in the cards for quite some time.
When respectable British media such as Financial Times warn against a renewed European psychodrama and instead call for working toward a “Europe of results,” this should be regarded rather as a bad joke than a serious alternative.
Neither by cajoling nor by beating can a donkey be turned into a racehorse, unless one is secretly satisfied with the donkey.
And that is exactly Europe’s core problem: several members do not want more than a donkey.
Institutions, however, may be reformed if they no longer work, and this is exactly what the EU has been futilely trying to do for 20 years.
After 1989, history has made EU enlargement indispensable, but, without institutional reform, a Europe of 27 member states will inevitably deliver ever worse – and, to its citizens, increasingly disappointing – results.
What will be the consequences of the Irish referendum?
1) A strong European foreign policy, badly needed given the current state of the world, was buried on June 12, for the time being.
The nation states will have control over foreign policy once again.
The same is true for the democratization of the EU and thus for its greater proximity to, and acceptance by, ordinary citizens.
Given this point, the Irish decision is especially grotesque, because it rejected exactly what it called for.
2) The EU will stagnate.
The process of enlargement will either be delayed or stopped completely, because the EU can no longer admit new members on the basis of the “Nice constitution.”
The price will first be paid in the Balkans, and then by Turkey.
3) The EU’s smaller and mid-sized members, above all, will pay the price for the Irish decision when foreign policy becomes re-nationalized.
They will lose influence.
There is nothing really new in that if one only looks at the foreign policies of France and Great Britain.
But the case of Germany is different.
Germany has long seen its strategic interests from within the framework of an integrated EU.
A long-term blockade of a strong EU will necessarily change this viewpoint.
4) As an alternative to a large and strong EU, the German-French relationship will return to the fore.
In the future, close cooperation between Germany and France will more than ever form the old and new center of gravity in a blocked EU.
But, given the Treaty of Nice, this will lead to the EU’s internal disintegration and the formation of two camps: the EU of integration and the EU of the Common Market.
Basically, the old European Economic Community and the old European Free Trade Agreement will de facto emerge anew within the framework of the EU. 
5) Within the wider EU, solidarity threatens to decline.
Solidarity is not a one-way street.
Ireland, one of the countries that benefited the most in material terms from the idea of European unification, has rejected this idea.
Thus, negotiations on European financial transfers, the core of European solidarity, will be much tougher in the future than they were in the past (when they were already difficult enough).
The poorer EU countries will suffer from this development.
There is still a minuscule chance to avert the debacle if Ireland with its “No” vote remains isolated within the EU.
Beyond that, however, we should seriously consider whether, within the framework of the Treaty of Nice and on the basis of the Common Market, all parties involved and Europe would be better off parting ways: members favoring political integration should move on, while those satisfied with the Common Market should stay behind.  
This formula worked with the Monetary Union.
So why not with political integration?
At any rate, comprehensive opt-outs are better than long-lasting blockades and disintegration of the European project.
Europe’s Challenges in 2012
MADRID – For more than six decades, Europe’s integration process has been steadily evolving.
Each step, from the European Coal and Steel Community to today’s European Union, was taken with the common good in mind, and was based on shared values (democracy, human rights, and social justice) and goals (economic growth, prosperity, and the consolidation of Europe’s international prestige).
In the coming year, the result – the common rules and institutions that we Europeans have painstakingly forged – will be tested like never before.
In 2011, Europe’s foundations began to tremble, as the eurozone’s sovereign-debt crisis, set in motion by the global financial and economic crisis that erupted in 2008, moved from the eurozone’s periphery to its core countries.
The EU’s resilience – indeed, its very survival – is being called into question at a time of profound geopolitical transformation, in which a stronger Europe is essential.
Global power is shifting towards Asia and the Pacific.
New –&nbsp;and newly influential – non-state actors have appeared, in some cases (for example, terrorist organizations) jeopardizing states’ capacity to guarantee national security.
Nuclear proliferation is a growing menace, as shown by the International Atomic Energy Agency’s recent report on Iran.
Progress on other crucial global issues – particularly energy security and climate change – has been disappointing.
And the scourge of poverty and famine – most vividly urgent today in Somalia –&nbsp;continues to offend the very idea of civilization.
All of this stands in stark contrast with the predictions of a peaceful, predictable, and safe “post-historical” world that were popular at the Cold War’s end.
The Arab revolts, unthinkable a year ago, now challenge a regional order that has prevailed for more than a half-century.
The Japanese tsunami has called into question the future of nuclear energy worldwide.
And, perhaps most remarkably, the relative global decline of the United States, the world’s economic and security anchor since 1945, became unmistakable in 2011, reflected in political polarization and paralysis – and punctuated by a credit-rating downgrade.
So the strategic challenges facing the EU are vast.
To meet them, it must first restore its international credibility.
Since the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty in 2009, great advances have been made – and should continue to be made – toward reform and regulation of the financial system.
But many decisions came too late or have not gone far enough, with far-reaching consequences, because current tools are inadequate to address the seriousness of the crisis.
As the sovereign-debt crisis has proven, the euro requires mechanisms to confront asymmetrical shocks, which implies the creation of a common treasury.
An important first step in confronting the speculative attacks that eurozone economies suffer today is a commitment to greater risk-sharing and greater authority for the European Central Bank.
Confirmation of a stricter and more rigorous Stability Pact is also imperative to achieve greater integration.
Here, the EU summit in December was an important step forward in terms of deepening political union and strengthening governance among the eurozone’s member states.
Nevertheless, more will be needed to restore financial stability, such as enlarging the total firepower of the European Financial Stability Facility.
Moreover, if we want the EU to emerge strengthened from the crisis, it must also strike a better balance between austerity and pro-growth policies, because, without growth and higher employment, the eurozone’s problems cannot be resolved.
More importantly, the EU must tie its economic strategies to long-term competitiveness, which is ultimately determined by the value added to goods and services.
China and India have learned that lesson well. In less than 15 years, they will account for 20% of global spending on investment in research and development, more than twice their current share.
Meanwhile, the EU will run up against serious demographic constraints: in 2025, Europe will represent just 6.5% of the world’s population, compared to Asia’s 61%, and its average age will be 45, compared to 28 in India, 37 in China, and 38 in the US.
In the absence of adequate strategies for immigration, integration, health care, education, and much else, Europe’s growth and competitiveness will decline, and social tensions will worsen and multiply.
Europe must also contribute to reforming the traditional system of international relations.
The existing multilateral institutions were designed for a vanishing Western-centric world.
At the same time, the dispersion of power, the degree of interdependence, and the sheer dimension of the challenges confronting the world require effective, accountable, and legitimate global governance.
The inability to achieve a consensus on acute issues, such as Syria’s internal repression, or on chronic problems, like climate change, highlights the (increasing) complexity of global governance and responsibility.
Accommodating today’s institutions to the new global powers is a key challenge that cannot be postponed further in 2012.
An example is the IMF’s general revision of quotas, due in 2014.
Here, no one is better positioned than Europe to advocate for effective multilateralism and facilitate agreement and adjustment, by adopting a common position to correct today’s overrepresentation.
Speaking clearly will enable us to promote our interests more successfully by developing partnerships not only with traditional allies, like the US, but also with new leaders, like China and Brazil, and strategic players, like Turkey and Russia – and with the increasingly important regional blocs that are forming around them.
In the Middle East – a region that, unlike Eastern Europe, has no landing strip – our support is essential to the construction of a new regional framework.
No one claims that meeting all of these challenges will be easy.
All roads have ups and downs, just as every crisis imparts a lesson.
In 2012, the lesson should be the need for greater political integration and financial regulation, a legitimate and transparent institutional framework, and consensus.
All problems can be worked out if we keep the lights on high and analyze the situation with a clear strategic vision.
Europe’s Competitiveness Shell Game
BRUSSELS – For seasoned observers of Europe’s economy, the most recent European Union summit delivered a bizarre sense of déjà vu.
Little more than a decade ago, European leaders announced to great fanfare the “Lisbon Agenda,” a policy blueprint to make Europe “the most competitive, knowledge-based economy in the world.” The new “Competitiveness Pact,” proposed at the EU summit by France and Germany, did not make the same pretensions to global grandeur, but was instead sold as a step required to ensure the survival of the euro.
With the exception of what appears to be a covert effort to force EU countries to raise corporate taxes to French and German levels, there is ostensibly nothing unreasonable in the Competitiveness Pact.
Raising the retirement age to 67, abolishing wage indexation, and compelling countries to enshrine a debt brake in their national constitutions are reasonable measures to enhance competitiveness and restore confidence in the euro.
Unfortunately, however, government leaders have apparently learned nothing from the lessons of the failed Lisbon Agenda.
Indeed, the current plans seem doomed to fail for two reasons.
First, a credible policy agenda needs firm targets with clear deadlines.
But, notwithstanding their leadership pose vis-à-vis the Competitiveness Pact, the French have already distanced themselves from the commitment to raise the retirement age to 67.
According to Bloomberg, a French official told reporters at the summit that there was no question of that after the retirement age was lifted to 62 from 60 last year.
Given the huge public protests sparked by that move, the official’s statement seems eminently believable.
The likely outcome – in typical European, consensus-driven fashion – will be to forgo deadlines and concrete targets in favor of an ambiguous, open-ended pledge to undertake further pension reform.
Similar exceptions will probably be made for other countries that cannot reconcile aspects of the new pact with their national circumstances.
Belgium, for example, insists on its system of automatic wage indexing.
After every country has received its “opt-out,” and the Competitiveness Pact’s targets have been sufficiently diluted to ensure its passage, there will most likely be very little of substance left.
Second, targets need to be not only specific, but also binding.
Sanctions for non-compliance must be enforced – without political meddling.
One of the most important lessons of the Lisbon Agenda is that the so-called Open Method of Coordination – a harmless peer-review procedure without repercussions for non-performance – is clearly the wrong approach to kick-starting national-level reforms.
But even where the European Commission had the legislative tools and political mandate to impose sanctions – for example, to punish non-compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact – member states managed to avoid punishment by “reforming” the requirements.
Indeed, Germany and France spearheaded the effort to make the Stability and Growth Pact more “flexible” when they could no longer comply with its 3%-of-GDP fiscal-deficit ceiling.
It is this history that makes the current moves to sideline the European Commission in enforcing the Competitiveness Pact suspicious.
Organized purely as an intergovernmental policy program, the pact cannot work, because EU member states cannot be trusted to monitor their own performance and enforce sanctions on their peers – or on themselves.
Such a system would be the political equivalent of letting the inmates guard the prison.
In fact, the Competitiveness Pact’s failure even to mention the Europe 2020 strategy, which EU leaders enacted less than a year ago as a blueprint for economic development, reinforces the impression of uncoordinated, ad hoc, and downright erratic policymaking that is heavy on theatrics and light on implementation.
The lack of consensus on basic features of an economic framework – be it a retirement age commensurate with Europe’s demographic outlook or a legislative commitment to budgetary discipline – makes one wonder how eurozone countries could enter a monetary union in the first place.
That question is in the past, of course, but publicly demonstrating the eurozone’s arrested convergence is bound to undermine confidence in the common currency further – and at a most unfortunate moment.
Just as financial markets seem to have calmed, European leaders have once again raised expectations of a major policy move – only to see yet another summit devolve into squabbling.
It is hard to imagine how Europe’s policy differences can be overcome by the leaders’ self-imposed March deadline, when the next summit will take place.
One thing is certain: it will require a lot more than a warmed-over Lisbon Agenda, with easy targets and toothless enforcement, to restore confidence in the euro and safeguard the monetary union.
Europe’s Conscience Police
The story of the rejection last autumn of my appointment to be a member of the European Commission is notorious.
Nominated to the Commission by the Italian Government, I was compelled to withdraw because of some allegedly homophobic remarks I was said to have made before the European Parliament’s Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice, and Home Affairs.
Now that the dust from that dispute has settled, and with a new Commission in place, it is time to ask what lessons can be drawn from this affair.
The first lesson concerns the indispensability in politics of accurate information and reporting.
Democracy works only if there is a fair reporting of the issues being debated.
Of course, everyone is free to comment on and evaluate events as he or she pleases.
But a high standard of fidelity to the truth is needed in the media; otherwise, debates become too distorted for citizens to evaluate correctly their meaning.
Reporters are not entitled to so twist the facts as to reinvent them.
In my case, the main charge against me was invented: I made no homophobic statement. Nor did I did introduce the issue of homosexuality into the debate over my appointment.
My opponents did.
I did not introduce the emotionally charged word “sin” and tie it to homosexuality in the debate.
Once again, my foes did this.
What I said, instead, was this: I might, as a practicing Roman Catholic who adheres to his Church’s teachings, think that homosexuality is a sin.
This belief could not be construed to have any influence on my decisions, unless I also said and believed that homosexuality is also a crime.
But I said nothing of the sort.
A liberal society is a society in which people holding different moral opinions are bound together through a common rule of law.
In the fields of both law and politics, I have consistently and clearly supported the principle of non-discrimination.
The distinction that I was drawing in my testimony, between law and morals, was not accepted. Worse, it was turned into a caricature, and then declared false.
Indeed, the committee entered in the sphere of moral conscience by stating that anyone who does not adhere to a positive moral evaluation of homosexuality is unfit to serve as a European commissioner.
This means that anyone holding to the moral doctrines of most Christian churches should nowadays be considered a second-class citizen in the European Union.
According to this principle, Konrad Adenauer, Robert Schuman, and Alcide de Gasperi – three of the EU’s founding fathers – would not measure up.
What is wrong with the fact that a parliamentary committee passes a political judgment against a Commissioner for purely political reasons?
The rejection of my nomination was, according to many, just another political battle: you win some, you lose some, but you cannot say that you have been unfairly discriminated against simply because you lost.
But the European Commission is not accountable to the European Parliament in the same way that a national government is accountable to its parliament.
The EU’s member governments name the members of the European Commission, and the Parliament lacks an explicit right to veto them.
A hearing over a nomination to be a Commissioner before an EU parliamentary committee should simply examine whether the person is competent in the area he or she is to oversee on the Commission, and whether there are elements of moral indignity – i.e., such obvious moral failings as to be disqualifying.
Now it seems that, according to the committee that rejected my nomination, adhering to the principles of most Christian churches is a cause for such a “moral” disqualification.
The implication of this position is profound and shocking.
If it were generally accepted, it would imply that the EU now holds official moral doctrines, and that allegiance to these doctrines is required in order to exercise the full right of citizens to serve in a public capacity.
That implication is intolerable, and it will progressively weaken and divide the EU through a type of semi-official hostility to religious faith.
Moreover, the demand for such an allegiance is a renunciation of one of the most important steps in Europe’s development.
It has been roughly 300 years since religious people came to understand that being of a different faith, or being agnostic, did not disqualify one from public office.
If the moral test that I endured stands, it means that Europe has come full circle: agnostics are no longer willing to accept that being religious – and having different moral views – should not bar someone from holding an official post.
I hope that the European Parliament’s Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice, and Home Affairs will reconsider its behavior, and that the “Buttiglione affair” will remain only an ordinary political injustice against a single individual rather than the harbinger of second-class citizenship for religious believers.
If, on the other hand, the European Parliament’s members follow through on the logic of my case – if my shunning becomes the basis for a consistent policy – the EU will be on its way to creating a kind of morality police and launching a modern-day inquisition, one that crassly violates both freedom of religion and freedom of conscience.
The European Oasis
PARIS – Are non-Europeans much less pessimistic about Europe than Europeans themselves?
Could distance be a prerequisite for a more balanced view of the continent’s predicament?
In an interview a few months ago, Wang Hongzhang, the chairman of China Construction Bank, indirectly expressed his subdued enthusiasm for Europe.
Quoting the Chinese proverb, “A starved camel is still bigger than a horse,” he went on to say that Europe’s economies are much stronger than many people believe.
And, without saying so explicitly, he suggested that the time was right to go on a European buying spree at the right price.
Of course, not everyone would share this optimistic vision.
Across the English Channel, British Euroskeptics rejoice that they have kept their distance from a “sinking ship.”
But, while The Economist recently described France as being “in denial,” the same could be said of the United Kingdom.
True, the French had neither the Olympic Games nor a royal celebration this year; but, when it comes to the state of their economies, the two countries are largely in the same boat.
If one travels to America or Asia, as I did this autumn, Europe’s image becomes selectively brighter: while it continues to be perceived as a positive model, it is no longer considered a global actor.
Seen from the United States, Europe may no longer be a problem, but it is not considered a part of any solution to the world’s problems, either – with the possible exception of those that concern Europe directly (and, even then, doubts linger).
Yet, for many international investors, Europe continues to be, or is once again, a risk worth taking, if not – as in the case of Wang – a golden opportunity.
In a time of growing complexity – and thus uncertainty – investors want to hedge their bets.
At least some of the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) appear to be running out of steam economically; and, while new emerging powers, such as Mexico, are tempting, they may prove to be more fragile than they look.
In this context, Europe may be a tired, aging, and depressed continent, but, as its luxury and aeronautics industries attest, it would be premature to bury it.
Relative decline is obvious: Europe accounted for 20% of the world’s population at the beginning of the eighteenth century, but only around 7% today, while its share is expected to be even lower in 2050.
But demography is not destiny: a small population has not prevented Singapore from sustaining a hyper-competitive economy.
Europe may not be a source of economic inspiration, but it still makes people dream.
It is perceived as a model of “civility.”
Whatever their other disagreements, Chinese and Japanese concur on one point: if Asia today, with its rising nationalist tensions, evokes Europe in the first half of the twentieth century, it is precisely because Asia has not embarked on a reconciliation process such as that which enabled France and Germany to transcend their centuries-old rivalry.
Likewise, Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, may emphasize the specificity of “Russian civilization” in a manner evocative of nineteenth-century anti-Western thinkers; but many in the Russian elite still consider the European Union, despite its many weaknesses, the most civilized model of governance that exists.
When Chinese seek a benchmark model for social protection, they go on study trips to Scandinavia.
But can Europe remain a model if it is no longer a serious geopolitical actor?
When US officials say to the Europeans, “We need you,” what they mean is quite minimal: “Please do not collapse and bring down the global economy with you.”
Europeans have become the Japanese of the West – financial contributors who at best play a supporting role in global strategic affairs.
For example, if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can still be resolved, a solution can come only with strong US involvement.
Barack Obama, who wants to be a transformative president like his role model, Abraham Lincoln, could do worse to deserve the Nobel Peace Prize that he received prematurely than to facilitate a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement.
Few expect such a colossal achievement, of course, but far fewer expect anything remotely similar from Catherine Ashton, the EU’s foreign policy czarina, or, for that matter, any European leader.
Europe remains a significant economic and commercial actor – one that can rebound at any time, now that it has at least partly transcended its systemic crisis.
It also remains a model of reconciliation in which people can continue to dream, despite unacceptably high levels of unemployment, particularly among the young.
But Europe is no longer perceived as a global actor – and rightly so.
It is an oasis of peace, if not dynamism.
The question for Europeans today is whether they can – and, more important, should – be content with their status.
Europe’s Contribution to Peace in Sudan
WASHINGTON, DC – Sudan sits at the proverbial crossroads between potential peace and possible nationwide conflict, which would undoubtedly become the world’s deadliest conventional war in 2011.
A referendum on South Sudan’s independence, scheduled for January 9, 2011, will likely split the country in two, with southerners finally achieving the freedom for which they have long fought. Such an outcome, however, would also leave the South with most of Sudan’s oil reserves.
Little wonder, then, that on the precipice of this historic moment, there are many snakes in the grass.
The ruling National Congress Party (NCP) appears poised to challenge the result of the referendum.
Critical negotiations between the NCP in the North and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in the South on issues that divide the North and South have stalled.
The Sudanese armed forces have bombed areas along the North-South border.
In Darfur, the human rights and humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, and the peace process there has made little headway. 
All of this should be seen in the context of the NCP’s long track record of human-rights abuses and reneging on agreements.
For more than 20 years, the Sudanese government fought a war against the South, in which more than two million people died. It has committed genocide and other atrocities in Darfur, where about 400,000 people have died.
The NCP has a history of dividing and manipulating groups to achieve its aims, and it regularly ignores its commitments.
As part of the effort to support negotiations over the post-referendum issues that could lead to renewed North-South war, the United States has presented a range of incentives for the parties to choose peace and has committed to imposing serious measures should they choose violence.
Most European countries, and the European Union as a whole, however, have not matched this commitment by offering their own incentives for peace and consequences for war.
European commitments in this regard, however, could help buttress the calculations of the parties in favor of peace.
For Europe, this means that money that would otherwise go to peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance can largely be saved and used in part for development.
The EU can play an important role in forging a common international response to the result of the referendum.
The large and widely recognized EU electoral observation mission on the ground should issue a strong and timely final report that comes down clearly on whether the vote represented the will of the people of South Sudan.
Such leadership can stymie politically motivated challenges to the referendum’s result and preempt a period of uncertainty that increases tensions on the ground.
European states can influence whether or not war consumes Sudan in 2011.
One concrete contribution – above all others – would be to make clear that there would be significant benefits for those in Sudan who choose peace, and clear consequences for the party that plunges the country back into war.
Europe’s Corner of Despair
CHISINAU – Three floors of Moldova’s parliament building are a charred ruin.
So is democracy in Moldova, a former Soviet republic that is now Europe’s poorest country.
Of Moldova’s 3.5 million people at the time of independence, 15% have already left the country to seek better lives elsewhere.
More than 63% of Moldova’s young people say they want out.
In early April, a disputed election victory by Moldova’s ruling Communists triggered protests.
Political opponents and disaffected people, many of them young and with few prospects of finding jobs, took to the streets.
A violent few broke into the offices of the country’s president and its parliament building, which was set on fire.
In response, the Communists blamed the violence on the opposition political parties, which it called “fascists,” and on Romania and Romanian irredentists in Moldova.
The police cracked down on young people and took hundreds into custody.
Several died, apparently from beatings.
President Vladimir Voronin later granted the detainees amnesty.
Nevertheless, many remain in detention and Voronin continues to hurl accusations at the opposition and Romania of organizing a coup d’état.
Legal proceedings have been opened against opposition parties.
Restoring stability and a fair democratic system to Moldova is important, first and foremost, because Moldovans deserve a government that is accountable.
Stability is also important because the country borders on Romania, a European Union member state.
The two countries share a language and culture, and, until Stalin separated them, were even part of the same state.
A vocal minority of Moldova’s people believe that merging their country with Romania would put the country into the express lane to EU membership, with its generous financial perks and, perhaps most enticing of all, passports that would enable them to escape a no-hope economy to build lives elsewhere.
Many Moldovans, indeed, already have Romanian passports so that they can travel and work in the EU.
Some Romanian officials, including President Traian Basescu, have bandied about the idea of distributing Romanian passports to as many as a million Moldovan citizens, a quarter of the entire population.
Of course, the Moldovan government balks at any attempt to lure away its citizens.
The United States should do more to help bring stability to Moldova.
Together with the EU, the US can help ensure a credible investigation of the post-election violence and complaints against the police.
Amerca should be more energetic in demanding that the Moldovan authorities respect the rule of law, issue a roster of all detained persons, provide them access to lawyers and family members, and guarantee that they are not harassed.
Opposition leaders and democracy watchdogs say Moldova’s election process was fundamentally flawed.
The country’s broadcast media, especially its television stations, gave a disproportionate amount of air time to the ruling Communists during the election campaign.
The Communists are alleged to have rigged the balloting by adding names to the voter rolls and reviving the dead for the day.
In the long run, the US and EU should support civil society organizations in pressing Moldova’s government to guarantee more equitable distribution of television time, to stop police harassment of opposition political leaders and workers as well as journalists, to reform the police and end the ruling party’s abuse of state institutions, and to allow all political parties more opportunity to inspect election rolls and monitor polling stations.
They should insist that opposition parties are included in a dialogue.
The US can put weight behind its demands by placing conditions on its financial assistance to Moldova.
The EU has even more leverage.
Moldova is more dependent on the EU than any other former Soviet republic.
More than half of the country’s trade is with the Union, and Moldova receives significant EU financial assistance.
Most Moldovan emigrants work in the EU, and almost 75% of Moldova’s population support EU membership.
Romania, too, should play its part and offer to sign a basic treaty and a border agreement with Moldova.
The last thing impoverished Moldovans need is an autocratic, unaccountable government that lacks sufficient imagination to find a way to revive the country. And just about the last thing the EU needs is an influx of hundreds of thousands of migrants fleeing poverty, political repression, and despair in Moldova and other countries of the former Soviet Union.
Europe’s Crisis of Leadership
BRUSSELS – The global financial crisis has already highlighted both the strengths and the weaknesses of the European Union.
Had it not been for the euro, the shock waves from the meltdown of September and October would have spread to the currency markets, creating tensions that would have set Europe’s political and economic integration back by decades, perhaps imperiling the whole project.
Much less positively, EU member states have been slow to act in concert.
At first it was the European Commission that drew criticism for its slowness in making proposals to rally national governments and their policymakers.
Now it is the member states that are resisting the urgent need for a coordinated EU-wide policy response to the deepening crisis.
The speed and the severity of the economic slowdown are far greater than any of the post-war downturns of the past 60 years.
In Europe, we by and large failed to heed the warning signals of America’s sub-prime mortgage crisis when it erupted in the late summer of 2007, and thus were unprepared when the next phase of the crisis engulfed European banks, too.
The lesson to be drawn is that the EU must move more quickly and with greater determination than has been the case so far.
Throughout the EU, people are asking, “What is Europe doing to address the crisis?”
The answer is “not nearly enough,” and the political price may be high at next summer’s European Parliament elections.
The remaining weeks of 2008 will be crucial to Europe’s efforts to regain the initiative and to attempt to attenuate the effects of the crisis while also addressing unresolved problems on the EU reform agenda.
As Trustees of Friends of Europe , we would urge the European institutions and EU political leaders to renew their efforts regarding both the Lisbon Treaty and the Lisbon Agenda.
France’s EU Presidency has done much to improve coordination between member states’ responses to the financial crisis, and the European Commission has also begun to play the more active role that Friends of Europe called for on October 10.
The challenge now is for the presidency and the Commission to give fresh political impetus to the EU’s stalled reform drive.
The December 11-12 European Council should signal clearly the timetable envisaged for re-opening the Lisbon Treaty’s ratification process.
Failure to do so would bring the risk of still greater political problems after next June’s European elections.
The Lisbon Treaty is a step towards adapting the EU’s decision-making mechanisms to the twenty-first century and a membership of 27 or more countries.
The global nature of the current crisis makes it plain that Europe must be able to decide quickly and coherently, or suffer adverse consequences.
There seems little doubt that public opinion across the EU is increasingly drawing the same conclusions.
The sovereign right of the Irish people to decide their own future is unchallengeable.
But Ireland should also allow the EU’s other member states to proceed with the Lisbon Treaty if that is what they wish.
Even if another referendum is to be held in Ireland, the Irish government should foresee a procedure that, irrespective of the outcome, allows other member states to implement the essential parts of the Lisbon treaty.
The Commission now needs to take action to ensure that member states redouble their efforts with regard to the Lisbon Agenda for overhauling Europe’s global competitiveness.
In 2000, the EU set a ten-year program of agreed reform targets, yet in many cases its member states have lacked the political will to implement them.
Europe’s increasingly gloomy prospects make these reforms more necessary than ever.
Europe’s Dangerous Banalities
JERUSALEM – Europe’s vocation for peacemaking and for international norms of behavior is bound to become the base upon which Barack Obama will seek to reconstruct the transatlantic alliance that his predecessor so badly damaged.
How fast America’s new president addresses the Arab-Israeli conflict will be of paramount concern to Europeans in this effort.  For to them, Jerusalem has always mattered more than Baghdad, but George W. Bush refused to listen.
Europe’s inability to help resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict does not stem from its positions on the core issues, which are only microscopically different from those held by the United States.
Its impotence stems, instead, from its attitude toward the Jewish state.
In essence, dialectic of attraction and rejection is embedded in our collective conscience as Jews and Europeans.
Europe, as Denis de Rougemont put it in 1946, is “la patrie de la memoire,” a tormenting and tormented memory, one must admit.
The old continent suffers from two guilt complexes that have much to do with Israel: the colonial and the Jewish complex.
The Palestinian tragedy is directly affected by this European affliction.
Israel was born as a state out of the gravest crisis of the European conscience.
For Europeans, Israel’s creation was to compensate for the sins committed against the Jewish people.
But the price that was supposedly paid by the Palestinians touched another neuralgic lobe in the European mind.
Because Europe remains entangled in this seemingly insoluble conundrum, Israelis see it as trying to compensate for its lack of political effectiveness in Middle East diplomacy with unbearably self-righteous and moralistic talk.
To the Israelis, Europe became the essayist Mario Andrea Rigoni’s “old lady, who after she had allowed herself all sorts of liberties…and a great number of horrors, would like, once she has reached the age of society, fatigue, and weakness, to see the world adapt itself to her needs for moderation, equity, and peace.” 
It took Europe gruesome religious wars, two world wars, and more than one genocide to resolve its endemic disputes over borders and nationalism.
Its record in colonialism wrote monstrous pages in human history.
Now Europe is making Israelis feel not only that it is indifferent to their existential predicament, but that, rather than fighting for life against tremendous odds, Israel is committing European-style crimes.
Are some Europeans, many Israelis ask, attempting to use Israel as a means to rid themselves of guilt over the Jewish question, and with it the Jews’ unbearable claim to moral superiority, by lightheartedly equating them with the perpetrators of the Shoah?
Israel, as the territorial answer to the old Jewish fears , tends to take decisions only on the basis of worst-case scenarios.
Its new doctrine of “brutal response” when attacked from lands from which it has withdrawn – as happened in Lebanon and Gaza – might be reprehensible, and it may even doom the country to international opprobrium.
But “genocide” it is not.
Indeed, Israel’s critics in Europe are indulging in a frivolous banalization when they compare the recent Gaza conflict or the battle of Jenin in 2002 – with its 58 casualties among Palestinian combatants (Israel lost 25 soldiers) – to Auschwitz, a death factory where 30,000 Jews were slaughtered daily.
Israel should not, however, rejoice at being so far away from Europe, because Europe’s way is not far-fetched; the world cannot be allowed to operate for long outside a reasonable international system of rules and laws.
Moreover, Israel is painfully aware of the many legitimate interests that Europe has in the region.
Instability is a threat to those interests, and with Europe becoming a cosmopolitan continent with a huge Muslim population, the Arab-Israeli conflict has, for Europeans, an undeniable domestic dimension as well.
Europe might not intimidate, but it certainly inspires, and Israel should have an interest in encouraging a judicious role for Europe in building a framework for peace, stability, and cooperation in the region.
It can also teach many lessons.
The EU is not proof of the decay of the nation-state.
It teaches us, instead, that nationalism (if respected) can become a responsible force for broader international cooperation.
Nationalism degenerates into violent narcissism only when denied its fundamental rights.
The EU has shown the difference between voluntarily limited sovereignty and involuntarily stolen sovereignty.
For Europe to play the role to which it is entitled in producing a Middle East peace, it needs to restore its credibility with Israel.
The vigorous and equitable reaction of European leaders to the Gaza war, and the visit of five of them to Jerusalem to help seal the ceasefire can, now that President Obama has launched his “aggressive” quest for peace in the region, launch a promising era of American-European partnership in Middle East peacemaking.
Europe’s Flawed Banking Union
PARIS – The European Union is now the proud owner of a Nobel Peace Prize.
When the choice alighted on Barack Obama three years ago, the Norwegian Nobel Committee was criticized for honoring someone whose achievements were still to come.
The Committee took that criticism to heart, and this time decorated an institution with a proud past, but a clouded future.
The eurozone is distinct from the EU of course, but it is the Union’s most ambitious undertaking to date, and it is still struggling to equip itself with the structures needed to bolster a currency union.
A common fiscal policy remains a distant dream, as does a genuine political union.
But Europe’s policymakers claim to be making progress toward a so-called “banking union,” which means collective banking supervision, rather than a merger of banks themselves.
In September, the European Commission announced a plan to make the European Central Bank the supervisor of all 6,000 of Europe’s banks.
The reaction among national politicians, central banks, and banks themselves was not universally favorable.
The Germans want the ECB to focus only on large systemic banks, and leave smaller savings banks (like those that invested heavily in subprime mortgages) to national authorities.
The United Kingdom and Sweden argue that they cannot be made subservient to a central bank of which they are, at best, semi-detached members.
The case for a pan-European supervisor is widely accepted, especially as the European Banking Authority (the EU’s banking regulator) proved feeble in carrying out financial stress tests: the first tests were so weak that even Spain’s now-bankrupt savings banks could pass with flying colors.
Europe must break the vicious circle linking distressed sovereign borrowers with banks that are obliged, or at least encouraged, to buy their bonds, which in turn provide the funding for bank rescues.
But the method chosen by the Commission to implement a banking union is fatally flawed.&#160; Moreover, according to a leaked opinion from the EU Council’s chief legal adviser, the proposed reform is illegal, because, according to the Financial Times (which received the leak), it goes “beyond the powers permitted under law to change governance rules at the European Central Bank.”
Throughout the crisis, European leaders have tried to respond to the gaps in the monetary union without proposing a new treaty, because they fear that any new treaty proposing more centralization of authority in Brussels would be rejected, either by national parliaments or by voters in a referendum. So they have tried to proceed by intergovernmental agreement, or by using existing treaty provisions.
In the case of the banking union, they plan to use Article 127(6) of the Lisbon Treaty which allows the European Council to grant authority to the ECB to perform specific tasks concerning “policies relating to the prudential supervision” of certain financial institutions in the Union.
That is a thin legal basis for establishing a pan-European supervisor with direct responsibility for individual institutions, and it was clearly not intended for that purpose.
Indeed, Germany agreed to the wording only on the understanding that the ECB could not be a direct supervisor.
The consequences of choosing this inadequate, if expedient, route are serious.
For starters, the existing treaty cannot be used to create a single European resolution authority, leaving an awkward interface between the ECB and national authorities.
Nor can it be used to establish a European deposit protection scheme, which is arguably the most urgent requirement, to stem the outflow of deposits from southern European banks.
There will also be potentially dangerous consequences for the ECB itself.
The use of the Lisbon Treaty clause means that the ECB must be given these additional responsibilities.
But it is impossible to create a separate bank-supervision entity within the ECB, as has been done in France, for example, with the Prudential Control Authority, or in the UK with the new Prudential Regulatory Authority, which has its own board and accountability arrangements within the Bank of England.
The importance of these structures is that they insulate the central bank’s monetary-policy independence from corruption by the tighter accountability requirements that inevitably come with banking supervision.
Because supervisors’ decisions affect individuals’ property rights – and their actions or omissions can put taxpayers on the hook to bail out banks – governments, parliaments, and the courts are bound to hold the watchdogs on a tight leash.
That is why Germany’s Bundesbank, which always guarded its monetary-policy independence so assiduously, has once again found itself in the rejectionist camp, expressing severe doubts about the route that the Commission plans to take.
This time, they are right.
There are other serious issues, too.
According to the Commission’s model, the European Banking Authority will remain in place, and is charged with producing a single rulebook for all 27 EU member states.
But, while its work is carried out under the normal qualified majority voting system, the 17 eurozone countries will have a single supervisor, so will have a block vote.
The Commission is trying to find ways to protect the rights of the non-eurozone countries.
But the very complexity of what is proposed shows just how inadequate the scheme is.
Non-Europeans, in particular, may find the entire topic impenetrably abstruse.
But it illustrates a simple point: Europe is trying to achieve a stronger federal model that responds to the weaknesses revealed by the eurozone crisis.
But it is doing so without addressing the crucial need to bring its citizens along.
Indeed, the devices that the EU is adopting are designed specifically to avoid having to consult them.
The proposed construction of a banking union reveals this fundamental flaw at the heart of the European project today.
It is difficult to be optimistic about the success of an initiative built on such flimsy legal foundations, and lacking democratic legitimacy.
Europe’s banks and their customers deserve better.
Europe’s Distant Mirror?
It is tempting for Europeans to project their own history onto Asia and to view current developments there as a mere repetition, if not an imitation, of what occurred in Europe.
In fact, Asians themselves encourage this temptation, with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) openly aiming to become increasingly like the European Union.
In trying to decipher Asia’s diplomatic future, Europeans are confronted, so to speak, with an “embarrassment of riches.”
Is Asia today replaying the balance of power games of late nineteenth-century Europe, with China in the role of Germany?
Or is South Asia, through the growth of ASEAN, poised to one day become the Far Eastern equivalent of the EU?
These comparisons are not neutral, and one may detect in the analogy between China today and nineteenth-century Germany an element of that guilty pleasure in others’ troubles that the Germans call “Schadenfreude.”
Asia may be doing well economically now, according to this view, but just wait: rising nationalism, China’s appetite for power, and the rest of Asia’s desire to curb its ambitions will necessarily impede economic growth and restore the West’s global primacy.
But this scenario does not correspond to reality.
China at the beginning of the twenty-first century is not Bismarck’s newly unified Germany in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The Chinese do not view themselves as a rising new power, but instead as Asia’s traditional power, now experiencing a renaissance.
China, they believe, is regaining the status and prestige that it enjoyed until the end of the eighteenth century.
As a result, unlike Wilhelmine Germany, the Chinese are not in a hurry to prove how strong and powerful they have become.
In strategic terms, China is not a revisionist power, but instead a “satisfied,” status-quo power.
The only exception to this, of course, would be a declaration of independence from Taiwan, which the Chinese would consider a casus belli.
To be sure, the Chinese are indeed rearming – and even entering the military space race – but they are doing so at a pace and to a proportion that reflects their new economic prosperity.
China’s fundamental priorities remain economic, reflecting its leaders’ belief that their regime’s long-term survival presupposes the continuation of rapid growth.
For that, they need access to energy, but they are not about to engage in military or even diplomatic adventures.
Nor are they set to become a benevolent, altruistic power, ready to use their new strength and reputation to improve the stability of the international system.
Chinese cynicism and spontaneous selfishness, however, is now tempered by what they perceive as growing recognition of their unique status.
The combination of respect and interest they see in the way the world now views China can only reinforce their sense of confidence.
So why should they take unnecessary risks?