NEW HAVEN – US politicians invariably bemoan trade as the enemy of the middle class, the major source of pressure on jobs and wages.
The current presidential campaign is no exception: Republicans and Democrats alike have taken aim at both China and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, holding them up as the scourge of beleaguered American workers.
While this explanation may be politically expedient, the truth lies elsewhere.
When it comes to trade, as I recently argued, America has made its own bed.
The culprit is a large saving deficit; The country has been living beyond its means for decades and drawing freely on surplus saving from abroad to fund the greatest consumption binge in history.
Politicians, of course, don’t want to blame voters for their profligacy; it is much easier to point the finger at others.
The saving critique merits further analysis.
The data show that countries with saving deficits tend to run trade deficits, while those with saving surpluses tend to run trade surpluses.
The United States is the most obvious example, with a net national saving rate of 2.6% in late 2015 – less than half the 6.3% average in the final three decades of the twentieth century – and trade deficits with 101 countries.
The pattern also holds true elsewhere.
The United Kingdom, Canada, Finland, France, Greece, and Portugal – all of which have large trade deficits – save much less than other developed countries.
Conversely, high savers like Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, South Korea, Sweden, and Switzerland all run trade surpluses.
Saving imbalances can also lead to destabilizing international capital flows, asset bubbles, and financial crises.
That was the case in the run-up to the financial crisis of 2008-2009, when global saving imbalances, as measured by the disparities between countries with current-account deficits and surpluses, hit a modern record.
The asset and credit bubbles fueled by those imbalances brought the world to the brink of an abyss not seen since the 1930s.
Here, too, there is considerable finger pointing.
Deficit countries tend to blame the yield-seeking “saving glut” that sloshes around in world financial markets.
As former US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke put it, if only countries like China had spent more, the bubbles that nearly broke America would not have formed in the first place.
Others have been quick to point out that America’s supposed growth miracle probably could not have happened without the capital provided by surplus countries.
The prudent approach would be to strike a better balance between saving and spending.
That is particularly important for the US and China, which together account for a disproportionate share of the world’s saving disparities.
Simply put, America needs to save more and consume less, while China needs to save less and consume more.
To succeed, both countries will have to overcome entrenched mindsets.
On this front, China has been leading the way, with a strategy of consumer-led rebalancing that it introduced five years ago.
The results so far have been mixed, as inadequate funding of a social safety net continues to temper the support to household incomes provided by services-driven job creation and urbanization-led increases in real wages.
But China has lately shown a commitment to addressing this shortcoming.
Its recently enacted 13th Five-Year Plan aims to dampen fear-driven precautionary saving through interest-rate liberalization, the introduction of deposit insurance, the loosening of the hukou residential permit system (which would improve benefit portability), and relaxation of the one-child family planning policy.
The US, however, is headed in the opposite direction.
There is no interest in debating the saving issue, let alone implementing policies to address it.
A pro-saving US policy agenda should draw on the following: longer-term fiscal consolidation, expanded IRAs (individual retirement accounts) and 401Ks, consumption-based tax reform (such as value-added or sales taxes), and interest-rate normalization.
Instead, US politicians continue to focus on keeping the consumption binge going, regardless of its implications for America’s saving imperative.
The asymmetrical response of the world’s two largest economies to their respective saving dilemmas has far-reaching consequences.
To the extent that China makes progress on the road to consumer-led rebalancing, it will shift from surplus saving to saving absorption.
Already, China’s gross national saving rate has declined from a peak of 52% of GDP in 2008 to around 44% this year.
It should fall further in the years ahead.
The US, long locked in a codependent economic relationship with China, cannot afford to ignore this shift.
After all, along with reduced current-account and trade surpluses, China’s consumer-led shift to saving absorption likely entails diminished accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves and reduced recycling of those reserves into dollar-based assets such as US Treasuries.
To the extent that America fails to boost its domestic saving, the lack of Chinese capital may well force the US to pay a steeper price for external financing, through a weaker dollar, higher real interest rates, or both.
Such are the classic pitfalls of codependency: when one partner alters the relationship, there are consequences for the other.
No country can prosper indefinitely without saving.
Holding the world’s reserve currency, America has gotten away with it, largely because the rest of the world let it.
After all, the enablers – especially export-led economies like China, along with its resource-dependent supply chain – benefited from America’s consumption binge, as it drove an outsize expansion of global trade.
But those days are numbered.
American voters – especially disenfranchised, angry middle-class workers – increasingly recognize that something does not add up.
Yet US politicians continue to deflect the electorate’s anger outward, dismissing the growth subsidy that accompanies the “kindness of strangers.”
It is time for politicians to own up to the uncomfortable truth: The saving deficit is the single greatest threat to the American Dream.
Lucky Little Countries?
AMSTERDAM – Western Europe’s small democracies have, on the whole, been exceptionally fortunate.
Freer and richer than almost anywhere else in the world, countries such as Holland, Belgium, and Switzerland would seem to have little to worry about.
This is why the world normally hears less about them than about Afghanistan, say, or Kosovo.
Yet all three have been much in the news of late – and not for happy reasons.
The most successful political force in Switzerland today is Christoph Blocher’s Swiss People’s Party.
The party’s propaganda material tells its story.
A poster shows three white sheep kicking a black sheep off the Swiss flag.
And images of junkies and Muslim women in headscarves are contrasted in a promotional movie with idyllic pictures of Alpine scenery and efficient banks – the People’s Party’s Switzerland.
Vlaams Belang, the Flemish nationalist party, may not be the biggest party in Belgium, but it has done well in local elections.
Like the Swiss People’s Party, Vlaams Belang feeds on popular resentment of immigrants – especially Muslim immigrants – of the European Union, and, of course, of the French-speaking Walloons, from whom the Flemish nationalists would like a divorce.
This last sentiment is posing a serious threat to Belgium’s survival.
Although the Dutch government is still managed mostly by mainstream, steady-as-you-go Christian Democrats, right-wing populism is growing.
Geert Wilders’ Freedom Party wants to ban the Koran, halt Muslim immigration, and deprive delinquents with an immigrant background of Dutch citizenship.
The new Proud of the Netherlands Movement, led by Rita Verdonk, the former Minister of Integration, promotes a somewhat more respectable version of this hard line.
These parties and movements share a sense that native-born citizens have been let down by liberal political elites, who seem unable or unwilling to stem the tide of immigration, crime, and Islamist militancy, as well as the erosion of national sovereignty by EU bureaucracy and global capitalism.
Such fears are by no means confined to Europe’s small countries.
Nicolas Sarkozy’s election in France has at least something to do with similar feelings.
But anxieties about being swamped by foreigners and dominated by outside powers are more acute in smaller countries, whose political elites seem particularly impotent.
The Dutch case is the most surprising, because, unlike Belgium, the Netherlands has no significant tradition of right-wing populism.
Nor does it share Switzerland’s insularity.
On the contrary, the Dutch pride themselves on their openness and hospitality to foreigners.
The case of Somalia-born Ayaan Hirsi Ali, the bestselling author of Infidel , best illustrates both the popular resentments and the relative openness that mark contemporary Dutch society.
Much criticism and even abuse has been heaped on the Dutch for the way her adopted country has treated her.
She has received death threats from Muslim extremists ever since she renounced – indeed, denounced – her Muslim faith, and was forced to live as a virtual fugitive, albeit under the protection of the Dutch state.
Before moving to the United States, she was forced out of her apartment in The Hague by complaining neighbors, and almost deprived of her passport.
Now that she is a permanent US resident, the Dutch government no longer wants to pay for her protection.
Commentators in the US and elsewhere have accused the Dutch of “unacceptable cowardice.”
Salman Rushdie called her “the first refugee from Western Europe since the Holocaust.”
French intellectuals, never shy of public posturing, are campaigning to give her French citizenship.
The way the Dutch government handled the affair was not elegant, to say the least.
But I’m not sure how many governments do pay for the protection of private citizens who live permanently abroad.
The US doesn’t pay to protect its citizens who are under threat even at home.
It is easy to voice contempt of the Dutch government.
But what has been lost in all the commentary is the nature of Hirsi Ali’s rise to prominence.
It is hard to imagine many countries where a young African woman could become a famous member of parliament only ten years after seeking asylum.
But the reasons for her rise are not entirely salubrious.
Whatever the merits – and they are considerable – of her arguments against the bigotry of Islamic or African customs, especially those concerning the treatment of women, she lent respectability to bigotry of a different kind: the native resentment of foreigners, and Muslims in particular.
Indeed, contrary to what some commentators have written, it wasn’t cowardly liberals who hounded Hirsi Ali out of the country because of her politically incorrect views about Islam.
She was betrayed by her own former ally, Rita Verdonk, and a variety of Dutch xenophobes, who don’t like an outspoken black female immigrant from Somalia any more than they like Muslims.
But the truth in these matters counts for less than the emotions.
And the emotions in this case betray an element of Schadenfreude: look at how even the Dutch, always boasting of their superior tolerance and liberalism, have responded like cowards when their principles are truly tested.
It is true that the Dutch, proud and comfortable inside their narrow borders, have, like the Swiss, often viewed the outside world with a degree of smugness.
And for this they are now being punished.
That, too, is the natural fate of being a lucky little country in Western Europe.
Lucky Putin, Unlucky Yeltsin
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s assertive foreign policy stance of recent years reflects the confidence that comes with a booming economy.
In 1999, the year before Putin succeeded Boris Yeltsin as president, Russia’s GDP was a paltry $200 billion.
By last year, it had reached $1 trillion.
Real growth has averaged 7% for eight years, and real incomes have grown by roughly 10% per year.
Russia’s budget surplus has stood at more than 7% of GDP in the last two years, public debt has dwindled to only 8% of GDP, from 100% in 1999, and the current account surplus has averaged at 10% of GDP for the last eight years.
But Russia’s stellar economic performance has little to do with Putin’s policy, and a lot to do with the reforms Yeltsin embraced.
By 1998, Russia already had achieved a critical mass of markets and private enterprise, while the financial crash of that year worked like a catharsis, forcing the government to abolish enterprise subsidies that underpinned a devastating budget deficit of some 9% of GDP.
Moreover, world oil prices that had fallen to $10 a barrel started rising toward the stratosphere.
The whole success story thus was in place in early 1999, one year before Putin entered the stage.
To be sure, Putin should be praised for substantial economic reforms during his first three years.
A new tax code was adopted, with lower and fewer taxes, notably a flat income tax of 13%.
The civil code was completed, a new customs code was enacted, and substantial judicial reform was implemented.
At the same time, however, Putin has systematically eliminated the rudimentary democracy Yeltsin had build.
One television channel after another was taken over by the state under various pretexts, as were major newspapers.
Opposition candidates and parties were denied registration for the slightest formal complaint.
Falsification of elections became the rule.
Many prominent Russians favored the Pinochet model of authoritarian politics and liberal economics.
But growing authoritarianism also hit business.
In October 2003, Putin cracked down on Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the CEO and main owner of Yukos oil, Russia’s most valuable company, who was thrown into prison on dubious charges of tax fraud after backing Putin’s political opponents.
Moreover, Putin’s associates wanted Yukos’ wealth, which was confiscated by the state oil company Rosneft through lawless taxation, leaving Putin’s tax reform and judicial reform in tatters and severely undermining property rights.
In fact, since 2003, Putin’s main economic policy has been re-nationalization.
Well-run private companies have been more or less forced to sell out to state-dominated companies.
Gazprom is buying up oil (Sibneft), gas, and power companies at knockdown prices, reinforcing its monopoly.
That, in turn, allows Gazprom to boost its profitability through price increases, despite stagnant production.
Indeed, with state companies now producing one-third of Russia’s oil, output growth has plummeted, as owners of private enterprises – the source of dynamism in the sector – are now afraid to invest in new capacity.
Among foreign investors, both Shell and TNK-BP are being pushed out by Gazprom in their main gas fields in Russia.
Beyond oil and gas, Russia’s arms export agency, Rosoboronexport, has just seized Avtovaz, the giant dysfunctional Soviet car factory, and VSMPO-Avisma, Russia’s big titanium company, while all aircraft production has been concentrated in one state company.
The government cheers this re-nationalization, although it has reduced Russia’s industrial growth from 8.3% in 2004 to 4% in the last two years.
Similarly, inefficient state banks – far inferior to private banks even in Kazakhstan or Ukraine – dominate the banking system.
The not very profitable state-owned Vneshtorgbank, for example, is on a buying spree, aggravating the quality of Russian banking.
Increasingly, Russia’s oil surpluses drive economic growth through rising investment, which boosts construction and consumption, in turn benefiting retail trade and finance.
With personal incomes rising strongly, poverty is declining, while 68% of Russia’s college-age youth now attend universities.
But other social indicators are unimpressive.
Life expectancy for men is stuck at 59.
The murder rate is even higher under Putin than it was under Yeltsin, as is the traffic death rate.
None of the big public systems – education, health care, or the military – has been reformed, and the regime shows little interest in doing so.
Instead, the Kremlin is preoccupied with the profitability and value of the state-dominated companies that it controls.
Not surprisingly, all corruption indicators have been rising since Putin took over from Yeltsin, whereas they are falling in most post-communist countries.
Although corruption is pervasive, no top official has been prosecuted.
Putin and his KGB friends from St. Petersburg sit safely on all this wealth, thanks to their authoritarian governance and control over all security organs.
Such a powerful apparatus cannot retire to a quiet life in a dacha as Yeltsin did – it would have to privatize everything first – which implies that Putin has no choice but to remain in office, regardless of what he says about not seeking a third presidential term.
But if he holds on to power contrary to the constitution, his popularity could easily collapse, especially as his economic policy has thrived on luck, not reform.
Squaring the Eurozone’s Vicious Circle
SALAMANCA – The eurozone is caught in a diabolical loop, in which weak banking systems harm their sovereigns’ fiscal positions, which in turn compromise the banking system’s stability.
But, over the last couple of years, policymakers have focused largely on reducing banks’ impact on their sovereigns – for example, through a Europe-wide supervisory authority and efforts to establish a European resolution mechanism – while ignoring the feedback in the other direction.
Although eurozone sovereign-debt markets have stabilized, the share of sovereign bonds held by domestic banks has increased sharply in the last few months, accounting for more than half of the net increase in debt emissions in some countries.
In Spain and Italy, sovereign bonds now account for roughly 10% of banks’ total assets (see graphs below).
The risk is that any unexpected challenge faced by a weaker debtor country’s sovereign-bond market – say, Catalonia’s secession referendum, or the renegotiation of the Portuguese and Greek bailouts – will undermine bank solvency, often even more than in previous rounds of the feedback loop.
Moreover, even in the absence of a crisis, the sovereign-bond market’s geographical segmentation hampers monetary-policy transmission substantially.
What accounts for banks’ growing bias toward their own country’s sovereign debt?
And what should be done about it?
The most obvious suspect is Basel III, the new global regulatory standard for banks’ capital adequacy and liquidity.
But, while Basel III favors sovereign debt in general by assigning it a zero risk-weight in calculating capital requirements, it does not favor home-country debt, at least not within the context of the eurozone.
Indeed, Basel III treats all OECD government bonds in the same way, regardless of whether they are denominated in the issuing country’s own currency.
Likewise, while the European Central Bank’s collateral policy imposes different “haircuts” on bondholders depending on a country’s credit rating, it discriminates little between countries.
In short, current bank regulation neither encourages nor discourages the home-country bias in banks’ sovereign-debt holdings.
In fact, eurozone banks’ preference for home-country sovereign bonds is rooted in a combination of factors, including fear of redenomination – a consequence of the crisis that leads banks to concentrate their risk domestically – and the expectation that bailout mechanisms will be national.
Given that the eurozone lacks any supra-national fiscal backstop, such as a lender of last resort or a debt-mutualization mechanism like Eurobonds, the home-country bias can be expected to intensify whenever an economy experiences a significant shock.
Against this background, European policymakers and regulators must take action to encourage banks to diversify their sovereign-debt holdings.
Of course, a common fiscal backstop (along with a single banking supervisor) would eliminate the bias.
But there is strong resistance to the fundamental changes to the eurozone’s architecture that this would require.
A more feasible solution would be to introduce an explicit regulatory bias against home-country sovereign-debt holdings.
This could be done in three ways.
The first option would be to place upper limits on the sovereign debt held by banks – for example, by eliminating the current exemption of zero-risk sovereign bonds from regulators’ so-called large exposure regime.
But administrative caps are a blunt instrument that introduce new nonlinearities and opportunities for arbitrage and speculation.
And weaker sovereigns, legitimately fearing that such a scheme would suppress demand for their debt, would almost certainly block it.
Another potential solution, proposed by the euro-nomics group in 2011, would be to create “European Safe-Bonds” (ESBies).
A European debt agency would purchase eurozone countries’ sovereign bonds, weighted according to each country’s contribution to the eurozone’s GDP, and use them as collateral to issue two securities.
The first security, the ESBies, would be composed of the senior tranche of the bond portfolio, and would serve as the “safe asset,” while the second, risky security would be sold to investors in the market.
ESBies would effectively fulfill the role of Eurobonds, but without the joint and several liability that would demand treaty changes.
Though the lack of such debt mutualization has caused weaker sovereigns to resist ESBies, while stronger sovereigns contend that ESBies still demand excessive risk-sharing, this solution could gain traction in the event of another crisis.
The third option would be to introduce a new rule conditioning sovereign bonds’ zero-risk weight on banks’ willingness to hold them in certain proportions – for example, relative to GDP.
Although a transitional regime would be needed to avoid hurting banks in weaker countries, such a rule would dramatically reduce banks’ exposure to home-country sovereign debt.
Indeed, it could help to encourage the market-driven creation of a eurozone safe asset – a kind of non-regulatory ESBie.
Regardless of the approach, one thing is clear: European policymakers and regulators must act now to eliminate the negative feedback loop between sovereigns and their banks.
Waiting for another crisis to strike could have devastating consequences for both.
A Theory of Boardroom Justice
LONDON – There is a real danger that corporate leaders, making decisions that seem correct behind closed doors, end up being tone-deaf in a soundproof room.
When the doors open and the decisions are announced, it is clear that board members are often deeply disconnected from the world’s economic and social realities.
Consider executive pay packages.
Board remuneration committees can explain them logically with complex formulas to justify them, and yet often they are completely out of line with common sense.
Board members need to rethink what they are doing in those rooms, and here individual directors’ guiding principle should be the “veil of ignorance” proposed by the political philosopher John Rawls in his 1971 treatise A Theory of Justice.
Rawls proposed the veil of ignorance as a way to derive principles of social justice to which anyone who did not know in advance their identity and position in society would consent.
How would the veil of ignorance work in a boardroom?
Board directors’ role is not simply to ensure return on investment; it is also to make decisions with due consideration for the community, employees, suppliers, consumers, and even the overall economy.
The decisions made in that room have an impact beyond the company, so it is not just shareholders who hold board members accountable for their choices.
In order for board directors and senior executives to make judicious decisions, they cannot think only about whether they will directly benefit.
As in Rawls, if we imagined that we did not know who we are or where we stand in society – whether we are rich or poor, male or female, young or old, CEO or shop-floor worker – our decisions would be more ethically grounded.
The veil of ignorance changes the nature of the discussion on almost every issue, from executive pay, wage discrepancies, and working conditions to long-term strategy, succession planning, and much more.
Many issues that should be viewed through the veil of ignorance fall into the categories of environmental sustainability, social equity, and corporate governance.
For example, if we didn’t know whether we would be working long days at a fast-food counter or overseeing the entire organization, we would think differently about compensation structures and the ever increasing gap between the most senior management and the most junior staff members.
If we didn’t know whether we would be working on a factory floor in Bangladesh or in a shiny head office in the United States, no one would disavow responsibility for the health and safety of Bangladeshi workers.
The list goes on.
If board members were making choices from behind the veil of ignorance –not knowing their position in the company – they would want everyone to have opportunities to implement change or be entrepreneurial.
Not knowing whether they were male or female, they would ensure pay equity and better policies concerning parental leave and child care.
Likewise, knowing that they might be the customer would make them look differently at cost-cutting measures that weaken product testing and consumer protection.
If they believed that they might live in a community affected by an oil spill, they would want robust, not minimal, environmental safety standards, and they would not seek to circumvent the rules.
There is a danger of taking this thought experiment too far.
Getting caught up in factoring in all of the different perspectives would cause decision-making to gravitate toward the lowest common denominator, with outcomes that achieve very little for anyone.
That is not the point.
The point is to step outside of one’s comfort zones, distance oneself from the voices around the table that sound just like one’s own, and remember that board members are responsible for the direct and indirect impact of their decisions.
There is no doubting corporate directors’ responsibility for the growth and success of the company.
But that responsibility also requires being thoughtful individuals who can see the bigger picture.
Investors are more attuned than ever to companies’ social and environmental impact, and they are increasingly concerned about whether the companies in their portfolios are good corporate citizens.
If directors remind themselves each time they enter the boardroom why they are there, and pause for a moment to consider how their views would be affected if they did not know who they were, they would make better decisions for the company and for the entire system in which it operates.
In this sense – and only this sense – ignorance in the boardroom is the right approach.
The People’s Corporations
LONDON – Two big power shifts are occurring around the world today.
First, corporate power is growing relative to that of governments.
Second, ordinary people are also gaining greater influence.
What does it mean that these seemingly contradictory shifts are happening simultaneously?
There is, no doubt, more power in the hands of companies than ever before.
People who have not been popularly elected control more and more of our daily lives – from entertainment and energy supplies to schools, railways, and postal services.
At the same time, the speed of technological innovation is outpacing that of legislation, meaning that corporate activities are routinely entering seemingly gray areas devoid of regulation.
But, counterbalancing this trend, people now have the means and opportunities to ensure that companies’ behavior does not go unchecked.
They are becoming more educated and aware of how companies operate, and they are more proactive and outspoken when they believe a company has crossed the line.
The public increasingly acts as the conscience of companies and industries, asking hard questions and holding them to account.
In the past several years, more effective means of collective action – such as social media, open publishing platforms, and online video sharing – have given people more levers to pull.
As people pursue boycotts and disinvestment, lobby for legislation, and activate social-media campaigns with growing sophistication, they are increasingly able to influence companies’ operational and strategic decision-making, thereby imposing checks and balances on today’s enormous accretions of private power.
For some companies, this has come as a thunderbolt.
Consider the British Petroleum oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.
The BP spill was one of the first instances in which companies were forced to contend with the power of social media – and in which people realized the potential of the tools at their disposal.
Like most companies at the time, BP was accustomed to communicating with traditional seats of power – the White House, the Kremlin, and so on – and to doing so via traditional modes of communication, such as briefing carefully selected journalists and distributing precisely worded press releases.
The Gulf oil spill changed all of that.
Communities united around an issue and found a voice on Facebook.
There was a massive conversation going on, and BP was neither a part of it nor able to control it via traditional communication-management methods.
Since then, there has been a marked increase in this sort of direct action.
Social media spread ideas in an immediate and unfettered manner.
A document, an image, or a video is shared, and suddenly what was secret or shielded is globally exposed.
And, though wrong or false information spreads just as quickly as true information, corrections are often swift as well.
For younger people today, using social media as a tool for activism is second nature.
They are fluent in using YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, and Reddit to communicate and create a community around an idea, issue, or objection – and to nurture the growth of a small group into a mass movement.
And older people are not far behind.
As corporate power rises, holding companies to account becomes increasingly important.
The scope of accountability must expand as well, in order to affect the behavior of executives and non-executives alike.
And companies’ board members will be increasingly held to account for how well they hold senior management to account.
With all of that comes a culture of questioning that which was previously unquestioned – including how companies are run and whether an organization’s actions are ethical.
Any action can be questioned by anyone, and if others find it interesting or important, the question will spread – and not just within a small community or a specialist group, but more broadly and around the world.
This shift has changed the nature of activism and collective action.
It has also made for new kinds of allies, with activist investors like Carl Icahn tweeting their intentions and markets responding.
Likewise, those who in other circumstances might see activist investors as natural adversaries can agree with the positions that they take, such as concerns about executive compensation or corporate social responsibility.
Activist investors can write open letters that may not be picked up by mainstream media outlets, but that can go viral on Twitter or Reddit.
This is often enough to make boards and executive committees sit up and take notice.
Corporate leaders who embrace this new reality, view it as an opportunity, and resist the inclination to “manage” or avoid issues will have a competitive advantage.
They will not regard meeting people where they are as a way to manipulate them, but as an opportunity to hear what they are saying.
Their first impulse will not be to figure out how to use modern means of direct communication to persuade customers, employees, and other stakeholders to think and do the things that they want them to think and do.
Instead, they will make real changes – and they will be better off for it.
Companies make our cars, our phones, and our children’s textbooks – and exercise increasing control over the daily lives and destinies of people worldwide, not only those who use their products, but also those who work for them and those who live in the communities where they are based.
If companies do not take seriously the responsibility that comes with their great and growing power, people will be there to remind them.
The Blatterball Diaries
LONDON – The World Cup has concluded with its usual flourish, and much of the world, as usual, couldn’t help but get caught up in the excitement of it all – which is exactly the outcome that Sepp Blatter wants.
Blatter, the president of FIFA, the Cup’s organizing body, wants the afterglow of an exciting month of play to blot out the corruption and backroom deals – and, most recently, a ticket scandal – that have roiled his tenure.
Times were very different in 1998, when Blatter took up his role.
Social media did not exist, and the Internet had not yet become a means of spreading the views of the voiceless and disenfranchised.
Nor was the culture of shareholder activism and corporate social responsibility as strong as it is today.
As BP, GM, and Royal Bank of Scotland have discovered, the world is watching, talking, and no longer willing to accept the old way of conducting business.
FIFA has two problems.
One is a straightforward lack of compliance with accepted business practices.
Allegations of wrongdoing range from match-fixing and bribery among members of FIFA’s Executive Committee to questions about how Qatar was chosen to host the World Cup in 2022.
The second problem is arguably more serious, for it is epiphenomenal: the damage that unethical behavior has done to the ideal of fair play.
When people see an institution that relates to something that they feel passionate about failing so publicly to abide by simple rules, they lose faith not only in that institution, but also in the idea that good governance is achievable at all.
The message sent, and understood, is that some institutions – of all kinds – are immune from scrutiny and can play by their own rules.
The code of conduct on the field – where we expect players to give their all under clear rules that are swiftly enforced by independent referees – is fundamentally the same as what we expect from governing bodies off the field.
In this sense, FIFA is not a special case: All non-profit and for-profit organizations around the world are expected to abide by this code of conduct.
And that is why FIFA’s problems are unlikely to fade from view.
They must be addressed head-on, with a clean sweep of its leadership and a complete overhaul of its governance structures.
FIFA is as complex as any large multinational private or public organization; how it is governed must reflect that.
For starters, FIFA must introduce truly independent board members to the governance process – people who will ask hard questions and challenge the organization’s executives.
Governance solely by association members has not worked – and, by encouraging a lack of transparency, may have made FIFA more vulnerable to the problems it now faces.
No organization that holds so much public influence and importance should be able to operate as a black box.
Likewise, FIFA must introduce and adhere to clearer term limits for its president and board members, starting with Blatter – and with immediate effect.
More effective checks and balances will not come easily; but they will not come at all without champions.
Before the World Cup began, some representatives of FIFA member associations spoke up in opposition to the status quo.
It will now be seen whether their actions reflect their words.
There are other glimmers of hope.
In the world of for-profit companies, investors are increasingly demanding better corporate-governance standards and more diverse boards that include independent members.
They are taking a much more active and public role in speaking out against bribery, corruption, and excessive pay packages, and in favor of corporate social responsibility and fair labor practices.
If their calls go unheeded, they vote at the annual general meeting – or with their feet.
FIFA’s sponsors must hold FIFA similarly to account, and there are signs that some are finally beginning – albeit tentatively – to speak out.
If they don’t, sponsors will leave themselves exposed to a consumer backlash as FIFA’s poor reputation rubs off on their brands.
Customers are savvier than ever before, and they, too, can vote with their feet.
Ultimately, however, change starts at the top.
Consider what a change in leadership has done for the Roman Catholic Church: Pope Francis is transforming an institution that was thought to be so byzantine, opaque, and intractable that change was all but impossible.
If the Catholic Church can change, so can the church of football.
There is another lesson here: good leadership also consists in knowing when to step down.
If Blatter genuinely cares about FIFA, he knows that remaining there would mean dragging the organization further into disrepute, damaging whatever positive contributions he has made, and quite possibly being forced to leave under a cloud.
The caption to a picture of Blatter on page six of FIFA’s 2013 financial report reads: “We have reached very high levels of accountability, transparency, and financial control.”
The problem is that no one believes it.
FIFA desperately needs to restore its public credibility. That can happen only after the necessary changes at the top and throughout the organization have been achieved.
Lula\u0027s Legacy
There is nothing wrong with either per se, so long as they are sustainable in the medium term and viable in the long term. The problem is that Brazil’s overall investment rate remains around 16% of GDP, far less than Mexico’s or the Latin American average, not to mention China (40%).
At that rate, the country’s infrastructure and competitiveness will inevitably decline.
Rousseff’s solution is massive state-funded investment, financed by the National Development Bank (BNDS), in key economic sectors (oil, meat-packing, construction).
But that strategy will most likely reinforce the corruption that has been a fixture of Brazilian politics for decades – and which improved little under Lula.
A second issue is the highly touted Bolsa Familia, which began under Lula’s predecessor as Bolsa Escola, and was originally devised by the economist Santiago Levy under Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo. These “conditional cash transfers” were initially intended to stop inter-generational poverty by helping to ensure that children are properly fed, schooled, and kept healthy.
But, under Lula (and under Vicente Fox and Felipe Calderón in Mexico, for that matter), they became a direct anti-poverty program aimed at the current generation of poor.
No one questions the generosity of this mutation, but it is far from clear that the nearly 15 million families receiving Bolsa Familia will maintain their current income level when the stipend disappears, or that it can be sustained indefinitely.
Bolsa Familia has been a stunning electoral success, and undoubtedly increased bottom-of-the-pyramid consumption in Brazil.
But there are doubts as to what it can achieve in the long run to eradicate poverty.
Third, Rousseff's rhetoric and origins as a militant leftist feed doubts as to whether she will pursue Lula's pragmatic, centrist economic and social policies.
Her democratic credentials are as solid as his, but there are worries about her apparent enthusiasm for state intervention in the economy – she seems to believe in the virtues of Keynesian fiscal stimulus at all times – as well as her ability to control the Workers’ Party the way that Lula did.
Foreign policy has been the most criticized aspect of Lula’s tenure, and Rousseff will most likely make things worse.
As an opponent of the military dictatorship that ruled his country years ago, Lula advocated respect for human rights, free and fair elections, and representative democracy.
But he paid little heed to these issues in office, dismissing concerns about human rights and democracy throughout the region and elsewhere, particularly in Cuba, Venezuela, and Iran.
Lula accentuated the traditional Brazilian attitude of not meddling in Cuban affairs, to the point of traveling to Havana shortly after a hunger-striking dissident died in prison there. When asked what he thought, Lula practically blamed the hunger striker for his death.
He also welcomed Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejhad in Brasilia and São Paulo almost as a hero barely three months after Ahmadinejhad stole Iran’s presidential election in 2009, which resulted in a wave of violent repression. And, within a year of the vote, Lula traveled to Iran.
Lula also turned a blind eye to Hugo Chávez’s increasingly heavy hand in Venezuela, never protesting or questioning his jailing of opponents, his crackdowns on the press, trade unions, and students, or his tampering with the electoral system.
Brazilian corporations, especially construction companies, have huge investments and contracts in Venezuela, and Lula has used his friendship with the Castro brothers and Chávez to placate the left wing of his party, which has never been comfortable with his orthodox economic policies.
Brazil’s ambivalent stance on human rights and democracy under Lula goes hand in hand with its attitude toward nuclear proliferation.
A signatory in the 1960’s of the Tlatelolco Treaty, which banned nuclear weapons from Latin America, Brazil dismantled its enrichment process and research facilities during the 1990’s and ratified the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1998.
Then, in May of this year, Lula teamed up with Turkey in proposing a deal with Iran on its nuclear program, which the latter nominally accepted but the rest of the world did not.
Whereas Brazil and Turkey claimed that the arrangement had been accepted by the US and Europe, the US called for – and got, with the support of Europe – new and stronger United Nations sanctions, which only Brazil and Turkey opposed.
Brazil is on the cusp of sustained growth, higher international stature, and consolidating its middle-class status.
But, until it develops a mature foreign policy that matches its economic aspirations – a foreign policy based on principled leadership, not heedless Third World solidarity – its global influence will be constrained.
Lying and Leadership
CAMBRIDGE – This election season has been marked by frequent charges of dishonesty.
During Britain’s “Brexit” debate, each side charged the other with distorting the truth, though the speed with which the “Leave” camp has been disowning its campaign promises, and the “Remain” camp’s claims have come true, suggests which was telling it like it is.
In the United States’ presidential election campaign, Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, seldom referred to his closest competitor in the primaries without calling him “Lying Ted Cruz.”
Similarly, Trump rarely misses an opportunity to refer to Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee, without attaching the prefix “Crooked.”
When she recently delivered a careful speech on foreign policy, Trump responded by calling her a “world-class liar.”
But, according to PolitiFact, a Pulitzer prize-winning organization that checks the veracity of political statements, 60% of the claims by Trump that it investigated since he began his campaign have been deemed false or “Pants on Fire” false, versus 12% for Clinton.
Some cynics shrug off such exchanges between candidates as typical behavior by politicians.
But that is too facile, because it ignores serious questions concerning how honest we want our political leaders and our political discourse to be.
In fact, we may not want our political leaders to tell the literal truth all the time.
In wartime or during a counterterrorism operation, deception may be a necessary condition of victory or success – which clearly is in our interest.
Other cases are less dramatic but no less important.
Sometimes, leaders have objectives that differ from those of a large part of their followers; rather than revealing the differences, they deceive their followers.
When such actions are self-serving, as in cases of corruption or narcissistic ego gratification, moral censure is easy and appropriate.
In contrast, other leaders with different objectives from their followers invest heavily in educating those who would oppose them to a different point of view.
In some instances, leaders find it impossible to educate their followers adequately in time, or their followers are too deeply divided to reach a consensus that will sustain collective action.
In such circumstances, some leaders may take a paternalist view and decide to deceive their followers for what they see as their larger or later good.
For example, as Senate Majority Leader, Lyndon B. Johnson deceived his southern supporters in order to pass the 1957 civil rights act.
Charles de Gaulle did not reveal his strategy for Algerian independence when he came to power in 1958, because he knew that doing so would doom it to failure.
John F. Kennedy misled the public about the withdrawal of US nuclear warheads from Turkey in the deal that peacefully ended the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962.
Moreover, Franklin D. Roosevelt lied to the American public about a German attack on a US destroyer, in an effort to overcome isolationist resistance to helping Britain before World War II.
And Winston Churchill once said that the truth may be “so precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies.”
The fact that leaders’ ends may sometimes justify violating norms about honesty does not mean that all lies are equal, or that we must suspend our moral judgment in such cases.
Machiavellian deception is often part of a strategy, for example, in bargaining or even in bringing a group to accept new goals.
But intentions matter.
Deception that is purely self-serving turns from a strategy that may benefit others into selfish manipulation.
Even if one admits that deception may sometimes be necessary, one can still ask about the importance of the goal, the availability of alternative means to achieve it, whether the deception is likely to spread through precedent or example, the damage done to various victims, and the deceivers’ accountability (whether their behavior can be discovered and explained later).
In his book, When Presidents Lie, the historian Eric Alterman concludes that presidential lies “inevitably turn into monsters that strangle their creators.”
And presidents may set bad precedents.
When Roosevelt lied about the German attack on the destroyer Greer in 1941, he set a low bar for Johnson’s highly embellished description of a North Vietnamese attack on US naval vessels, which led to the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution of 1964.
It is all too easy for leaders to convince themselves that they are telling a noble lie for the good of their followers, when in fact they are merely lying for political or personal convenience.
That makes it all the more important in a democracy that we carefully examine the nature of the tradeoffs between ends and means that leaders make.
There may indeed be situations where we would approve a political leader telling us a lie, but such cases should remain rare and subject to careful scrutiny.
Otherwise, we debase the currency of our democracy and lower the quality of our political discourse.
This is why it is a mistake for cynics to shrug off Trump’s rhetoric as simply one of the things politicians do.
If PolitiFact and other similar organizations are correct, politicians are not all the same when it comes to lying.
Trump has made many more false statements than any of his opponents, and few (if any) could pass the test of not being self-serving.
An independent and vigorous press that checks the truth is crucial to preserving the integrity of democracy; but so is an electorate that resists cynicism and the debasement of political discourse.
Argentina’s Fresh Start
BUENOS AIRES – For the last 99 years, the presidency of Argentina has rotated between Peronists – Juan Domingo Perón and his populist followers – and reactionary generals.
Every so often, centrists from the Radical Civic Union were voted into office, but their terms ended quickly, in resignations or coups.
In Sunday’s election, Argentina’s voters broke the pattern: for the first time in almost a century, the president will not be a Peronist, a Radical, or an army general.
It is difficult to overstate the significance of the occasion.
According to Héctor Schamis, a political scientist at Georgetown University, if a similar political change had occurred in France or Brazil, the country’s citizens would be celebrating the birth of a new republic.
Argentina’s new president-elect, Mauricio Macri, an engineer by training, is often described in the international press as “center-right.”
But that label is not quite correct.
In Argentina, the left-right divide has been blurred by the policies of the hydra-headed Perónist Justicialist Party, which privatized state companies in the 1990s, only to re-nationalize them later.
Moreover, “center-right” often means “conservative,” and Macri’s victory will not “conserve” the status quo.
Macri is best described as a “liberal” – in the European sense of the word.
That means, first of all, respect for Argentina’s democratic institutions, badly damaged after a decade of rough handling by Presidents Néstor and Cristina Kirchner.
It also means more market-friendly economic policy.
One of Macri’s early post-election proclamations was that he wants a “developmentalist” as finance minister.
In Latin America, that means an economist who worries about growth, employment, and exports, as well as about balancing the budget and paying debts.
Macri will phase out, albeit gradually, the stringent price and capital controls favored by the Peronists.
And his trade and industry minister is unlikely to repeat the antics of a recent predecessor, who placed a gun on the table while negotiating import and export quotas with local producers.
And yet, the world should not expect free-market zealotry from Macri.
He heads a broad coalition that includes his own liberal-minded Republican Proposal Party, the center-left Radical Civic Union, and other centrist groupings.
The coalition will not command a majority in either house of Congress, so legislating will require fashioning temporary ad hoc alliances.
During the campaign, Macri displayed a sensitive political ear.
He understood that Argentines were tired of the Kirchners’ imperious (one might even say authoritarian) political style, whereby anyone who disagreed with them was branded a lackey of dark imperialist forces.
Even for a country with a political history as tumultuous as Argentina’s, partisan polarization and vitriol had reached levels that seemed extreme.
The contrast was striking even on Macri’s first day as president-elect.
Unlike Cristina Kirchner, who gave long-winded speeches but held no press conferences and took no questions from journalists, Macri answered queries until reporters had none left.
Expect more of that.
As President, Macri will inherit a dire economic situation.
The economy is shrinking.
Inflation is above 20% (no one is sure by how much, because the figures have been doctored).
The peso is overvalued.
International reserves are dwindling quickly.
And the budget deficit has reached 7% of GDP.
Some adjustment is inevitable.
Fortunately, there is also some good news.
The current account is roughly in balance, so there is no need for further import compression.
And because no one would lend to Argentina after it defaulted in the early 2000s, the government has relatively little debt.
By allowing the peso to depreciate, Macri could achieve two goals at once.
A weaker currency would stimulate exports and allow imports to grow as foreign-exchange controls are lifted.
Meanwhile, because a significant share of government revenues are dollar-linked, while its expenditures are mostly in pesos, devaluation would reduce the budget deficit.
Macri’s honeymoon is likely to be brief; the Peronist opposition, having rid itself of the Kirchners, will not hesitate to attack the new administration.
But if he uses his political capital wisely, he has a good chance of stabilizing the economy while retaining reasonable levels of political support.
That would change the political outlook not only in Argentina, but throughout Latin America.
In neighboring Brazil, President Dilma Rousseff’s administration made little effort to hide its preference for Macri’s opponent.
As her government plumbs record lows in opinion polls, the centrist opposition has been inching toward power.
Macri’s victory could accelerate that process.
Likewise, Macri’s victory could give voters in Venezuela – headed to the polls on December 6 – the courage they need to cast their ballots against their increasingly authoritarian government.
Indeed, Macri has announced that, in response to human rights violations in Venezuela, he will invoke the so-called “democratic clause” in the statutes of Mercosur, which could lead to Venezuela’s suspension from the regional trading bloc.
This stands in marked contrast to the cowardly and complicit silence of other governments in the region.
If Macri follows through, that action alone will guarantee his presidency a mention in the history books.
The Promise and Peril of Macroprudential Policy
MONTEVIDEO – Central bankers continue to fret about frothy asset markets – as well they should, given the financial crisis of 2008-2009.
Having been burned once, they are now doubly shy.
And China’s recent stock-market plunge has certainly not eased their fears.
Securities prices are extraordinarily high, considering the backdrop of flaccid economic growth.
Bond prices have soared on the back of quantitative easing by the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve, and the European Central Bank.
Property prices from London to San Francisco have risen to nosebleed-inducing levels.
What, if anything, should be done to minimize the risks of a rapid and sharp asset-price reversal?
For many years, this question was framed according to the “lean versus clean” debate: Should central banks “lean” against bubbles, damping down asset prices that create risks to financial stability, or just clean up the mess after bubbles burst?
Proponents of the latter approach, such as former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan, express doubt that policymakers can reliably identify bubbles, and are generally uneasy about managing asset prices.
To be sure, central bankers cannot know for sure when asset prices have reached unsustainable heights.
But they cannot know for sure when inflation is about to take off, either.
Monetary policy is an art, not a science; it is the art of taking one’s best guess.
And, as the 2008-2009 crisis demonstrated, merely cleaning up after the bubbles burst is very costly and inefficient.
So what should central bankers do instead?
Ideally, they would develop a set of specially tailored financial tools.
For example, raising banks’ capital requirements when credit is booming could restrain lending and strengthen banks’ cushion against losses, while setting ceilings on loan-to-value ratios could rein in exuberant property markets, thereby heading off excessive risks for borrowers and lenders.
Unlike such tools, interest-rate policy is a blunt instrument for dealing with financial imbalances.
And using interest rates to address such concerns may interfere with the central bank’s primary objective of keeping inflation near target.
Unfortunately, the development and use of macroprudential tools faces considerable economic and political obstacles.
The Bank of Spain’s attempt to implement adjustable capital requirements for banks, through its system of “dynamic provisioning,” did little to deter aggressive lending during the country’s property boom.
Once a mania gets underway, the temptation to join is simply too strong.
Macroprudential policy may also fail when the regulatory perimeter is too narrow.
In 1929, the Fed attempted to restrain Wall Street with a policy of “direct pressure,” coercing member banks not to lend to security brokers and dealers.
In 2006, it encouraged its members not to lend to commercial property developers.
In both cases, other lenders stepped in to meet the demand for credit, neutralizing the authorities’ macroprudential initiative.
And, while countries like the United Kingdom and New Zealand have experimented with giving central banks the power to place ceilings on loan-to-value ratios, this remains a bridge too far in the United States.
In a country where homeownership is virtually an entitlement, measures making it more difficult would whip up a political firestorm.
Any attempt by the Fed to impose caps on loan-to-value ratios would also excite Americans’ fears of concentrated financial power – fears that have intensified since the crisis.
By seeming to favor one segment of society, such an initiative would merely provide more fodder to those who argue for greater political oversight of the Fed.
Policymakers should respond to these challenges by working hard not only to develop effective macroprudential tools, but also to demonstrate that they can be deployed evenhandedly.
But even with their best efforts, the process will take time.
In the meantime, situations may arise in which the interest rate is the only instrument available for limiting financial excesses.
And, as the recent crisis demonstrated, there are circumstances when central bankers should use it.
Sometimes, the costs of inaction – of permitting financial risks to develop – are simply too high.
There are two key conditions for using policy interest rates as a macroprudential tool.
The first – and most obvious – is that risks to financial stability must be substantial.
But the second condition is equally important: adjusting the interest rate should not jeopardize the central bank’s other key objective, namely achieving its inflation target.
The Swedish Riksbank provides a cautionary case in point.
In 2010, when it began raising its policy rate to contain financial excesses, it put price stability at risk.
Before long, Sweden had succumbed to deflation, from which it is still struggling to recover.
Similarly, after its policy of direct pressure failed in 1929, the Fed raised interest rates to rein in the stock market.
Its attempt to prevent a bubble came at the cost of inducing a depression.
The point of seeking more effective macroprudential policies is to avoid such tragic bargains.
Made in China Remade
SHANGHAI – “It’s a dying business,” said the owner of a garment factory I met in Zhuhai, a city in Guangdong province.
Like many in his line of business, he is packing up. Lured by abundant cheap labor, investors flooded to Zhuhai two decades ago.
Gone, it seems, is the heyday of T-shirts, toys, plastic flowers, tiles, hooks, springs, and the like. Today, the costs of manufacturing such items are lower in countries like Bangladesh and Vietnam than in Guangdong.
As labor costs continue to climb, is China set to lose its coveted spot as the world’s workshop?
Rising labor costs are inevitable.
China’s government introduced tough labor laws and a minimum wage in 2008.
Recent policies to improve rural economic conditions have slowed the flow of migrants from the countryside.
Workers are demanding higher compensation to match the fast-rising cost of living in China’s cities, as manifested in an ongoing and high-profile labor strike at a Honda plant based in Guangdong. Salary was the major point of contention.
Workers on strike demanded a raise in pay from the current 1500 renminbi ($234.00) to 2000-2500 renminbi ($373.13) per month.
Clearly, Chinese factories can no longer offer dirt-cheap prices.
Apparel production is a prime example of China’s declining competiveness in markets dependent on low-cost labor.
According to a study by the US consulting firm Jassin O’Rourke, labor costs in China are higher than in seven other Asian countries.
The average cost for a worker is $1.08 per hour in China’s coastal provinces and $0.55-0.80 in the inland provinces.
India was in seventh place, at $0.51 per hour.
Bangladesh offers the lowest cost, only one-fifth the price of locations like Shanghai and Suzhou.
Adding to China’s labor woes, the financial crisis during the last two years had a disastrous effect on foreign demand.
In 2009, China’s export value fell by 16 percent from 2008. Labor intensive industries were especially hard hit.
In the textiles industry, profits declined for the first time in ten years in 2008.
In March 2009, exports of electronics and IT products tumbled nearly 25% from the previous period.
Although Chinese exports have begun to recover in 2010, the impact of the financial crisis remains palpable.
By January 2010, the value of exports has returned to its previous level in the same period of 2008. But many factories have already perished.
For Chinese manufacturers, a long-term trend of rising costs coupled with a short-term export slump were unprecedented challenges.
But the government and entrepreneurs are not idly sitting by as competitiveness slips.
These adverse conditions have inadvertently propelled a long-delayed restructuring of China’s labor-intensive industries.
As costs surge, Chinese producers are seeking higher value, new niches, and more influence over policymaking.
Along China’s dynamic coastal belt, local governments are drafting new economic blueprints to push their firms up the value-added chain.
Consider the case of a textiles manufacturing center in Jiangsu province, dubbed the “silk capital” of China. Three-quarters of the city’s GDP had been coming from textiles production.
Last year, however, exports fell by about 15%. For local planners, the export shock was a wake-up call for change.
As a result, officials in Jiangsu are no longer content with sewing clothing.
Leveraging a mixture of administrative guidance and monetary incentives, the city government plans to reduce the share of garments in the output of textiles products by 25% in three years and to increase the industrial applications of chemical fibers, which promise much higher returns than apparel production. &nbsp;Already, according to local officials, the city’s factories have acquired the ability to mass-produce super-thin fibers first designed in Japan.
In fact, the global meltdown may turn out to be a blessing in disguise for industrial upgrading.
Slumping orders devastated low-end producers, which barely survived on wafer-thin margins.
Half of China’s toy factories went bust by the end of 2008.
Though alarming in the short term, the eradication of small producers spells good news for those that survived the crisis.
As firms consolidate market share, they gain economies of scale.
Larger firms are more capable of pooling resources for research and development, which is the key to China’s aspirations to climb the value ladder.
Less fragmented industries also lobby better.
Traditionally, contract manufacturers in China are scattered and fiercely competitive. They have little if any say over domestic and international regulations.
Producers in Jiangsu, for example, were forced to adapt constantly to fickle product-safety and environmental standards in export markets.
Compared to producers in the US and Europe, those in China are weakly organized and passive.
This could change.
As surviving firms gain in size, Chinese businesses may exercise more bargaining power vis-à-vis the Chinese government and foreign firms.
Exercising a louder voice in politics at home and abroad could mean reduced uncertainty for Chinese exporters.
Consider the strategy of Lenovo, China’s largest computer manufacturer; it has hired a lobbyist in Washington D.C., reportedly the first Chinese company to do so.
In decades to come, China can no longer sustain the cost advantages that defined its initial period of export success.
But it is a mistake to think that China’s manufacturing will remain in the doldrums.
Compared to many developing countries, China’s government is stable and embraces foreign investment.
Industrial clusters have been established in many parts of the country, where business connections can compensate for rising costs.
Domestic consumption is growing.
Further, as low-end, low-cost labor jobs morph towards higher-end, higher-cost jobs, China will move not only into more valuable manufactured goods, but also into the service industries, such as design.
This change, too, could give the US a difficult new run-for-its-money.
When China’s labor-intensive industries emerge from their metamorphosis, we should expect to see firms that are larger, that invest more in product innovation and design, and that hold more sway over business and trade policies.
So “Made in China” is not losing international dominance yet. It is merely taking on a new – and possibly more formidable – shape.
Madonna and Child
In October, hundreds of millions of people all over the world learned about a one-year-old boy from Malawi called David.
A month before, it seems safe to assume, many of these people had never heard of his native land, a landlocked African nation of about 13 million people bordering Mozambique, Zambia, and Tanzania.
Suddenly, David became the world’s best-known Malawian because it was his good fortune to be adopted by Madonna, the pop star who is to TV cameras what honey is to bears.
But was it really good fortune?
David’s father, Yohane Banda, suddenly in the media spotlight, said he had not understood that his son no longer belonged to him and might never return to Malawi.
Madonna says that that is not what Banda said earlier, although she does not speak his language.
Was it good for the boy, people asked, to be separated from his father?
Human rights advocates began court action to demand his return.