Clearly, issues relating to liability and insurance will have to be addressed in all sharing-economy models, especially financial ones; but these are hardly insurmountable obstacles.
The truth is that the Internet-led process of exploiting under-utilized resources – be they physical and financial capital or human capital and talent – is both unstoppable and accelerating.
The long-term benefits consist not just in efficiency and productivity gains (large enough to show up in macro data), but also in much-needed new jobs requiring a broad range of skills.
Indeed, those who fear the job-destroying and job-shifting power of automation should look upon the sharing economy and breathe a bit of a sigh of relief.
Ancaman Keamanan Global akibat Resistensi Antimikroba
SEATTLE – Kini kita dihadapkan dengan kenyataan suram bahwa pengobatan atau pencegahan penyakit-penyakit menular belum juga mengalami kemajuan besar semenjak keberhasilan vaksin dan terapi antimikroba.
Malah tampaknya dunia dilanda kemunduran, ketika mikroba yang dahulu bisa diobati menjadi resisten terhadap terapi dan jumlah infeksi-infeksi baru yang belum ditemukan obatnya terus bertambah.
Situasi ini memunculkan ancaman global yang serius dan mendesak.
Efek global dari krisis Ebola tahun 2014 di Afrika Barat atau wabah SARS tahun 2003 yang mematikan negara-negara maju seperti Singapura dan Kanada, tentu masih hangat di pikiran kita.
Kemunculan infeksi dari resistensi antimikroba (AMR) yang sangat mematikan dan menyebar dengan cepat akan menimbulkan korban tak terhingga, belum lagi penderitaan yang tak terbayangkan.
Konsekuensinya bisa serupa dengan buruknya serangan teroris berskala besar.
Masyarakat akan terkucilkan, perbatasan negara terancam harus ditutup, dan perjalanan menjadi terbatas atau bahkan dihentikan sementara.
Sistem kesehatan berisiko terpecah-belah atau runtuh, sama halnya dengan perekonomian.
Kemungkinan terjadinya peristiwa malapetaka semacam itu menunjukkan bahwa ancaman yang ditimbulkan dari penyakit-penyakit menular – baik itu akibat mikroba yang kebal terhadap banyak obat atau penemuan mikroba baru – adalah tantangan terbesar yang dihadapi generasi sekarang.
Ini bukan sekadar risiko kesehatan masyarakat, tapi juga ancaman bagi keamanan nasional dan global.
Dengan demikian, penanganannya harus dilakukan berdasarkan solusi yang komprehensif dan efektif.
Penelitian dan pengembangan untuk produksi obat-obatan atau vaksin baru biasanya memakan waktu lama, kerap kali membutuhkan lebih dari satu dasawarsa.
Litbang juga berbiaya tinggi, ratusan juta dolar dikeluarkan dalam proses pembuatan satu produk.
Selain itu, tidak ada jaminan itu semua akan berhasil; bahkan, setiap satu produk yang sukses, setidaknya ada sembilan kandidat potensial yang gagal.
Mengingat besarnya risiko yang dipertaruhkan, tidak mengejutkan ketika perusahaan-perusahaan farmasi bersikap sangat berhati-hati dalam menentukan investasi pada obat atau vaksin baru, dan hanya memilih investasi yang menjanjikan keuntungan finansial yang cukup untuk menutupi biaya kesuksesan atau kegagalan, serta menghasilkan return yang masuk akal
Banyak gagasan dimunculkan untuk memecahkan masalah investasi tersebut, seperti menawarkan hadiah untuk produk yang berhasil, menggagas sejumlah insentif baru untuk investasi industri, dan merancang mekanisme pendanaan yang orisinal untuk mendukung riset dalam penanggulangan penyakit-penyakit menular baru.
Semuanya terpuji dan bisa berdampak, namun ide-ide itu hanya bisa menawarkan kemajuan bertahap.
Perlu ada solusi yang lebih ambisius.
Setiap negara pasti siap menyalurkan sebagian PDB-nya untuk dialokasikan pada pertahanan atau keamanan nasional.
Ancaman global dari infeksi penyakit menular baru atau resistensi obat harus dijadikan prioritas dalam konteks serupa, agar semua negara berkomitmen untuk mengucurkan pembiayaan, modal intelektual, dan sumber daya yang dimiliki demi mendukung penemuan, pengembangan, produksi, penyimpanan, dan distribusi yang adil untuk setiap agen antimikroba dan vaksin baru.
Tapi negara tidak akan membuat komitmen kecuali mereka sadar akan risiko yang dihadapi.
Kerugian akibat penyakit-penyakit menular baru diperkirakan mencapai 60 miliar dolar AS per tahun; jika investasi dilakukan sejak dini, total kerugian tersebut dapat diminimalisasi.
Investasi yang dikeluarkan sebaiknya dikumpulkan untuk menghasilkan serangkaian produk yang ampuh melawan penyakit-penyakit menular.
Banyak cara yang bisa dilakukan.
Salah satu yang termudah ialah pengucuran dana kepada ilmuwan di perguruan tinggi, kerja sama pengembangan produk, perusahaan biotech, dan perusahaan farmasi besar apabila terdapat peluang.
Strategi ini akan memungkinkan proses-proses yang sudah berjalan bisa disertai dengan momentum baru berdasarkan ketersediaan dana-dana baru.
Sayangnya, sejarah mengajarkan kita bahwa upaya ini tidak bisa melampaui kemajuan di luar tahap pengembangan saat ini.
Sebuah alternatif yang diusulkan adalah pendirian perusahaan farmasi nirlaba, mutakhir, dan bercakupan global yang disertai dengan anggaran penelitian setara dengan lima perusahaan profit terbesar dunia, dan memiliki sasaran tunggal untuk pembuatan serangkaian produk guna mengatasi masalah yang ditimbulkan penyakit-penyakit menular.
Sama seperti perusahaan profit manapun, personel bagian manajemen dan ilmiah yang akan bertugas haruslah dipilih dari tim yang terbaik, sehingga perlu juga ditetapkan kompensasi yang bersaing untuk menarik mereka.
Tim manajemen akan mempertanggungjawabkan kinerja mereka di hadapan dewan investor, yang terdiri atas perwakilan negara-negara yang menyediakan dana dan para ilmuwan yang menyumbangkan modal intelektualnya.
Agar konsisten dengan praktik industri, desain produk harus dibuat berdasarkan gabungan riset internal dan in-licensing atau akuisisi dengan inovasi eksternal.
Infrastruktur yang memadai untuk uji-uji klinis harus disiapkan untuk mendukung riset yang dijalankan tidak hanya di negara-negara maju tapi juga di wilayah-wilayah terpencil, sebagai asal mula timbulnya sejumlah penyakit menular yang mengancam banyak negara.
Pekerjaan yang dilakukan perusahaan baru ini akan didukung oleh perjanjian-perjanjian yang disepakati antara badan-badan regulator tentang syarat-syarat pendaftaran produk baru, para pemegang HKI tentang penyampingan hak-hak royalti, serta antara pemerintah mengenai perlindungan tanggung jawab bagi perusahaan dan kompensasi bagi korban jika timbul efek samping tak terduga dari konsumsi produk baru. Komunitas internasional harus menaikkan kapasitas manufaktur yang ada, merancang jalur distribusi baru, dan menjaga kapasitas penyimpanan untuk persediaan produk-produk bukan penggunaan segera.
Jelas bahwa strategi ini adalah kerja keras berat, apalagi dengan beragam rincian yang perlu dikelola.
Tapi entah bagaimana, kita harus menghapus kesangsian dan bertindak sekarang, jangan sampai kita lengah sehingga ancaman global yang urgen ini luput dari perhatian kita.
Ini adalah perang yang harus kita menangkan.
Inflation Comes to China
SHANGHAI – Macroeconomic conditions in any country are like running water.
How large and fast is the flow?
Where does it originate and where does it go?
The “main stream” of China’s economy is the vast flow of inward investment.
China’s economy is prone to rapid growth, with buoyant investment demand sustaining powerful short-term inflationary pressures.
As a result, credit controls on investment projects and a close watch on the money supply have been used to promote macroeconomic stability since China began its market reforms.
But in 2003, following five years of deflation, China’s economy entered a new phase.
Overcapacity vanished, constraints on consumption were lifted, and a dramatic increase in household demand followed.
Since then, heavy industries – steel, automobiles, machinery, building materials, energy, and raw materials – have experienced an unprecedented investment boom, reflecting demand for urban construction, housing, transport, infrastructure, and equipment renewal.
Not surprisingly, the economy began to overheat.
Productivity and profitability in manufacturing and heavy industries picked up, boosting China’s national savings dramatically.
Indeed, the huge increase in China’s trade surplus in recent years is a consequence not of the renminbi’s exchange rate, as many believe, but of the domestic savings’ increase.
Yet, from 2005 to early 2007, macroeconomic policy was focused on reining in the surplus.
Most importantly, the renminbi was allowed to appreciate, and the export tax rebate was virtually eliminated.
In early 2007, because inflation was not really visible, the government did not regard it as a major problem.
But when price increases accelerated in the second half of the year, the authorities began to worry.
The central bank (PBOC) initially attributed it to excess liquidity, and so began to use monetary policy tools, raising interest rates five times since late 2007.
As a result, the interest rate for 12-month fixed deposits has reached 3.9%.
Moreover, the PBOC has issued Central Bank Notes six times, reinforcing its anti-inflationary effort.
Nevertheless, by the end of October, M2 money supply had increased by 18.4% – growing by 1.3% faster year on year, and exceeding the 16% target.
By the start of 2008, it was clear that controlling inflation and cooling an overheating economy had become the government’s main economic target.
Indeed, the government’s key economic committee, the Central Work Committee, has concluded that after years of “high growth and low inflation,” China is on a route to “high growth with high inflation.”
This invariably means that fiscal and monetary stability will become a priority while controlling the trade surplus has become a lower one.
The problem is that, until now, the major cause of inflation has been rapidly rising manufacturing costs, and there is no sign of a slowdown in energy and raw material prices.
Moreover, a new labor law and income policies will further increase workforce costs.
And, due to rising consumer prices, the nominal interest rate will continue to rise.
As a result, with investment demand remaining robust, inflation could spread.
In the face of growing inflation, output is set to suffer.
In order to curb investment demand, tighter credit rationing and monetary policy are inevitable in 2008, while investment projects and land use will be subject to more rigorous control.
Likewise, increasing pressure from growing labor costs will force enterprises to lower their profit expectations and cut costs, negatively affecting output growth and employment in the short run.
It will be difficult to ease these inflationary pressures this year.
International commodity prices will continue to rise, increases in domestic labor costs and prices of non-tradable goods cannot easily be stemmed, the international economic situation will encourage further capital inflows, and asset inflation will persist.
All these factors will push inflation above the 2007 level.
With export performance also set to slow, owing to the economic downturn in the United States, employment and growth could be weakened further, which implies mounting pressure on China’s government – and thus on the fiscal deficit, creating another source of inflationary pressure.
And, once an inflationary trend emerges and economic growth slows, the steady- as-you go pattern to China’s decade-long boom will be over.
Inflation is Now the Lesser Evil
CAMBRIDGE – It is time for the world’s major central banks to acknowledge that a sudden burst of moderate inflation would be extremely helpful in unwinding today’s epic debt morass.
Yes, inflation is an unfair way of effectively writing down all non-indexed debts in the economy.
Price inflation forces creditors to accept repayment in debased currency.
Yes, in principle, there should be a way to fix the ills of the financial system without resort to inflation.
Unfortunately, the closer one examines the alternatives, including capital injections for banks and direct help for home mortgage holders, the clearer it becomes that inflation would be a help, not a hindrance.
Modern finance has succeeded in creating a default dynamic of such stupefying complexity that it defies standard approaches to debt workouts.
Securitization, structured finance, and other innovations have so interwoven the financial system’s various players that it is essentially impossible to restructure one financial institution at a time.
System-wide solutions are needed.
Moderate inflation in the short run – say, 6% for two years – would not clear the books.
But it would significantly ameliorate the problems, making other steps less costly and more effective.
True, once the inflation genie is let out of the bottle, it could take several years to put it back in.
No one wants to relive the anti-inflation fights of the 1980’s and 1990’s.
But right now, the global economy is teetering on the precipice of disaster.
We already have a full-blown global recession.
Unless governments get ahead of the problem, we risk a severe worldwide downturn unlike anything we have seen since the 1930’s.
The necessary policy actions involve aggressive macroeconomic stimulus.
Fiscal policy should ideally focus on tax cuts and infrastructure spending.
Central banks are already cutting interest rates left and right.
Policy interest rates around the world are likely to head toward zero; the United States and Japan are already there.
The United Kingdom and the euro zone will eventually decide to go most of the way.
Steps must also be taken to recapitalize and re-regulate the financial system.
Huge risks will remain as long as the financial system remains on government respirators, as is effectively the case in the US, UK, the euro zone, and many other countries today.&nbsp;
Most of the world’s largest banks are essentially insolvent, and depend on continuing government aid and loans to keep them afloat.
Many banks have already acknowledged their open-ended losses in residential mortgages.
As the recession deepens, however, bank balance sheets will be hammered further by a wave of defaults in commercial real estate, credit cards, private equity, and hedge funds.
That brings us back to the inflation option.
In addition to tempering debt problems, a short burst of moderate inflation would reduce the real (inflation-adjusted) value of residential real estate, making it easier for that market to stabilize.
Absent significant inflation, nominal house prices probably need to fall another 15% in the US, and more in Spain, the UK, and many other countries.
If inflation rises, nominal house prices don’t need to fall as much.
Of course, given the ongoing recession, it may not be so easy for central banks to achieve any inflation at all right now.
Indeed, it seems like avoiding sustained deflation , or falling prices, is all they can manage.
Fortunately, creating inflation is not rocket science.
All central banks need to do is to keep printing money to buy up government debt.
The main risk is that inflation could overshoot, landing at 20 or 30% instead of 5-6%.
Indeed, fear of overshooting paralyzed the Bank of Japan for a decade.
But this problem is easily negotiated.
With good communication policy, inflation expectations can be contained, and inflation can be brought down as quickly as necessary.
It will take every tool in the box to fix today’s once-in-a-century financial crisis.
Fear of inflation, when viewed in the context of a possible global depression, is like worrying about getting the measles when one is in danger of getting the plague.
Inflation or Deflation?
CAMBRIDGE – The investors that I talk to these days are not sure whether to worry more about future inflation in the United States or about future deflation.
The good news is that the answer – for at least the next few years – is that investors should worry about “neither.”
America’s high rate of unemployment and the low rates of capacity utilization imply that there is little upward pressure on wages and prices in the US. And the recent rise in the value of the dollar relative to the euro and the British pound helps by reducing import costs.
Those who emphasize the risk of inflation often point to America’s enormous budget deficit.
The Congressional Budget Office projects that the country’s fiscal deficit will average 5% of GDP for the rest of the decade, driving government debt to 90% of GDP, from less than 60% of GDP in 2009.
While those large fiscal deficits will be a major problem for the US economy if nothing is done to bring them down, they need not be inflationary.
Sustained budget deficits crowd out private investment, push up long-term real interest rates, and increase the burden on future taxpayers.
But they do not cause inflation unless they lead to excess demand for goods and labor.
The last time the US faced large budget deficits, in the early 1980’s, inflation declined sharply because of a tight monetary policy.
Europe and Japan now have both large fiscal deficits and low inflation.
The inflation pessimists worry that the government will actually choose a policy of faster price growth to reduce the real value of the government debt.
But such a strategy can work only in countries where the duration of the government’s debt is long and the interest rate on that debt is fixed.
That is because an increase in the inflation rate causes interest rates on new debt to rise by an equal amount. The resulting higher interest payments add to the national debt, offsetting the erosion of the real value of the existing debt caused by the higher inflation.
In the current situation, the US cannot reduce the real value of its government debt significantly by indulging in a bout of inflation, because the average maturity on existing debt is very short – only about four years.
And the projected fiscal deficits imply that the additional debt that will be issued during the next decade will be as large as the total stock of debt today.
So raising inflation is no cure for the government’s current debt or future deficits.
Those who worry about deflation note that the US consumer price index has not increased at all in the past three months. Why won’t that continue and feed on itself – as it has in Japan – as consumers delay spending in anticipation of even lower prices in the future?
And doesn’t Japan’s persistent deflation since the early 1990’s also show that, once it begins, deflation cannot be reversed by a policy of easy money or fiscal deficits?
But the recent weakness in US prices is very different from the situation that prevails in Japan.
Zero inflation for the past three months has been a one-time event driven by the fall in energy prices.
The other broad components of the consumer price index have increased in recent months, and the consumer price index is up about two percentage points over the past 12 months.
Moreover, surveys of consumer expectations show that US households expect prices to rise at more than 2% in both the coming year and the more distant future.
That expected inflation rate is consistent with the difference in interest rates between ordinary US government bonds and Treasury Inflation Protected Securities.
With such expectations, consumers have no reason to put off purchases.
A second reason for relatively low inflation in recent years has been a temporary fall in the cost of production.
As firms shed workers during the economic downturn, output fell more slowly. The resulting rise in output per worker, together with slow wage growth, reduced unit labor costs.
That process is now coming to an end as employment rises.
So the good news is that the possibility of significant inflation or deflation during the next few years is low on the list of economic risks faced by the US economy and by financial investors.
But, while inflation is very likely to remain low for the next few years, I am puzzled that bond prices show that investors apparently expect inflation to remain low for ten years and beyond, and that they also do not require higher interest rates as compensation for the risk that the fiscal deficit will cause real interest rates to rise in the future.
The sharp decline in energy prices is the primary reason for the recent drop in the inflation rate.
In the US, the core inflation rate (which strips out changes in volatile energy and food prices) was 1.6% over the last 12 months.
Moreover, the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the European Central Bank understand that even if energy prices do not rise in the coming year, a stable price level for oil and other forms of energy will cause the inflation rate to rise.
In the US, the inflation rate has also been depressed by the rise in the value of the dollar relative to the euro and other currencies, which has caused import prices to decline.
This, too, is a “level effect," implying that the inflation rate will rise once the dollar's exchange rate stops appreciating.
But, despite this understanding, the major central banks continue to maintain extremely low interest rates as a way to increase demand and, with it, the rate of inflation.
They are doing this by promising to keep short-term rates low; maintaining large portfolios of private and government bonds; and, in Europe and Japan, continuing to engage in large-scale asset purchases.
The central bankers justify their concern about low inflation by arguing that a negative demand shock could shift their economies into a period of prolonged deflation, in which the overall price level declines year after year.
That would have two adverse effects on aggregate demand and employment.
First, the falling price level would raise the real value of the debts that households and firms owe, making them poorer and reducing their willingness to spend.
Second, negative inflation means that real interest rates rise, because central banks cannot lower the nominal interest rate below zero.
Higher real interest rates, in turn, depress business investment and residential construction.
In theory, by depressing aggregate demand, the combination of increased real debt and higher real interest rates could lead to further price declines, leading to even larger negative inflation rates.
As a result, the real interest rate would rise further, pushing the economy deeper into a downward spiral of falling prices and declining demand.
Fortunately, we have relatively little experience with deflation to test the downward-spiral theory.
The most widely cited example of a deflationary economy is Japan.
But Japan has experienced a low rate of inflation and some sustained short periods of deflation without ever producing a downward price spiral.
Japan's inflation rate fell from nearly 8% in 1980 to zero in 1987.
It then stayed above zero until 1995, after which it remained low but above zero until 1999, and then varied between zero and -1.7% until 2012.
Moreover, low inflation and periods of deflation did not prevent real incomes from rising in Japan.
From 1999 to 2013, real per capita GDP rose at an annual rate of about 1% (which reflected a more modest rise of real GDP and an actual decline in population).
Why, then, are so many central bankers so worried about low inflation rates?
One possible explanation is that they are concerned about the loss of credibility implied by setting an inflation target of 2% and then failing to come close to it year after year.
Another possibility is that the world's major central banks are actually more concerned about real growth and employment, and are using low inflation rates as an excuse to maintain exceptionally generous monetary conditions.
And yet a third explanation is that central bankers want to keep interest rates low in order to reduce the budget cost of large government debts.
None of this might matter were it not for the fact that extremely low interest rates have fueled increased risk-taking by borrowers and yield-hungry lenders.
The result has been a massive mispricing of financial assets.
And that has created a growing risk of serious adverse effects on the real economy when monetary policy normalizes and asset prices correct.
The Information Revolution Gets Political
NEW DELHI – The second anniversary of the “Arab Spring” in Egypt was marked by riots in Tahrir Square that made many observers fear that their optimistic projections in 2011 had been dashed.
Part of the problem is that expectations had been distorted by a metaphor that described events in short-run terms.
If, instead of “Arab Spring,” we had spoken of “Arab revolutions,” we might have had more realistic expectations.
Revolutions unfold over decades, not seasons or years.
Consider the French Revolution, which began in 1789.
Who would have predicted that within a decade, an obscure Corsican soldier would lead French armies to the banks of the Nile, or that the Napoleonic Wars would disrupt Europe until 1815?
If we think of the Arab revolutions, there are many surprises yet to come.
So far, most Arab monarchies have had enough legitimacy, money, and force to survive the waves of popular revolt that have brought down secular republican autocrats like Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak and Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, but we are only two years into the revolutionary process.
Beneath the Arab political revolutions lies a deeper and longer process of radical change that is sometimes called the information revolution.
We cannot yet fully grasp its implications, but it is fundamentally transforming the nature of power in the twenty-first century, in which all states exist in an environment that even the most powerful authorities cannot control as they did in the past.
Governments have always worried about the flow and control of information, and our age is hardly the first to be strongly affected by dramatic changes in information technology.
Gutenberg’s printing press was important to the origins of the Protestant Reformation and the ensuing wars in Europe.
Today, however, a much larger part of the population, both within and among countries, has access to the power that comes from information.
The current global revolution is based on rapid technological advances that have dramatically decreased the cost of creating, finding, and transmitting information.
Computing power doubled roughly every 18 months for 30 years, and, by the beginning of the twenty-first century, it cost one-thousandth of what it did in the early 1970’s.
If the price of automobiles had fallen as quickly as the price of semiconductors, a car today would cost $5.
As recently as the 1980’s, phone calls over copper wire could carry only one page of information per second; today, a thin strand of optical fiber can transmit 90,000 volumes in a second.
In 1980, a gigabyte of data storage occupied a room; now, 200 gigabytes of storage fits in your shirt pocket.
Even more crucial has been the enormous drop in the cost of transmitting information, which reduces barriers to entry.
As computing power has become cheaper and computers have shrunk to the size of smart phones and other portable devices, the decentralizing effects have been dramatic.
Power over information is much more widely distributed today than even a few decades ago.
As a result, world politics is no longer the sole province of governments.
Individuals and private organizations – including WikiLeaks, multinational corporations, NGOs, terrorists, or spontaneous social movements – have been empowered to play a direct role.
The spread of information means that informal networks are undercutting the monopoly of traditional bureaucracy, with all governments less able to control their agendas.
Political leaders enjoy fewer degrees of freedom before they must respond to events, and must then communicate not only with other governments, but with civil society as well.
But it would be a mistake to “over-learn” the lessons that the Arab revolutions have taught about information, technology, and power.
While the information revolution could, in principle, reduce large states’ power and increase that of small states and non-state actors, politics and power are more complex than such technological determinism implies.
In the middle of the twentieth century, people feared that computers and new means of communications would create the kind of central governmental control dramatized in George Orwell’s 1984.
And, indeed, authoritarian governments in China, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere have used the new technologies to try to control information.
Ironically for cyber-utopians, the electronic trails created by social networks like Twitter and Facebook sometimes make the job of the secret police easier.
After its initial embarrassment by Twitter in 2009, the Iranian government was able to suppress the country’s “green” movement in 2010.
Similarly, while the “great firewall of China” is far from perfect, the government has managed thus far to cope, even as the Internet has burgeoned in the country.
In other words, some aspects of the information revolution help the small, but some help the already large and powerful.
Size still matters.
While a hacker and a government can both create information and exploit the Internet, it matters for many purposes that large governments can deploy tens of thousands of trained people and have access to vast computing power to crack codes or intrude into other organizations.
Likewise, while it is now cheap to disseminate existing information, the collection and production of new information often requires major investment, and, in many competitive situations, new information matters most.
Intelligence collection is a good example, and the elaborate Stuxnet worm that disabled Iranian nuclear centrifuges seems to have been a government creation.
Governments and large states still have more resources than information-empowered private actors, but the stage on which they play is more crowded.
How will the ensuing drama unfold?
Who will win, and who will lose?
It will take decades, not a single season, to answer such questions.
As events in Egypt and elsewhere have shown, we are only just beginning to comprehend the effects of the information revolution on power in this century.
The Truth about Medical Consent
LONDON – Is it acceptable for doctors to withhold information from their patients?
Some claim that it is not only acceptable; it is desirable.
Hope, they argue, is critical to aid recovery, and a bleak diagnosis should not be allowed to kill it.
In his influential 1803 text Medical Ethics, the English physician Thomas Percival described the doctor’s role as “the minister of hope and comfort to the sick,” noting that at times they should conceal alarming information from their patients.
A patient’s life, Percival wrote, can be shortened not only by a doctor’s acts, but also by his words and manner.
The Canadian physician William Osler (whose patients included Walt Whitman) was another fervent believer in the healing power of hope.
Indeed, his “unfailing but occasionally unwarranted optimism,” a biographer noted, was one of his most outstanding characteristics.
In a 1958 textbook on medical ethics and law, another eminent doctor stated that it is “often clinically wise and in the patient’s interest to withhold certain matters.”
A few years ago, I interviewed a family doctor on the same subject.
He described his first “house call” in the 1960s, when he and a senior colleague visited a jovial protestant minister who had no idea that he only had weeks to live, owing to aggressive colon cancer.
The senior doctor suggested giving the patient large doses of painkillers, which they would tell the patient were antibiotics to treat an “infection.”
The junior doctor, uncomfortable with this deceit, asked the minister’s wife for permission to tell the truth, and after much hesitation, she agreed.
When the minister heard the news, he fell into a state of such despair that he refused all painkillers.
He was sure he would end up in hell.
More than 40 years later, that doctor told me: “To this day, I can see his face.
It was the biggest mistake of my medical career.”
Nowadays, this kind of medical paternalism is no longer the rule in many countries.
To avoid exposing themselves to claims of negligence or even, in rare cases, criminal assault, doctors must disclose an ever increasing amount of information, however bleak, about treatment risks, benefits, and alternatives, enabling the patient to give “informed consent.”
Maintaining a patient’s hope while fulfilling the obligation of disclosure is one of the most difficult tasks doctors face.
It requires a deep knowledge of the human heart; a single word, a gesture, or a look can lift or wreck a patient’s spirits.
Many doctors struggle to obtain proper consent.
One problem is that doctors receive little formal training in obtaining consent, with medical schools teaching only the basics.
As a result, many doctors are unaware of the subtleties of what constitutes valid consent in the eyes of the law and their professional body – a task made more difficult by the evolving rules on consent.
Another problem is that many doctors consider obtaining consent to be a tedious obligation, with senior doctors sometimes delegating the task to less experienced colleagues.
Moreover, doctors often obtain consent hastily, in a way that sounds almost rehearsed, as if unaware that the patient is receiving the information for the first time.
This haughty attitude is reflected in the jargon of “consenting a patient” – as though it were something done to a patient, like drawing blood or administering an injection: “Dr. Smith, please go consent Mr. Jones.”
Instead, consent should be viewed as a patient’s cherished possession, which he or she may choose to relinquish, if presented with a sufficiently compelling case.
Consent should not be snatched away, like a train ticket held out for the conductor.
The problem is compounded when consent is obtained just hours before a major operation, and months after the last consultation with the surgeon.
This can lead patients to consent to procedures that they do not understand – or want.
A colleague shared the story of a patient who told the porter pushing her on a trolley to the operating theater that she had been looking forward to the operation.
Once she was “cured,” she said, she could start a family.
She was just a few feet away from a hysterectomy.
The porter immediately called the medical team, and the operation was postponed.
Either the patient was not given the information, or she did not fully understand it.
As patients, future patients, or relatives, we all have an interest in raising the standards of consent.
Of course, some may prefer the paternalism of old.
But we should be able to make that choice, letting doctors know if we would prefer to be well informed or minimally informed.
Likewise, if we want more information, we should ask more questions.
We can ask for additional details about the procedure and other options.
We can ask for the doctor’s own complication rates.
If we are dissatisfied with an answer, we can seek a second opinion.
We can ask the doctor what she would do in our position, or what advice she would give if the patient was her own child or parent.
And, if we still are not sure, we can request more time to consider our options.
Obtaining consent is a vital but often overlooked skill for doctors.
Understanding why so many doctors struggle with it is the first step toward raising the standards of consent.
New Battlegrounds in Development Finance
PRETORIA – The popularity of public-private partnerships (PPPs) to support infrastructure development in emerging countries is growing worldwide.
The G-20 backs PPPs to boost global growth and create jobs.
The BRICS economies (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) see them as a way to build essential infrastructure quickly and cheaply.
The United Nations hopes that infrastructure PPPs will provide the means to realize its post-2015 global development agenda.
PPPs’ new appeal may redefine not just development economics, but also the overall relationship between rich and poor countries – though not necessarily for the better.
The PPP bandwagon has three essential components: an explosion in infrastructure finance (backed by pension and other large funds); the creation of “pipelines” of lucrative mega-PPP projects to exploit countries’ raw materials; and the dismantling of environmental and social safeguards.
Each must be carefully monitored as the use of PPPs expands.
The World Bank is already seeking to double its lending within a decade by expanding infrastructure projects.
Its new Global Infrastructure Facility (GIF) will mobilize global pension and sovereign wealth funds to invest in infrastructure as a specific asset class.
The emerging world has also been active.
The BRICS recently announced plans for a New Development Bank (NDB) for infrastructure and sustainable development.
Its first Regional Center for Africa will be based in South Africa.
China will launch a new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
Both banks aim to offer alternatives to the US-led World Bank and the Japan-led Asian Development Bank, respectively.
Indeed, these new development-finance institutions are seen as a reaction against the Bretton Woods institutions, whose pursuit of neoliberal austerity policies and failure to reform their governance structures to share power with emerging economies, has been blamed for strangling public spending, de-industrialization, and the dismantling of national development banks.
Many emerging countries also resent the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguards, which they see as compromising their national sovereignty.
In response to this criticism, the Bank is revising its safeguards and enforcement mechanisms.
But weaker oversight by the World Bank would leave loan recipients to monitor and enforce environmental and social standards themselves – regardless of their resources or political will to do so –thus jeopardizing efforts to defend the rights of indigenous peoples, resettle displaced people, mitigate environmental damage, or protect forests and biodiversity.
The weakening of World Bank safeguards might also trigger a “race to the bottom,” pitting private or state investors, new financing institutions, and a deregulated World Bank against one another, while provoking a popular backlash.
That is why it is important to have citizens’ groups that can step in to ensure that investments operate fairly.
Though civil-society groups have long monitored the “supply side” – the project financing – they often ignore the “demand side” – namely, the value and impacts of the projects being implemented.
This is especially the case for infrastructure investments in energy, water, transport, and information and communications technology (ICT).
The Program for Infrastructure Development in Africa, for example, has planned $360 billion worth of “bankable mega-projects” in these sectors by 2040.
PIDA gives priority to energy (especially hydropower) projects to support mining operations and oil and gas pipelines, while sidelining renewable energy technologies, such as solar, wind, and geothermal.
Similar concerns surround the project “pipelines” of the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America and the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund in Asia.
Though some PPP projects offer high returns, they also demand hefty additional guarantees from the host government to offset private-sector risk.
In this way, fundamental tensions are created both in the way these deals are put together and in the overall conduct of North-South and South-South integration.
For example, powerful groups and transnational corporations (such as the World Economic Forum, General Electric, and Rio Tinto) are gaining influence within the G-20, the G-7, and the BRICS, whose members compete among themselves for access to resources and markets.
That competition now features new Infrastructure Project Preparation Facilities (IPPFs) to accelerate and replicate large PPPs with a disturbing reliance on big dams and fossil-fuel infrastructure, such as Nigeria’s gas-supply pipeline to the European Union – a top priority of PIDA that implies slow progress toward a low-carbon future.
Indeed, the struggle for sustainability, especially in Africa, is becoming a new battleground, featuring deployments by the BRICS, the G-20, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), Mercosur, and other international groupings and local vested interests.
To understand how this plays out requires a rigorous new development paradigm.
That is a difficult challenge, because civil society organizations with the greatest interest in learning how to cope with the new pressures tend to specialize in specific development areas, such as the Millennium Development Goals, or sectoral issues, rather than having a broader view of how development finance institutions and their big shareholders operate.
A revived World Social Forum might take on the task, by reverting to its original intention of being a counterweight to the WEF.
In Africa, pan-African bodies charged with coordinated oversight and agenda-setting authority should be judged by whether mega-PPPs in infrastructure reinforce a colonial-style extraction and consumption economy, or create a healthy and sustainable economy for generations to come.
New Equities for Infrastructure Investment
SINGAPORE – Infrastructure projects can be among the most productive investments a society can make, with clear links to a country's economic growth.
For private investors, however, the situation is more complicated.
Infrastructure projects can offer reliable – if lower-than-average – returns.
But existing asset classes all too often fail to provide the structure needed for these projects to compete with traditional equity or debt.
At the World Economic Forum's annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland, in January, Walter Kielholz, Chairman of Swiss Re, and former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown advocated for the creation of a new asset class for infrastructure – as we have done previously, as well.
So how, exactly, can the world harness the potential of private money for infrastructure?
The size of the pie is huge, and so are the opportunities for private investors.
The pipeline for infrastructure projects in emerging markets is estimated to have surpassed $1 trillion – $150 billion of which is expected to be raised from private sources.
In mature markets, infrastructure investment is projected to reach $4 trillion by 2017.
Our analysis of investment deals over the past 18 months shows that public-private partnerships increasingly rely on capital markets to source funds, even as banks rein in lending in order to comply with the regulatory provisions set out by the Third Basel Accord.
Liquidity remains limited in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, the legacy of which includes a regulatory regime that is not conducive to long-term investment.
Though financing for public infrastructure has returned to 2008 levels, little of it is being funneled into new projects.
Most funds have targeted existing infrastructure – investments that are considered relatively safe, because they entail little or no construction risk and have demonstrated their potential to generate stable cash revenues.
In order to overcome the obstacles to investment, we propose the creation of an asset class that we call “buy-and-hold equity" (BHE).
This asset class would sit between traditional equity and debt, with investors able to hold it for 15 years or longer.
It would offer returns close to those yielded by equity investments, but with some of the risk offset by its long-term nature.
Risk would be further mitigated through the participation of large, influential investors, including sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, and possibly international financial institutions.
Public contributions, likely backstopped by multilateral lenders, would provide projects with something close to sovereign risk profiles.
Finally, the regulated nature of cash flows would allow for better pre-defined return structures than traditional private or public equity can offer.
The development of BHE would require a new private-sector investment platform, structured to provide bespoke returns for its different participants.
The private sector would bring in infrastructure investment expertise, while sovereign funds and international financial institutions would provide the bulk of the capital and stability.
Naturally, the platform would focus on projects with defined cash flows and contractual terms (which could include associated risk-mitigation strategies) guaranteed for 20-30 years.
Not all infrastructure projects will be appropriate for this new asset class.
Those best suited will be physical assets that are irreplaceable or core to a country's economy.
Assets with competitive advantages, protections against inflation, limited sensitivity to the economic cycle, and clear, long-term cash flows would also qualify.
Ideally, the investment platform would create a sustained project pipeline by establishing a private-sector-funded structure that does not solely rely on governments or international financial institutions to bring ventures to the market.
The platform would act not only as an investment vehicle, but also as a project initiator, mining opportunities around the world and identifying and classifying them according to a systematic approach.
Both greenfield and brownfield developments would be considered.
The platform would provide its own capital, as well as any technical, operational, and managerial expertise required to classify projects according to risk, thereby enabling the creation of indices that investors could monitor and study.
For projects judged to be secure, the platform could act as a catalyst for long-term investments typical of institutional investors and pension funds.
Designed properly, a new BHE asset class for private and public infrastructure could unleash the power of the market in the interest of the public good.
Given fiscal and other constraints on governments' capacity, it is an asset well worth having.
Infrastruktur untuk Masa Depan yang Berkelanjutan
WASHINGTON, DC – Infrastruktur adalah penggerak yang kuat untuk mencapai pertumbuhan ekonomi dan pembangunan yang inklusif, mampu meningkatkan permintaan agregat saat ini dan memberi landasan bagi pertumbuhan masa depan.
Infrastruktur juga menjadi unsur utama dalam agenda perubahan iklim.
Jika pembangunannya dilakukan dengan buruk, infrastruktur dapat menjadi bagian terbesar dari permasalahan, namun sebaliknya bila dilakukan secara tepat akan menjadi bagian dari solusi.
Dalam 15 tahun ke depan, investasi pada infrastrutur dengan jumlah lebih dari $90 triliun diperlukan di seluruh dunia.
Angka tersebut adalah dua kali nilai seluruh saham infrastruktur saat ini dan kenaikan total investasi tahunan harus dua kali lipat, dari $2,5-3 triliun hingga di atas $6 triliun.
Sekitar 75% dari investasi tersebut harus dilakukan di negara berkembang, terutama negara-negara berpendapatan menengah karena tuntutan pertumbuhan mereka, laju urbanisasi yang besar dan banyaknya pembangunan infrastruktur yang tertunda.
Menutup kesenjangan infrastruktur pasti tidak mudah.
Tetapi ini juga merupakan kesempatan besar untuk menciptakan fondasi bagi masa depan yang lebih berkelanjutan.
Sekarang, lebih dari 80% pasokan energi primer dan lebih dari dua pertiga listrik di dunia dihasilkan dari bahan bakar fosil.
Infrastruktur saja menyumbangkan sekitar 60% emisi gas rumah kaca di seluruh dunia.
Jika negara-negara di dunia mengikuti pendekatan yang sama dalam pembangunan infrastruktur baru, kita akan membuka jalur pembangunan yang merusak, menghabiskan banyak sumber daya, dan tidak berkelanjutan.
Tetapi peralihan menuju energi terbarukan dan infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan akan menciptakan dampak yang berlawanan, membantu menurunkan emisi gas rumah kaca sekaligus meningkatkan ketahanan negara terhadap perubahan iklim.
Apabila risiko-risiko iklim diperhitungkan dalam keputusan terkait investasi, energi terbarukan, transportasi bersih, sistem perairan yang efisien, dan kota-kota yang lebih tangguh dan cerdas akan tercipta sebagai hasil-hasil terbaik dari keputusan tersebut.
Untungnya, kemauan politik untuk bertindak dan melawan perubahan iklim kini semakin kuat.
Pada konferensi iklim PBB bulan Desember lalu, para pemimpin dunia mencapai kesepakatan penting untuk menuju masa depan yang lebih berkelanjutan, termasuk mengubah cara proyek infrastruktur dikembangkan, dibiayai, dan dilaksanakan.
Namun penetapan agenda hanya langkah pertama.
Menyediakan infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan dan berskala besar memerlukan kepemimpinan yang kuat dalam hal kebijakan publik dan jiwa kewirausahaan sektor swasta yang responsif.
Pembuat kebijakan harus merumuskan secara jelas strategi menyeluruh tentang investasi infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan dan memasukkannya dalam kerangka kerja komprehensif mengenai pertumbuhan dan pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Dalam hal ini, negara-negara anggota G-20 dapat memberi teladan.
Hanya melalui strategi-strategi terpadu, pembuat kebijakan dapat memberikan koherensi kebijakan yang diperlukan tidak hanya untuk memaksimalkan efektivitas setiap kebijakan tapi juga menanamkan kepercayaan di sektor swasta untuk ikut berperan.
Persisnya, apa saja yang harus dimuat dalam strategi-strategi tersebut?
Selain dari tindakan dan prioritas kebijakan khusus yang harus disesuaikan dengan kondisi di masing-masing negara, unsur-unsur utama dalam agenda infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan umumnya dapat dikelompokkan dalam empat “I”: investasi, insentif, institusi, dan inovasi.
Sebagai permulaan, pembuat kebijakan perlu memastikan terjadinya kenaikan yang signifikan dalam total investasi.
Hal ini menuntut adanya pembalikan tren investasi publik yang biasanya negatif selama dua dekade terakhir.
Pemerintah harus mengalokasikan lebih banyak dana untuk pembangunan infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan.
Namun, meningat keterbatasan fiskal yang parah di banyak negara, investasi publik saja tidak cukup; sektor swasta masih harus menyediakan lebih dari setengah total kebutuhan.
Upaya-upaya mengurangi risiko kebijakan dan biaya melakukan usaha dapat membantu menggerakkan sektor swasta untuk menaikkan investasinya secara besar-besaran.
Untuk memastikan investasi baru akan berorientasi pada infrastruktur yang berkelanjutan, pembuat kebijakan juga harus menyesuaikan insentif pasar.
Penghapusan subsidi bahan bakar fosil dan penetapan harga karbon (carbon pricing) sifatnya krusial; mengingat rendahnya harga minyak, sekarang adalah waktu yang tepat bagi negara untuk menerapkan reformasi tersebut.
Reformasi penetapan harga juga diperlukan di industri lain, termasuk perairan.
Melalui penetapan harga yang sesuai dan revisi peraturan untuk memperbaiki insensif yang menyimpang, pemerintah dapat memanfaatkan pasar untuk mendukung tujuan-tujuan kebijakan publik.
Tetapi penambahan investasi saja tidak cukup.
Institusi-institusi yang kuat diperlukan untuk memastikan kelayakan, kualitas, dan dampak investasi.
Satu hal yang terpenting adalah kapasitas mengembangkan project pipeline dan kerangka kelembagaan yang kuat bagi kerja sama publik-swasta.
Mengingat 70% dari total investasi infrastruktur berkelanjutan dilakukan di wilayah perkotaan, kita perlu lebih memperhatikan kualitas lembaga-lembaga daerah, serta kapasitas fiskal setempat.
Bagi negara-negara berkembang, bank-bank pembangunan multilateral dapat menjadi mitra kunci dalam meningkatkan kapasitas dan menyediakan pendanaan.
Terakhir, “I” yang keempat adalah inovasi.
Di satu sisi, inovasi teknologi diperlukan untuk menyediakan komponen-komponen infrastruktur yang rendah karbon dan efisien, serta tahan terhadap perubahan iklim.
Itu juga menjadi alasan mengapa investasi dalam penelitian dan pengembangan – terutama teknologi energi terbarukan – harus ditingkatkan secara signifikan.
Di sisi lain, inovasi finansial dan fiskal dibutuhkan untuk menangkap potensi berbagai teknologi baru.
Terutama, penggunaan ruang fiskal secara kreatif akan memungkinkan mobilisasi lebih banyak pembiayaan kepada infrastruktur berkelanjutan.
Selain itu, inovasi tersebut dapat menghasilkan lebih banyak ruang ketika pajak karbon (carbon taxes) memberikan pendapatan yang besar bagi pemerintah (dan menyempurnakan struktur pajak).
Sementara itu, instrumen-instrumen keuangan baru dan penggunaan modal pembangunan secara cerdas dapat meningkatkan jumlah pembiayaan dari swasta dan menurunkan biayanya.
Mempromosikan infrastruktu sebagai kelas aset dapat membantu menarik saving anggaran infrastuktur yang lebih besar.
Kini, aset yang dikelola bank dan investor institusional di seluruh dunia berjumlah lebih dari $120 triliun, namun infrastruktur saja hanya sebanyak 5% dari angka tersebut.
Sekarang, investasi infrastruktur dan tindakan melindungi iklim sama-sama dibutuhkan.
Dengan pendekatan yang tepat, kita dapat mencapai kedua tujuan secara bersamaan dan membangun masa depan yang lebih sejahtera dan berkelanjutan.
Inherited Malignancy
HANNOVER , GERMANY – Breast cancer is among the most life-threatening of malignancies, affecting about one in ten women in the Western world.
Taking the family history of 100 healthy women, at least one affected first-degree relative can be found in up to 15 of them.
Indeed, investigations have shown that the risk of developing breast cancer is roughly doubled in females with a family history of breast cancer.
In 1994-1995, the human genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 were identified as major culprits.
Dozens of their mutations are associated with an increased risk of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer. Women who have an abnormal BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene run a lifetime risk of up to 85% of developing breast cancer, while the increased risk of developing ovarian cancer is about 55% for women with BRCA1 mutations and about 25% for women with BRCA2 mutations.
Most recently, huge studies analyzing effects of single nucleotide variations in genomic DNA, so-called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), on breast cancer risk of BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers have identified so-called modifier SNP that can decrease or increase the individual lifetime risk.
We have also learned that only 20-40% of the breast cancers that cluster in families come from BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline mutations – genetic alterations that are present from birth in every cell of the body and can be transmitted to the offspring.
Increased breast cancer risk is also known to be associated with several inherited syndromes, such as Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a condition that is further associated with childhood onset of multiple malignancies including soft tissue sarcomas, leukemias, and brain tumors.
In most cases of familial breast cancer, however, genetic predisposition remains elusive.
Indeed, no further genes have been found whose mutations are associated with high lifetime risks of developing breast cancer.
Recently, new approaches to investigating genes involved in DNA repair, and huge studies of the effect of SNP on breast cancer risk, have identified two classes of breast cancer susceptibility factors.
One class contains mutations in genes involved in DNA repair.
Their frequency is rather rare and certain mutations can be found only in distinct populations, but this class of susceptibility factors is associated with a moderately increased breast cancer risk.
Considering frequency and risk, this class of breast cancer susceptibility factors can be called “rare, intermediate-penetrance mutations”.
The other class involves what are known as “common, low-penetrance variants.”
Their biological consequences are mainly unknown, but statistical analyses have shown that they are associated with a significantly increased relative breast cancer risk which, in contrast to the first class, is rather small.
Several national networks and consortia have already developed models for estimating the breast cancer risk in women with a positive family history.
We have criteria for genetic testing of both BRCA1 and BRCA2 and guidelines for risk-adapted surveillance programs – including, where appropriate, risk-reducing surgery.
But nothing is known yet about the clinical utility of the recently identified susceptibility factors, whether they are class one or class two.
While these novel susceptibility factors have been shown to be significantly associated with an increased relative breast cancer risk, the statistical significance does not imply clinical utility for preventive management and therapy of breast cancer – at least not yet.
Today, no guidelines are available to make a reasoned clinical decision on the presence or absence of these novel susceptibility factors.
In these circumstances, testing them would only provoke massive insecurity, leading to unnecessary interventions in carriers and a false sense of security in non-carriers, as well as in their relatives.
Today, it is widely accepted that breast cancer, whether familial or sporadic, can be understood as a complex disease.
Thus, the genetically determined portion of an individual’s breast cancer risk is the result of several or even many genetic variants and mutations.
To take full advantage of the known genetic susceptibility factors, it will be necessary to understand their biological consequences.
In addition, reliable risk prediction models are required to learn more about the combined effect of certain patterns of susceptibility factors on overall lifetime risk and response to therapy, including their role as objects of targeted therapies.
Last, but not least, criteria have to be established to define when and to whom genetic testing should be offered.
Thus, “to test or not to test” is not the first question that needs to be answered.
Initially, experts have to ask whether the result of a genetic test for susceptibility factors can help clinical decisions to be made on the basis of generally accepted guidelines.
If, at this time, the answer is no, counselees do not need to waste time and money dealing with the test.
In contrast, if the answer is yes, the informed counselees themselves have to decide if they wish to be tested or not.
Screening the genome for breast cancer susceptibility factors has led to the identification of novel genetic variants, and ongoing studies and further technical progress will certainly lead to additional significant findings.
The challenge today is to extract the clinical relevance of these findings and translate them into daily health care.
Managing this challenge is crucial if we are to realize the promise of individualized medicine, with intensified surveillance and therapy for high-risk patients and avoidance of unnecessary or even harmful interventions in those with a relatively low risk.
In Marx’s Shadow Again
A century and a half ago, Karl Marx both gloomily and exuberantly predicted that the modern capitalism he saw evolving would prove incapable of producing an acceptable distribution of income.
Wealth would grow, Marx argued, but would benefit the few, not the many: the forest of upraised arms looking for work would grow thicker and thicker, while the arms themselves would grow thinner and thinner.
This injustice would provoke revolt and revolution, producing a new, better, fairer, more prosperous, and far more egalitarian system.
Ever since, mainstream economists have earned their bread and butter patiently explaining why Marx was wrong.
Yes, the initial disequilibrium shock of the industrial revolution was and is associated with rapidly rising inequality as opportunities are opened to aggressiveness and enterprise, and as the market prices commanded by key scarce skills rise sky-high.
But this was – or was supposed to be – transient.
A technologically stagnant agricultural society is bound to be an extremely unequal one: by force and fraud, the upper class push the peasants’ standards of living down to subsistence and take the surplus as the rent on the land they control.
The high rents paid to noble landlords increase their wealth and power by giving them the resources to keep the peasants down and widen the surplus – for, after all, they cannot make more land.
By contrast, mainstream economists argued, a technologically advancing industrial society was bound to be different.
First, the key resources that command high prices and thus produce wealth are not fixed, like land, but are variable: the skills of craft workers and engineers, the energy and experience of entrepreneurs, and machines and buildings are all things that can be multiplied.
As a result, high prices for scarce resources lead not to zero- or negative-sum political games of transfer but to positive-sum economic games of training more craft workers and engineers, mentoring more entrepreneurs and managers, and investing in more machines and buildings.
Second, democratic politics balances the market.
Government educates and invests, increasing the supply and reducing the premium earned by skilled workers, and lowering the rate of return on physical capital.
It also provides social insurance by taxing the prosperous and redistributing benefits to the less fortunate.
Economist Simon Kuznets proposed the existence of a sharp rise in inequality upon industrialization, followed by a decline to social-democratic levels.
But, over the past generation, confidence in the “Kuznets curve” has faded.
Social-democratic governments have been on the defensive against those who claim that redistributing wealth exacts too high a cost on economic growth, and unable to convince voters to fund yet another massive expansion of higher education.
On the private supply side, higher returns have not called forth more investment in people.
America’s college-to-high-school wage premium may now be 100%, yet this generation of white, native-born American males may well wind up getting no more education than their immediate predecessors.
And increasing rewards for those at the increasingly sharp peak of the income distribution have not called forth enough enterprising market competition to erode that peak.
The consequence has been a loss of morale among those of us who trusted market forces and social-democratic governments to prove Marx wrong about income distribution in the long run – and a search for new and different tools of economic management.
Increasingly, pillars of the establishment are sounding like shrill critics.
That way, shareholders and investors could properly judge whether the advice given and the investments made were in fact sound in the long run rather than just reflecting the enthusiasm of the moment.
But Wolf’s solution is not enough, for the problem is not confined to high finance.
The problem is a broader failure of market competition to give rise to alternative providers and underbid the fortunes demanded for their work by our current generation of mercantile princes.
Innocent Bystanders
SANTIAGO – Take a taxi in São Paulo nowadays and you will experience the maddening traffic and untidy streets of an emerging-country metropolis. But when the time comes to pay for the ride, you may feel like you are in Boston, Luxemburg, or Zurich: the value of the Brazilian real, like the currencies of many emerging-market countries, is high – and could go higher.
Strong currencies make strong countries, a senior United States policymaker used to say.
Many emerging-country exporters, struggling to retain customers in the wobbly US and European markets, feel otherwise.
For decades, developing countries dreamed of a nirvana of sky-high commodity prices and rock-bottom international interest rates.
But perhaps finance ministers in Lima, Bogota, Pretoria, or Jakarta should have been more careful about what they wished for.
The problem? An invasion of short-term capital flows fleeing the slow-growth, low-interest-rate advanced countries.
The imbalances were reduced temporarily as the global financial crisis caused private demand to drop in the US, the UK, and elsewhere.
But, starting in 2010, the imbalances returned, and, according to the International Monetary Fund’s recently released World Economic Outlook, they will not shrink between now and 2016.
G-20 communiqués have repeatedly pledged to secure “adjustment” and “rebalancing” in the world economy, but those promises have come to nothing.
Still-troubled financial systems and huge fiscal deficits are keeping the West’s deficit countries (especially the US) from expanding domestic demand.
And an unwillingness to trade away export-led growth is having the same effect on the East’s surplus countries (especially China).
As a result, emerging countries, according to the IMF, have been pressed to carry “a disproportionate burden of demand rebalancing since the crisis.”
Countries running surpluses accumulate massive stocks of foreign assets, and those resources have to be invested somewhere.
Before the crisis, a substantial amount of that money was invested in US, Spanish, or Irish real estate. Today, that market is dead and the money must go elsewhere.
Europe, gripped by a tremendous banking and debt crisis, is not an attractive destination, and loose monetary policy in the US has produced ultra-low bond yields there.
As a result, many emerging countries, with their higher interest rates and promising growth prospects, have become irresistibly attractive to investors.
After recent events in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, Wall Street analysts are waxing somewhat less optimistically about political stability in emerging countries.
And a flat 2011 performance in some Latin American and Asian equity markets – following tremendous runs in 2010 – has taken a bit of sheen off the emerging-market investment fad. But the money keeps coming.
This dollar invasion is making macroeconomic management in emerging countries even more challenging than usual.
If high commodity prices are expected to persist, then some strengthening of currencies is both desirable and inevitable.
But a thin line separates orderly adjustment to changed conditions from market over-reaction. And sensible people in many emerging-country capitals are wondering whether we have crossed that line.
Loss of export competitiveness as a result of excessively strong currencies is not the only problem.
Massive capital inflows caused real-estate and stock-market bubbles in the US and parts of Europe.
Today, some policymakers in Latin America, worried that the same thing could happen to their countries, are casting about for policy tools to prevent it.
As a result, the US Federal Reserve’s policy of so-called “quantitative easing” is going south, where it takes the form of foreign-exchange intervention.
If rich-country central banks can buy long term bonds, then emerging-country central banks can buy dollar-denominated bonds.
Even countries that practice inflation targeting and have otherwise vowed to let their exchange rates float – Brazil, Colombia, Peru, and Chile, for example – have done it, and in large quantities.
Expect macroprudential policies to go south, too – and to be redefined in the process.
If buying dollars is not sufficient to stem the appreciation tide, regulators in emerging economies will erect an array of other barriers to keep money out.
None of these policies is without costs.
They are second-best local-policy responses to an ineffective mechanism for international adjustment (or non-adjustment).
A better system to rebalance the world economy is as necessary as it is unlikely.
All we can look forward to is the next G-20 communiqué.
Silicon Valley or Demand Mountain?
BELLEVUE, WASHINGTON – Everyone wants to know how to build the next Silicon Valley: an innovation hub that draws talent and capital, and that creates jobs, companies, and whole new industries.
Developed-country governments scramble to subsidize technology that could be the Next Big Thing.
Emerging-market policymakers hope that incentives like tax breaks and free land will induce innovators to settle and prosper there.
But most of these well-meaning schemes are missing an essential ingredient: demand.
Demand for innovation in specific areas of technology has been the common force behind all high-tech hot spots, as well as the most important inventions.
Technological breakthroughs such as antibiotics and cars responded to a compelling need felt by a huge number of consumers.
Government projects such as the United States’ Apollo program – intended to put a man on the moon – drove demand for more basic technologies (which are simply inventions that no one has asked for yet).
Silicon Valley itself was built on demand.
The US Department of Defense put up tens of billions of dollars in contracts for microelectronics, a commitment that both paid down innovators’ risk and created an infrastructure that would support the growth of start-ups.
All demand is not created equal, though, and it is instructive to examine the differences.
Consumer or market-driven demand – the kind most of us think of when we hear the word – is far less predictable, and therefore much riskier, than state-sponsored demand of the sort that landed a man on the moon.
Companies that depend solely on their products’ commercial appeal are limited in the kinds of innovations that they can safely introduce, because if one of their products fails in the marketplace, they may not survive to build another one.
This is especially true of start-ups and small companies – the very players that everyone hopes will show up in the next-wave of Silicon Valleys.
Fortunately, by sponsoring long-term, targeted initiatives, governments can stimulate more predictable demand.
The Apollo program gave innovators clearly defined goals and a roadmap for getting there: first put animals in orbit, then put people there, then send probes to the moon, then send people there.
Equally important, the government offered rewards for interim progress, not just ultimate success.
Putting a monkey in space may not have been the most exciting achievement, but the government was paying for it, so it happened.
A smart government creates guaranteed demand not only for the solution itself, but for the steps along the way.
Coupling intermediate technical milestones with guaranteed incentives enables companies to focus on problems that might take ten years or more to solve.
It also motivates innovators from a variety of industries to take on complex problems that must be addressed by more than one kind of invention.
The US Defense Department’s microelectronics initiative required not only new materials and circuits, but also new methods of fabrication.
Because of the reward structure, these efforts could be coordinated, rather than pursued in isolation.
Unlike market-driven demand, which too often results in a winner-takes-all dynamic, state-sponsored demand creates an environment in which multiple solutions to technical problems can proliferate and coexist.