One of America’s last competitive cultural exports, it seems, is the post-adolescent male escape fantasy.
Ever since Huck Finn took his friends down the Mississippi River on a raft, American men have created and consumed fantasies of setting out with their males friends for parts unknown, or of traveling in an all-male group to have adventures closer to home.
In the 1950’s, Jack Kerouac took his buddy careening across the country in On the Road.
A decade later, Ken Kesey took his buddies, the Merry Pranksters, across the country in the other direction in their painted bus (granted, with female hangers-on).
From Easy Rider in the 1960’s to the Harold and Kumar movies today, the “buddy film” – typically involving travel-based adventure – has become an established genre. Savvy American politicians even make use of it for their own purposes.
Both John McCain and George W. Bush cleverly tapped into this fantasy – with its easy bonhomie and absence of wives and kids – to capture the hearts of the male journalists aboard their campaign buses, who could imagine themselves once again as tough, unfettered, and venturesome Kerouac figures.
President Obama even gave the actor who played Kumar a job in the White House (which he has now left to return to Hollywood).
As you survey the rest of global culture, the male-escape scenario is hard to spot emerging from any other place.
Save for the recent hit film 3 Idiots, Bollywood doesn’t send groups of Indian guys off on merry, irresponsible adventures.
Male protagonists in French films don’t take off together in convertibles for the Pyrenees; they stay home and urbanely have affairs.
Nor does Japanese pop culture manufacture escape fantasies aimed at Japanese men.
Yet men all over the world tune in to American-made fantasies of male bonding and male escape – escape from the bonds of work and domesticity, and, if only for a youthful period of the male lifespan, from long-term commitment to women themselves.
This fantasy, derived, no doubt, from American history – from westward expansion and Manifest Destiny, from the Gold Rush and a settlement policy that valorized staking a claim to the wilderness and subduing it – is powerfully appealing to men in general, and to many women as well.
Indeed, American women have recently begun to film and export their own versions of this fantasy – starting with the groundbreaking 1991 film Thelma and Louise and continuing in a growing trend of girl-group travel and escape packages.
Other countries’ lack of male escape fantasies in their popular culture may be no less historically rooted: less transient, more traditional societies will not warmly welcome homegrown films and pop songs about local young men taking off and fleeing their responsibilities.
But, judging by the appetite shown worldwide for this narrative, it seems clear that identification with such adventures is almost universal.
It seems to speak to a deep longing in men – and in the women who also enjoy these films and TV shows – for a time in one’s life when one could dash toward freedom, adventure, and self-reinvention, unencumbered by social ties and family obligations.
At its best, this genre is part of America’s gift to the rest of the world.
At its worst, it is part of America’s curse.
That whiff of careening, heedless adolescent fecklessness is part of what makes the archetypal American male presence alarming when he is equipped with a global cudgel.
To the rest of the world, those same qualities are part of his charm only so long as he stays safely up on the screen.
The Great Firewall of China
Writing from 1930’s Shanghai, China’s great essayist Lu Xun once observed: “Today there are all kinds of weeklies. Although their distribution is not very wide, they are shining in the darkness like daggers, letting their comrades know who is attacking the old, strong castles.”
Muckraking broadsheets in the first half of the last century played cat-and-mouse games with Chinese government censors, ultimately helping to expose the corruption and moral bankruptcy of the Nationalist (KMT) government and contributing to the Communist victory in 1949.
If that sounds familiar, its is because the Chinese Communist Party never forgets its history – and is determined to prevent history from repeating itself.
Thus, China’s rulers acted in character last December, when they cracked down on news organizations that were getting a bit too assertive.
The editor and deputy editors of Beijing News, a relatively new tabloid with a national reputation for exposing corruption and official abuse, were fired.
In protest, more than 100 members of the newspaper’s staff walked out.
Most Chinese might not have known about the walkout if it hadn’t been for Chinese bloggers.
An editorial assistant at the New York Times, Zhao Jing, writing under the pen name Michael Anti, broke the news on his widely read Chinese-language blog.
He exposed details of behind-the-scenes politics and called for a public boycott of the newspaper, evoking strong public sympathy for the journalists, expressed online in chatrooms and blogs.
Zhao’s blog wasn’t under the direct control of the Party’s Propaganda Department.
It was published through a Chinese-language blog-hosting service run by Microsoft’s MSN Spaces.
On December 30, Zhao’s blog disappeared.
Since then, Microsoft has confirmed that its staff removed the blog from an MSN Internet server, citing the need to respect Chinese law when doing business in China.
Microsoft’s contribution to Chinese political repression follows Yahoo’s role in the sentencing of a dissident reporter and Google’s decision not to display search results that are blocked by what has become known as the “Great Chinese Firewall.”
Indeed, China has developed the world’s most sophisticated system of Internet blocking and censorship, thereby hiding information unfavorable to China’s rulers from all but the most technologically savvy.
The system is bolstered by human surveillance and censorship carried out not only by government employees, but also by private service providers.
Some liken Microsoft’s behavior to IBM’s infamous collaboration with the Nazis in Germany.
Human rights activists in the United States are calling for legislation that would prevent American companies from engaging in business practices that help repressive regimes stifle democratic movements.
But the companies argue that there is absolutely no other way to compete – they must either comply with censorship or discontinue business.
If MSN Spaces did not censor its Chinese blogs, Microsoft argues, the Great Chinese Firewall would simply be programmed to block Chinese Internet users from accessing its service.
In fact, most international blog-hosting services are blocked in China, which provides a competitive boon to several hundred domestic blog-hosting services.
These services, with names like Bokee.com, Blogbus.com and Blogcn.com, all comply with Chinese government censorship requirements.
Software prevents users from posting politically sensitive words, and provocative content that gets past the automated controls is frequently removed.
These businesses would not be allowed to exist otherwise.
Despite the censorship, the Chinese blogosphere is blossoming, with probably somewhere between 5-10 million active blogs.
The Chinese public has grown expert over the years at finding plenty of things to do and talk about while avoiding politically dangerous issues.
Chinese bloggers are no different.
New pop cultural celebrities are emerging online, and people are creating their own radio and even TV shows.
Naturally, the Chinese companies that provide most of the tools used to create and host this content have censorship built into their software, management structure, and business models.
But most Chinese bloggers accept this as part of the reality of life in China.
They are not willing to fight for greater freedom of speech and are even willing to censor each other in order to preserve what they have.
Which brings us back to China’s greatest modern writer, Lu Xun.
In 1921, he wrote a biting piece of social criticism, “The True Story of Ah Q,” about a hapless character who adjusts his values to whatever the circumstances and people around him seem to demand.
Unfortunately, faced with a choice between protecting the long-term interests and human rights of their customers and complying with laws implemented by unelected power-holders, technology firms like Microsoft, Yahoo, and Google seem to have embraced the Ah Q spirit.
They have made it clear that when it comes to free expression, their priorities lie on the side of surrender.
In the long run, this does not bode well for their global reputations, which depend on users’ trust in the openness and independence of their products and services.
One day, perhaps, censorship will no longer make good business sense anywhere.
The Great Game’s New Players
NEW DELHI – Two “great games” currently roil South Asia.
In the West, Afghanistan – and what Henry Kissinger calls “Islamist Jihadists” – challenges the international order.
In the East, a large number of Chinese troops have entered Pakistani-held territory high in the mountain fastness of the Kashmir Karakorams, in the picturesque Gilgit-Baltistan region, not far from the glacial battlefield of Siachen, where India and Pakistan confront each other.
Senge Hasan Sering, from Skardu, the director of the Gilgit-Baltistan National Congress, believes that the number of Chinese People’s Liberation Army troops now present “could be over 11,000,” as there are also additional “PLA construction corps personnel” deployed.
It is here that China is currently investing “billions of dollars in mega projects like expressways, tunnels, and oil and gas pipelines.” This, Sering says, is “surely not on account of any overflowing altruism.” 
The Chinese say that some of their troops are present in Pakistan because of another sort of “overflowing,” of which there has been a great deal in this part of Kashmir and in the rest of Pakistan.
This year’s heavy monsoon rains have wrought havoc in the area, severing road connections, washing away bridges, and rendering over half a million people homeless in these mountains – without “dwellings, farmlands, moveable assets,” or even “graveyards.”
This is over and above the many thousands in the Hunza region, who in January lost everything on account of a cloudburst that wiped out several villages and created a highly unstable artificial lake.
Rudyard Kipling’s old “Great Game” now has new contestants.
Instead of an expansionist Russian empire confronting Imperial Britain, it is now a China hungry for land, water, and raw materials that is flexing its muscles, encroaching on Himalayan redoubts and directly challenging India.
China’s incursion reaffirms the ancient strategic axiom that “geography is the real determinant of history” – and, as a result, of foreign and security policy, too.
Robert Kaplan wisely observes that “Indian geography is the story of invasions from a northwesterly direction,” and “India’s strategic challenges still inhere in this fact,” which is why Afghanistan, to Indian eyes, is linked to the sub-continent’s history, and thus our future.
It is also why there exists an “organic connection of India to Central Asia,” the key to that link lying in the Himalayas, which is where the India-China rivalry is currently focused.
Fortunately, at least for the present, this rivalry is far less emotional than India-Pakistan relations, having not been born of historical grievances.
The Chinese urge is to break from the confines of their country’s history, and thus China’s own geography.
An assertive and relatively stable China, it seems, must expand, lest pent-up internal pressures tear it apart.
A strong and stable India, on the other hand, will always be a status quo power.
It is against this backdrop that the latest contest between India and China must be assessed.
Several thousand PLA troops are indisputably stationed in the Khunjerab Pass on the Xinjiang border to protect the Karakoram Highway, which PLA soldiers are now repairing in several places.
The road, after all, is a vital link in China’s quest for direct access to the Arabian Sea. But this is also Indian territory, wherein lies the rub, for the region is now victim to a creeping China acquisitiveness, with Pakistan acquiescing as a willing accomplice.
Despite India’s historically established territorial claims to the region, China terms the area “disputed,” a description that it has now begun to extend to the whole of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
This sort of verbal trickery to hide a strategic objective has been seen before.
Indeed, some years back, a planned visit to Indian Ladakh by the PLA’s commander of the Lanzhou Military Region was canceled on the grounds that Pakistan had protested – implying that Pakistan had a legitimate claim to the area.
It would be a mistake to presume that the vast expansion of trade between India and China, currently worth more than $60 billion annually (with China now India’s largest trading partner), must lead to improved bilateral relations.
Even while trade expands, China is attempting to confine India within greatly foreshortened land and sea borders through its so-called “string of pearls policy.”
This effort to encircle India by sea with strategically positioned naval stations from Hainan in the East to Gwadar in the West, and on land by promoting bogus Pakistani claims that undermine India’s territorial integrity, takes the “Great Game” to a new and more dangerous level.
Indeed, the pincer of Afghanistan and Gilgit/Baltistan poses the gravest challenge to India’s statecraft since Independence.
More than that, the struggle now underway at the top of the world may well determine whether this will be an “Asian Century” or a “Chinese Century.”
The Great Global Bargain Hunt
TOKYO – Few recent elections have grabbed world attention in the way that Greece’s vote on June 17 did.
Now that the center-right New Democracy, which finished first, has formed a coalition government with the center-left PASOK and the Democratic Left, the key issue for Prime Minister Antonis Samaras’s administration is whether it can implement the austerity measures agreed with Greece’s eurozone partners in exchange for continued support from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union.
The situation remains dangerous – and not only for Greece.
Spain and Italy face the redemption of government bonds valued at €13.2 billion ($16.5 billion) and €17 billion, respectively, in July, with redemptions continuing every month thereafter like an unstoppable tsunami, ensuring continued turmoil in Europe and beyond.
Given the global menace posed by Europe’s sovereign-debt and banking crises, measures to strengthen the European banking system and encourage fiscal integration gained some momentum at the recent G-20 summit in Los Cabos, Mexico.
The summit’s concluding statement declared that countries with ample finances are prepared to provide economic stimulus if growth weakens.
One result of this promise is that pledges to boost the IMF’s funding have now reached $456 billion. These pledges come on top of the $430 billion expansion of IMF funding that was announced in April, so the Fund should have the financial firepower to act in any crisis – if, that is, the money pledged at the G-20 summit is actually contributed.
The BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), which are all members of the G-20, now account for 43% of the world’s population and 18% its economy.
Their share of “international responsibility” was revealed at the recent summit: contributions to the IMF of $43 billion by China, $10 billion by Brazil, Russia, and India, and $2 billion by South Africa. Mexico, the G-20’s host, also pledged $10 billion.
This renewed international cooperation was intended, of course, to protect the global financial system.
But contributing money also means having a say, and the BRICS – no surprise – are pressing their demand for voting reform in the IMF, and are increasingly offering currency swaps to economically troubled countries.
Various countries, however, are also strengthening their own positions with little regard for the impact of their actions on the international financial system.
The most active of these countries is, of course, China, which can call upon its vast and still-rising foreign reserves of $3.3 trillion to push its interests in every corner of the globe.
For example, although China has done little to bolster the Greek government’s balance sheet, its active approach to the crisis has been conspicuous.
Prime Minister Wen Jiabao visited Greece in October 2010 and agreed to strengthen cooperation between China and Greece during a meeting with then-Prime Minister George Papandreou – timely support that the weakened Greek government was delighted to receive.
But the form of Chinese support for Greece will likely benefit China far more than Greece in the long term.
Indeed, in an editorial published on June 15, China Daily described Greece as a “gateway” for China into Europe.
Already, the China Ocean Shipping Company (COSCO) has obtained a 35-year lease to operate the second pier at the port of Piraeus, one of the busiest in the world, for €3.5 billion, and has purchased a truck-loading facility and packaging center in the Piraeus suburbs.
The company has also expressed its intention to acquire 23% of Piraeus Port Authority, and is seeking to lease or acquire ports on the island of Crete.
Likewise, though COSCO’s bid for the Thessaloniki Container Terminal met local opposition, Chinese investors are in negotiations with the Greek government to acquire a 20-year interest (2026-2046) in Athens International Airport for €500 million.
China may look like a white knight for Greece, which remains mired in fiscal crisis and severe recession; but this was also a perfect chance for China to go bargain hunting around the world.
So instead of using its vast foreign exchange reserves to bolster the international system, China is picking up strategic assets on the cheap.
Consider Iceland, which suffered bitterly following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
An enormous Chinese Embassy has been built in Reykjavik with an eye to improving China’s intelligence about future developments in the Arctic Ocean.
And Chinese companies’ land purchases in Iceland have been so extensive as to fuel local paranoia, with some investment plans blocked for fear that they might be a stepping-stone to a Chinese military presence.
For almost a decade, people have wondered how China would use its gargantuan foreign-exchange reserves, particularly whether it would challenge the supremacy of the dollar.
It now seems clear that China intends to use its foreign reserves to further its own global geopolitical strategy, not to buttress the international system that has enabled its three-decade boom.
As governments and citizens around the world become aware of the influence that China can buy with its deep pockets, is an anti-Chinese backlash inevitable?
Or have some countries been so scarred by the financial crisis that they don’t care where their next meal ticket comes from?
Time will tell, but there is a danger that Chinese hubris is beginning to extend to global finance.
The Great Illusion
The saddest of the books on my office bookshelf is an old one published nearly a century ago: Norman Angell's The Great Illusion: A Study of the Relation of Military Power in Nations to Their Economic and Social Advantage , which tried to prove that military conquest was obsolete.
Angell's argument was simple: in all prolonged modern industrial wars, everybody loses.
Losers lose the most, but winners also are worse off than if peace had been maintained.
Many fathers, sons, and husbands are dead, and so are many mothers, wives, and daughters.
Much wealth has been blown up. Much architecture has been turned into rubble.
Confiscation damages the rule of law on which modern industrial prosperity rests.
The most that even the winners can say is that they are little losers rather than big losers.
Modern industrial war is, as the computer in the 1982 movie War Games put it, a very peculiar game: "The only way to win is not to play."
At the time that Angell wrote, some people argued that war was an important means to promote national prosperity; that commercial prosperity was the fruit of military power.
Angell puzzled over how pre-WWI pan-German politicians could believe that German prosperity required a big battle fleet when the absence of one made no difference to the prosperity of Norway, Denmark, or Holland.
He looked forward to the coming of an age of rational statesmanship, when every prime minister and foreign minister would recognize that regardless of the matter in dispute, binding arbitration between nations was a better strategy than war.
He was, of course, right in his judgment that the only way to prevent any modern industrial war from becoming a destructive tragedy for all was to quickly conclude a ceasefire.
Governments that view aggressive war as a means to prosperity have been rare since the end of World War I: the Imperial Japanese government that launched World War II in the Pacific and Saddam Hussein's two grabs for oilfields are examples that spring immediately to mind.
In one sense, governments have learned the lesson Norman Angell preached.
But what makes The Great Illusion the saddest book on my office bookshelf is that we have found other reasons to fight wars, and the years since Angell wrote his book have seen the most terrible and bloody wars ever.
We have fought wars to preserve colonial domination and wars to end it. We have seen civil wars.
We have seen ideological wars. We have seen wars of extermination like the one that Hitler and the Nazis waged against not just Jews and Gypsies, but Poles and Russians.
We have seen ethnic wars and wars fought to make governments stop killing their citizens. Indeed, we have seen more religious wars than at any time since the end of the Thirty Years War in 1648.
Yet there is cause for hope.
From the pro-consulate of Julius Caesar until 1945, there was most likely at least one army crossing or about to cross or thinking of crossing the Rhine in arms. Now there are none.
A little more than a century and a half ago the United States appeared willing to go to war with the world's only superpower of the time to try to turn Vancouver, British Columbia, into a city ruled from Washington, D.C. rather than from Ottawa or London.
Vancouver is a lovely city, and I would love to have the voters of British Columbia inside the US, because I think they would add much health to the American electorate.
But nobody thinks that idea worth fighting a war over.
A century ago, a French politician was no more likely to advocate peace and detente with Germany than a modern Arab politician is likely to advocate peace and detente with Israel.
Academic foreign policy "realists" (who somehow strike me as not a very realistic bunch) attributed the end of Franco-German antagonism to the fact that they had something bigger to be scared of: Russia, which was terrifying under Stalin, frightening under Khrushchev, and worrisome under Brezhnev.
Let the Cold War end, they said, and then we will see France and Germany begin to rattle their sabers again, for that is the tragedy of international power politics.
Yet the Cold War has been over for fifteen years, and military conflict between France and Germany today seems as unlikely as military conflict between America and Canada.
I hope that it is the fact of European interdependence - an interdependence carefully constructed by Jean Monnet, Robert Schumann, Konrad Adenauer, and those who followed in their footsteps - and not the memory of the horror of World War II that has caused the armies that used to cross the Rhine in arms to vanish.
If so, there is a chance that the globalized economic age to which we look forward will be a more peaceful age than the twentieth century was.
If not, then Angell may well continue to be as irrelevant as he was right.
The Ghost of Inflation Future
DIJON – With all of the problems afflicting the world economy nowadays, inflation seems to be the least of our worries.
In addressing the post-2008 economic malaise, which stems from over-indebtedness, policymakers are correct to focus on the threat of debt deflation, which can lead to depression.
But dismissing inflation as “yesterday’s problem” could undermine central banks’ efforts to address today’s most pressing issues – and, ultimately, facilitate inflation’s resurgence.
Understanding how the Great Inflation from the late 1960’s to the early 1980’s was tamed offers important lessons for addressing far-reaching economic problems, however different ours may be, and provides insight into the dangers that may lie ahead.
The first useful lesson concerns expectations.
In the decades following World War II, the doctrine that inflation needed to be traded off against employment – based on the relationship that William Phillips described in 1958 – dominated economic thinking.
But the Phillips curve fared poorly in the 1970’s, when many countries experienced “stagflation” (high levels of both inflation and unemployment).
This vindicated criticism by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps, among others, who had already begun to argue that the Phillips curve represented merely a short-term relationship.
If people do not expect inflation, the illusion of increased purchasing power can boost employment and output for a relatively short period.
But once workers realize that real wages have not increased, unemployment will return to its “natural” level consistent with stable inflation.
Later, “new classical” economists like Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent demonstrated that once people understand that inflation is being manipulated to generate market optimism, the monetary authorities’ actions lose their impact.
The result is higher prices and no job creation.
These ideas, combined with effective policy practice like that of the US Federal Reserve under Paul Volcker’s chairmanship, led many countries worldwide toward more explicit inflation targeting, in which central banks stabilize inflation expectations by making a credible commitment to a predetermined rate of price growth.
By the 1990’s, inflation was old news in the advanced economies, with much of the developing world soon to follow.
Today, the Fed is again playing the expectations game.
But, in order to stave off the threat of deflation and depression, it is targeting a lower unemployment rate, below 6.5%.
As progress toward that target is made, Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke announced in late May, the Fed will begin to “taper” its program of long-term asset purchases known as quantitative-easing (QE).
That prospect has already sparked renewed financial-market volatility.
In July, Bernanke attempted to calm investors with remarks signaling that, amid inadequate employment gains and persistently low inflation, the Fed would not abandon monetary stimulus anytime soon.
This stance reflects the Fed’s dual mandate, according to which monetary policy targets maximum employment consistent with price stability.
But the credibility needed to anchor expectations is difficult – sometimes even impossible – to achieve when two targets are being pursued simultaneously.
The resulting uncertainty could trigger more volatility, especially in bond markets, potentially impeding economic recovery (for example, by pushing up long-term mortgage rates) or augmenting future inflation risk.
By contrast, the credibility associated with pursuing only an inflation target builds on itself.
Given this, it would be safer and more effective for the Fed and other central banks to pursue a single inflation target, and then use the gain in credibility to aid economic recovery.
For example, a central bank might announce that circumstances during, say, the next two years warrant a doubling of the inflation target from the usual – that is, almost never varied – annual rate of 2%.
Such an approach would reduce the risk of debt deflation, while capping inflation expectations to prevent a damaging surge in prices as recovery takes hold.
Such preventive measures are all the more important in view of the Great Inflation’s second relevant lesson: fiscal discipline is essential to price stability.
Sustaining a high budget deficit over many years will lead to an unmanageable debt buildup, unless that debt is inflated away or restructured.
As it stands, the United States – and presumably the United Kingdom – plans to begin tapering QE when the economy is growing faster, unemployment is lower, and government and household revenues are rising.
But will tax revenues rise fast enough to offset the escalating cost of servicing the government’s mountain of debt?
Even if public debt is not growing as fast as before, the huge volume of existing debt must be repaid.
The best cure would be controlled higher inflation – that is, the aforementioned temporary increase in the inflation target – to erode the real value of public debt and forestall the risk of a much more damaging inflationary shock later, one in which expectations become unhinged.
But, while this approach could work in the US, the European Central Bank is institutionally constrained from raising the inflation target.
Although its pledge last August to purchase unlimited quantities of short-term government debt has calmed markets, activation of the ECB’s “outright monetary transactions” program is conditional on continued fiscal retrenchment.
So the eurozone’s crisis-stricken economies cannot grow.
In this context, the eurozone’s most heavily indebted countries will have to force their creditors to accept a restructuring of public debt.
The preferable alternative would be growth-boosting devaluations – that is, a eurozone breakup.
But if, as seems likely, such devaluations are left too late, debt restructuring might still be needed.
In the coming years, Europe appears set to lurch from the frying pan of depression to the fire of high inflation.
When it does, the lessons of the Great Inflation will suddenly be all too pertinent.
The Great Man Syndrome
In our globalized age, vast impersonal forces are supposed to determine events.
Globalized markets, unfettered trade, militant Islam, China’s awakening: these are the things historians and strategists usually portray as the key forces shaping our destiny.
But most people don’t see things this way.
Instead, most people still instinctively look at “great men” as the agents of history, the men (and women) who seem to forge events through their political vision, personal charisma, and the force of their moral claims.
By sheer force of conviction and personality, such figures, many of us believe, can carry the day, bringing a glimmer of hope to an otherwise detached and impersonal universe.
This yearning for providential men or women in our global age results from at least three factors.
The first concerns the complexity and vulnerability of our world.
The second, paradoxically, reflects our growing cynicism towards politics and politicians.
And the third is the result of our media culture, obsessed as it is with putting a “face” to events.
Confronted with the problem of bringing about positive changes in a domestic or international environment that seems to defy the power of “normal” leaders, one looks for new Alexanders to untie the “Gordian knot” and transcend complexity by sheer force of will and dynamism.
For example, structural reforms in Europe are thought impossible to enact unless imposed by some reincarnation of Margaret Thatcher.
In the Middle East, everyone waits for a new Anwar Sadat to arise among the Arabs.
Disillusion with politics and politicians also is a key element of our yearning for providential leaders.
In France for example, the overly flattering commemoration of President François Mitterrand’s death ten years ago primarily reflects widespread disillusion with his successor, Jacques Chirac.
Indirect criticism of the present is usually a key element in idealized views of the past.
The less we expect from a “normal” politician, the more we look for a hero.
With the world becoming a global stage, the media’s role in fueling the appetite for providential leaders is essential.
The public demands quick answers to complex problems that, unsolved, risk endangering the planet.
They need figures with whom they can identify, immediately recognize, and, above all, trust.
The emergence of an embryonic “world civil society” heightens demand for universal and charismatic figures, holding out the hope of global accountability, but also carrying populist overtones.
In a world searching for providential leaders, the case of Ariel Sharon is both symbolic and paradoxical, for this universal man remains one of the most controversial figures of recent decades.
He has become a nearly revered figure in his country, and large segments of Western public opinion believe that his political demise represents a potentially fatal blow to any hope of progress in the region, even as he remains hated in large parts of the Arab and Muslim world.
Sharon’s transformation from villain to hero within the space of a mere few years is a source of fascination for his people, the region, and the world – all the more so because his ultimate intentions will remain a subject of endless dispute among historians tomorrow and among politicians claiming to be his faithful heirs today.
Was Sharon really convinced by demographers that the “Great Israel” that once seemed to be his dream would actually mean the end of a Jewish State, or did his disengagement strategy of “Gaza first” really mean “Gaza last”?
For those who support one or the other reading, Sharon will forever hold the benefit of the doubt.
That Sharon’s stroke could be compared – in terms of political consequences – with the assassination of Yitzak Rabin demonstrates that his personality had become associated with hope and security.
The “bulldozer” had become the grandfather of most Israelis and the last card of Western diplomacy, for Americans and, surprisingly, for Europeans, too.
He alone seemed to incarnate the combination of reassuring strength and vision to carry the majority of Israelis behind him in a process of unilateral disengagement.
In fact, one may wonder if the world has made of Sharon a providential man because it wanted so much to believe that there was still “hope around the corner” in the Middle East.
Was this wishful thinking or self-fulfilling prophecy?
We will never know.
What is certain is that the vacuum left by Sharon’s departure from politics is all the more striking in view of the images of chaos emerging from the Gaza that Israel has vacated, and the collapse of the Palestinian authority before our eyes.
Nor will the emergence of another providential figure come easily.
Not all exceptional periods create their Bonapartes, and this is probably a good thing, for exceptional leaders may give the illusion that all problems have solutions, which is far from true.
The natural course of history in the most optimistic sense is progress “at the margin,” but the rapid pace of technological change is pushing us to expect equally rapid progress in human affairs.
Many of us believe that such an impossible wager can be fulfilled only by a providential man, with all the hopes – and dangers – that this entails.
The Great Organ Bazaar
LUND, SWEDEN – The Web site 88DB.com Philippines is an active online portal that allows service providers and consumers to find and interact with each other.
Naoval, an Indonesian man with “AB blood type, no drugs and no alcohol,” wants to sell his kidney.
Another man says, “I am a Filipino.
I am willing to sell my kidney for my wife.
She has breast cancer and I can’t afford her medications.”
Then there is Enrique, who is “willing to donate my kidney for an exchange.
21 years old and healthy.”
Other offers of this type could, just a few years ago, be found at www.liver4you.org, which promised kidneys for $80,000-$110,000.
The costs of the operation, including the fees of the surgeons – licensed in the United States, Great Britain, or the Philippines – would be included in the price.
All of this Internet activity is but the tip of the iceberg of a new and growing global human-tissue economy.
Indeed, the World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that about 10% of organ transplants around the world stem from purely commercial transactions.
Trade in organs follows a clear, geographically linked pattern: people from rich countries buy the organs, and people in poor countries sell them.
In my research on organ trafficking, I have entered some of these shadow markets, where body parts from the poor, war victims, and prisoners are commodities, bought or stolen for transplant into affluent ill people.
One woman, originally from Lebanon, told me that a wealthy businessman from Spain paid a huge sum for her kidney.
In the end, however, she received no monetary payment.
Today, her life is much worse than before, because medical complications following the operation make it difficult for her to work.
Similar stories are told by organ vendors I have met from the former Soviet states, the Middle East, and Asia.
Organ trafficking depends on several factors.
One is people in distress.
They are economically or socially disadvantaged, or live in war-torn societies with prevalent crime and a thriving black market.
On the demand side are people who are in danger of dying unless they receive an organ transplant.
Additionally, there are organ brokers who arrange the deals between sellers and buyers.
It is also necessary to have access to well-equipped clinics and medical staff.
Such clinics can be found in many countries, including Iran, Pakistan, Ukraine, South Africa, and the Philippines.
Indeed, the Philippines is well known as a center of the illegal organ trade and a “hot spot” for transplant tourism.
From the 1990’s until 2008 (when a new policy was adopted), the number of transplantations involving organ sales by Filipinos to foreign recipients increased steadily.
Many organ sellers from Israel, for example, were, together with their buyers, brought to Manila for the transplants.
Hector is one of the several hundred cases of kidney vendors documented by social workers in three impoverished towns in the Philippines’ Quezon province.
His brother was trapped in Malaysia with high debts to criminal gangs, so Hector sold his kidney in order to buy his freedom.
Another vendor, Michel, became a broker himself; after selling one of his kidneys to pay for his father’s medicines, the surgeon forced him to deliver more organs.
The vendors’ organs were transplanted to recipients mainly from the Philippines, Israel, Japan, South Korea, and Saudi Arabia.
Trade in humans and their bodies is not a new phenomenon, but today’s businesses are historically unique, because they require advanced biomedicine, as well as ideas and values that enhance the trade in organs.
Western medicine starts from the view that human illness and death are failures to be combated.
It is within this conceptual climate – the dream of the regenerative body – that transplantation technology develops and demand for biological replacement parts grows.
One of the more obvious manifes­tations of treating the human body as a resource to be mined is the hospital waiting list, used in many countries.
A man I interviewed recently for a study of Swedes who had been on the waiting list, but who decided to purchase kidneys abroad, described to me his trip to Pakistan for the transplant: “I’m not the kind of man who uses other people, but I had to.
I had to choose between dying and getting back my life!”
In an era of transplants on demand, there is no way around this dilemma.
The biological imperatives that guide the priority system of transplant waiting lists are easily transformed into economic values.
As always where demand exceeds supply, people may not accept waiting their turn – and other countries and other peoples’ bodies give them the alternative they seek.
The futures market at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is now predicting declines of around 15% more before the prices bottom out in 2010.
These are the market’s forecasts – and it is not a very liquid market.
But those who make these forecasts are implying real declines, from peak to trough, of more than 50% in some places. 
Why are we seeing such big price drops?
And why does the housing market in so many other countries now reflect similar conditions?
The answer has both proximate and underlying causes.
The proximate answer for the US is that a decline in lending standards helped people buy houses at ever-increasing prices before 2006.
Freer lending meant that people were freer to bid up prices of homes to ridiculous levels.
Shacks were selling for a million dollars.
After the peak, lenders tightened their standards.
When buyers find it difficult to finance home purchases, sellers have to cut the asking price. 
The up and down of lending represents a credit cycle, and credit cycles have played a major role in economic fluctuations for centuries.
In his 1873 book 
 Lombard Street
 , Walter Bagehot, the British businessman and editor of 
 The Economist
 , described these cycles perfectly.
The boom just before the depression of the 1870’s that he described sounds a lot like what happened just before the current crisis.
When credit expands, he wrote, “The certain result is a bound of national prosperity; the country leaps forward as if by magic.
But only part of that prosperity has a solid reason…this prosperity is precarious.” 
But the credit cycle was not the ultimate cause of the 1870’s depression or the crisis we are seeing today.
Ultimately, one must always ask why lending standards were loosened and then tightened.
The credit cycle is an amplification mechanism.
The instability in the lending sector is always there, and the crisis manifests itself only if some precipitating factor triggers it.
Moreover, the extreme weakening and then tightening of credit standards seems particularly prominent only in the US, while the housing boom-bust cycle is prevalent throughout much of the world.
The precipitating factor that led to the current situation has to do with our evolving world culture, spread rapidly through enhanced media outlets and the Internet, and its perceptions of the markets.
It has to do with the deep admiration of markets that has developed during the boom, in line with the “efficient markets theory” in academic finance.
It became widely believed that financial markets are such sublime poolers of information that they represent a collective judgment that transcends that of any mere mortal.
James Surowiecki’s bestselling 2004 book, with the outrageous title 
 The Wisdom of Crowds
 , pressed this idea forward at the very height of the real estate boom.
The boom in the world’s housing markets and stock markets between 2003 and 2006 was caused by this faulty idea, and the idea that investments in homes and equities are a sure route to wealth.
It had become an article of faith that the value of both types of assets only goes up in the long run, and that it is foolish to try to “time the market.”
It was sincerely believed, and supported by deep intuitive judgment, that interruptions in this upward trajectory could only be small and transient.
People seemed to think that rapid appreciation in these markets had become a universal constant, like the speed of light. 
Nothing else ultimately explains lenders’ immense willingness, in the boom up to 2006, to lower their credit standards on home mortgages, regulators’ willingness to let them do it, rating agencies’ willingness to rate mortgage securities highly, and investors’ willingness to gobble them up.
There is no theory in economics that provides a reason to think that prices in these markets can only go up.
On the contrary, economic theorists have been puzzled by the historical rate of increase in the stock market, which they call “the equity premium puzzle.”
They do not have a corresponding name for the behavior of the housing market, because, historically, its prices (correcting for inflation) have not generally gone up very much on average, until the post-2000 bubble.
The booms in these markets can be traced substantially to the growth of the idea that one should always continually hold as many of these assets as possible, just as that you should drink green tea or eat dark chocolate every day for antioxidants.
Such ideas create artificial demand – but only for a while.
After all, we no longer smoke cigarettes to prevent infections.
People will believe many things if they have the impression that the rich and famous believe them, too.
But their belief can suddenly be disrupted if plainly visible events contradict it.
That is what is happening now, and 2009 will shape up as a year of even more profound disenchantment.
The Greek Conundrum
The euro is a unique and unusual construction whose viability is now being tested.
Otmar Issing, one of the fathers of the common currency, correctly stated the principle on which it was founded: the euro was meant to be a monetary union, but not a political one.
The participating states established a common central bank, but they explicitly refused to surrender the right to tax their citizens to a common authority.
This principle was enshrined in Article 125 of the Maastricht Treaty, which has since been rigorously interpreted by the German constitutional court. 
The principle, however, is patently flawed.
A fully-fledged currency requires both a central bank and a treasury.
The treasury need not be used to tax citizens on an everyday basis, but it needs to be available in times of crisis.
When the financial system is in danger of collapsing, the central bank can provide liquidity, but only a treasury can deal with problems of solvency.
This is a well-known fact that should have been clear to everyone involved in the euro’s creation.
Issing admits that he was among those who believed that “starting monetary union without having established a political union was putting the cart before the horse.” 
The European Union was brought into existence step-by-step by putting the cart before the horse: setting limited but politically attainable targets and timetables, knowing full well that they would not be sufficient, and thus that further steps would be required in due course.
But, for various reasons, the process gradually ground to a halt.
The EU is now largely frozen in its current shape.
The same applies to the euro.
The crash of 2008 revealed the flaw in the euro’s construction, as each member country had to rescue its own banking system instead of doing it jointly.
The Greek debt crisis brought matters to a climax.
If member countries cannot take the next steps forward, the euro may fall apart, with adverse consequences for the EU.
The original construction of the euro postulated that each member would abide by the limits set by the Maastricht Treaty.
With the risk premium at current levels, there is a real danger that Greece may not be able to extricate itself from its predicament, regardless of what it does, because further budget cuts would further depress economic activity, reducing tax revenues and worsening the debt-to-GDP ratio.
Given that danger, the risk premium will not revert to its previous level in the absence of outside assistance.
The situation is aggravated by the market in credit default swaps, which is biased in favor of those who speculate on failure.
The most effective solution would be to issue jointly and separately guaranteed eurobonds to refinance, say, 75% of the maturing debt, as long as Greece meets its agreed-upon targets, leaving Greece to finance the rest of its needs as best it can.
This would significantly reduce the cost of financing, and it would be the equivalent of the IMF disbursing its loans in tranches as long as conditions are met.
But this is politically impossible at present, because Germany is adamantly opposed to serving as the deep pocket for its profligate partners.
Therefore, makeshift arrangements will have to be found.
The Papandreou government is determined to do whatever is necessary to correct the abuses of the past, and it enjoys a remarkable degree of public support.
There have been mass protests and resistance from the old guard of the governing party, but the general public seems ready to accept austerity as long as it sees progress in correcting budgetary abuses – and there are plenty of abuses to allow progress.
So makeshift assistance will be sufficient to allow Greece to succeed, but that leaves Spain, Italy, Portugal, and Ireland.
Together they constitute too large a portion of the euro zone to be helped out by makeshift arrangements.
The survival of Greece still leaves the future of the euro in question.
Even if the EU handles the current crisis, what about the next one?
It is clear what is needed: more intrusive monitoring and institutional arrangements for conditional assistance. Moreover, a well-organized eurobond market would be desirable.
The question is whether the political will to take these steps can be generated.
The Greek Tragedy, Act II
CHICAGO – A Greek tragedy is typically composed of three acts.
The first sets the scene.
It is only with the second that the plot reaches its climax.
For current-day Greece, the imposition of “voluntary” losses on the country’s private creditors represents just the end of the beginning.
The real tragedy has still to unfold.
On the face of it, the “voluntary” arrangement with creditors might appear to have been a big success.
The volume of Greece’s foreign debt has been reduced by more than €100 billion ($130 billion).
Greece’s European partners have provided €130 billion in new loans.
As a result, Greece has avoided generalized bank failures, and it has been able to continue paying its public employees.
But, despite these trumpeted results, the reality is much harsher.
Even with the latest deal, Greece’s debt ratio remains at 120% of last year’s GDP.
With a projected drop in GDP of 7% this year and a sustained deficit, the debt ratio would exceed 130% before stabilizing at 120% in 2020.
But even this reduced level is not sustainable.
With its population set to contract by 0.5% annually over the next 30 years, even if per capita income in Greece were to rise at the German rate of 1.5% per year, the debt would be difficult to service.
Assuming that Greece could borrow at a real interest rate of only 3% (the current level is 17%), the government would need to run an annual 2.6%-of-GDP primary budget surplus (the fiscal balance minus debt-service costs) for the next 30 years just to keep the debt burden stable.
To put that task in perspective, in the last 25 years, Greece ran an average primary deficit of 2% per year.
To reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to 70%, Greece would have to maintain an average primary surplus of 4% for the next 30 years, a level that it has temporarily achieved in only four of the last 25 years.&nbsp;
If the situation is so dramatic, why are the European Union and the International Monetary Fund celebrating the recent agreement?
Simply put, these institutions’ primary objective was to minimize the repercussions that a Greek default would have on the international financial system.
Greece, frankly, was not their priority.
Given the reaction in financial markets, they have succeeded.
The delay in reaching an agreement enabled most private creditors to escape the consequences of their reckless lending to Greece.
Roughly half of Greece’s external debt migrated from the private sector to official institutions.
But the group of lenders that the EU and the IMF wanted to help the most – the banks – only partly reduced their exposure.
Between May 2010 and September 2011, the value of Greek sovereign debt held by French banks dropped by €4.6 billion (39%), while German banks reduced their holdings by €2.9 billion (31%) and Italian banks by €530 million (30%).
In part, this drop reflects the reduction in market value of the existing liabilities.
Thus, on average, banks have sold very little.
But, while private-sector losses have been minimized, at what price?
Had Greece defaulted on its debt in 2010, imposing the same “haircut” on private creditors as it has imposed now, it would have reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio to a more manageable 80%.
That would have been painful, but it could have spared the Greeks from a 7% decline in GDP and a rise in unemployment to 22% (including an increase in youth unemployment to a whopping 48%).
More importantly, a default in 2010 would have left some room for adjustments.
Under the current plan, there is none: if the economy does not turn around quickly, Greece will need more help.
But where can it go now to find it?
Most of the sovereign debt is now held by the official sector, which traditionally does not allow any haircut.
The remainder has been reissued under English, not Greek, law, putting it outside of the control of the Greek government and its new collective-action clause, which facilities partial defaults.
In other words, Greece has exhausted its ability to share part of the burden with the private sector.
Next time, Europe’s taxpayers will be on the hook.
The second act of the Greek tragedy will cast desperate Greeks against angry and disenchanted Europeans elsewhere.
Only at the climax will we know whether the effort to delay the inevitable contributed to undermining the idea of Europe for the current generation.&nbsp;
The Green Guevara’s
“Bolivia is rich,” a Tacana Indian woman told me last week inside Madidi National Park.
Earlier in the day, we’d witnessed a hundred capuchin and squirrel monkeys rush down from the Amazon jungle canopy and were now relaxing beside Lake Chalalan while her cousin, a shaman, blessed coca leaves as the evening’s traditional drumming and dancing began.
This is Chalalan Lodge, a wholly Indian-owned and -operated ecotourism outfit through which a hundred indigenous families lifted themselves out of poverty – while creating benefits worth a half million dollars for the Bolivian economy each year.
It is one of dozens of similar operations – from the world’s largest salt flats in the south, to Lake Titicaca in the west, to the eastern Pantanal wetlands – that combine economic growth with conservation.
It seems improbable that such enterprises should exist in Bolivia, a fragile democracy, and the hemisphere’s poorest place next to Haiti.
As the December 18 presidential elections approach, the front-runners could not look much different from one another.
In first place is Evo Morales, an Amayra Indian running under the Movement Toward Socialism banner who is sometimes seen as Che Guevara’s second coming.
Running behind “Evo” is Jorge “Tuto” Quiroga, a millionaire former IBM executive from the European-descended Bolivian elite; he is closely aligned with America’s Republican Party and is married to a Texas blonde named Ginger.
Tuto warns that, should Evo win, he might consolidate a Latin American axis-of-evil connecting a leftist Bolivia with Fidel Castro’s Cuba and Hugo Chávez’s Venezuela.
Evo counters that Tuto is too linked to Bolivia’s corrupt political establishment – one of the most dishonest in the world according to the watchdog group Transparency International – to do much for Bolivia’s two-thirds Indian majority.
Whichever man wins will face Bolivia’s seemingly intractable pair of ills: social-exclusion and poverty.
It’s a combination that has led to the overthrow of two presidents in the last three years.
Workable solutions will lie not in ideology but rather in capitalizing on what the nation has to offer to the global economy: its stock of pristine ecology.
Noel Kempff, for example, one of Bolivia’s national parks, is home to the world's biggest forest-based Kyoto Protocol experiment.
The park contains the biggest chunk of virgin cerrado habitat left on Earth, with tapirs, red brocket deer, silvery marmosets, and pumas living amid twenty waterfalls crashing off the Huanchaca Mesa into forests.
The park’s waterways contain one-tenth of the world’s remaining 1,000 giant river otters, along with black and speckled caiman, pink river dolphins, and capybaras.
The 2,000 Chiquitanos living around the park contend that a tree holds up the Amazon’s seven skies, and they are living that belief in a modern way: by using their forests to help reduce the stratospheric greenhouse gasses that cause global warming.
British Petroleum and American Electric Power, the largest electricity supplier in the United States, have helped the Chiquitanos buy up logging concessions, thereby doubling Noel Kempff to three million acres.
The firms earn cap-and-trade carbon credits to fulfill their Kyoto requirements.
Bolivia’s Indians have also used their eco-clout to convince the energy companies to bankroll their fight for a 750,000-acre homeland bordering Kempff.
Conservation resonates with local political parties.
On the left, Evo delivers homilies exalting Pacha Mama, or Mother Nature; on the right, Tuto favors market mechanisms like Kyoto over command and control.
Both candidates want jobs to be created in ecological services.
Regardless of who comes to power, the West should channel a larger portion of the billions of dollars in development aid each year, including the newly approved $535 million for the country from the UN’s Millennium Challenge Account, to foster a local spirit of natural capitalism instead of providing charity.
The Indian-run lodge I visited is part of a $175 million ecological tourism industry that has been growing at 20% a year precisely because of the country’s natural splendor.
Economists argue that should the current trickle of 350,000 visitors each year grow to a quite reasonable million, every Bolivian would be employed.
“Bolivia is where Costa Rica was 20 years ago,” an eco-tourism expert told me at the first national summit on the industry on the shores of Lake Titicaca.
Finally, the Bush administration must ratify the Kyoto Protocol, in order to allow both global firms and Bolivian community entrepreneurs to create yet more rainforest ranches and other creative initiatives that reduce poverty, harbor biodiversity, and cool a warming world.
Perhaps Bolivia is indeed rich – in a way that could benefit all of us well into the future.
The Greening of Bush
The United States is usually regarded as an environmental laggard, with President George W. Bush perceived as being little better than the head of a gang of willful polluters who do everything they can to obstruct global action to protect the environment.
Of course, there is some truth in this characterization of America (and quite a lot in that of Bush), but the picture is not uniformly bleak.
Indeed, the environmental movement – like most modern social movements – began in the US.
The roots of America’s “environmental movement” lie in the nineteenth century, when the damage wrought by the industrial revolution and the fragmentation of the natural landscape by individual property rights and tenures first became apparent.
But it was the publication in 1962 of the book Silent Spring – a polemic against the use of pesticides in agriculture – by the biologist Rachel Carson that jump-started the modern ecological movement.
Carson drew on scientific findings, but also voiced fundamental misgivings about consumer capitalism and a “postmaterialistic” belief in the primacy of the quality of life over economic growth.
In Carson’s wake, the “Woodstock” generation of the 1960’s, with its Earth Days, soon began to organize a broad campaign, which saw, in April 1970, around 20 million Americans take to the street to defend the environment.
In this new movement, the libertarian tendencies of the New Left and the protectionist tendencies of the traditional right became intertwined.
Paul Ehrlich’s bestseller The Population Bomb exerted an influence that lasts to this day.
America’s environmental movement was soon exported to Europe and elsewhere: on one hand, the pragmatic Friends of the Earth and the media-oriented organization Greenpeace , and, on the other hand, eco-fundamentalist groups like Earth First! and the Environmental Justice Movement (EJM) or lobbying groups like the World Wildlife Fund.
This movement managed to force the first environmental laws out of the conservative Nixon administration: the National Environmental Act of 1969, the Clean Air Act of 1970, the Clean Water Act of 1972, and the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Then as now, the focus in America was on “green” topics (clean water, fresh air, and biological diversity) rather than with the “brown” topics of ecological disasters such as the Chernobyl (or Harrisburg) disaster, which have played a dominant role in mobilizing Europeans.
America’s influential Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) also was established under Nixon.
Environmentalists hired scientists, lawyers, and lobbyists who made sure that laws weren’t just passed in Congress, but also implemented in practice.
But the current Bush administration has been hacking away at these 1970’s laws from all directions.
He approved oil exploration in closed nature reserves, and also systematically fought to suppress scientific evidence on climate change.
Now, however, due to the surge in crude oil prices, even Bush has had to begin to consider alternative energy sources, and it won’t be possible to limit these to nuclear power or ethanol, which is so popular among farmers, a key Bush constituency.
Indeed, even Bush’s own political base, the Christian fundamentalists, are becoming “green,” pressuring the administration to sign the Kyoto Protocol because they believe that the environment must be protected just like unborn life.
“Eco-theology” and evangelical pro-life propaganda have become one of the liveliest branches of the US environmental movement.
“Green” eco-activists, while feeling awkward about support from this quarter, nonetheless find them useful allies.
Indeed, the greening of America is becoming a general proposition.
Many Americans can only shake their heads at the energy lobbyists who surround Bush and Vice-President Dick Cheney, and for a long time now a majority has been in favor of signing multilateral agreements, particularly in the area of climate protection.
Catastrophic events like Hurricane Katrina have reinforced this stance.
All this has caused Bush to seek to accommodate – verbally, at least – the will of an overwhelming majority of Americans to conserve energy.
Moreover, although Bush has given mainly national security reasons for his seeming change of heart, America’s federal system, helps the country get around even a roadblock as powerful as the president, as “localism” promotes eco-political initiatives at the state level and even within municipalities.
It is not just California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger who has recognized the signs of the times and proclaimed bold Kyoto targets for his state that may become a pacemaker of All-American modernization again.
Political climate change has also been brought about by people like Jerome Ringo, the president of the National Wildlife Federation (NWF) , whose 4.5 million members make it one of the largest environmental organizations.
Ringo also heads the Apollo Alliance , a coalition of trade unions, environmentalist groups, managers, and local politicians that demands clean energy and good jobs.
How green America will actually become remains to be seen, of course, but, as an ecological avant-garde, the US might even regain its lost influence in the world.
Those who disdain environmental concerns have been ousted at the polls in large numbers, companies invest huge amounts in environmental technologies, states are suing car producers for their climate-adverse policies, and the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol have long been surpassed by some states – a lesson for German and European cities and municipalities.
As in the past, the effectiveness of these initiatives ultimately will depend on whether these impulses reach Europe and Japan, as well as emerging nations like China and Brazil.
It is time for Greens everywhere to start attending to ecological matters again – and, strange as it may sound, to look again to America for inspiration.
The Greening of China
Two countries – the United States and China – remain aloof from global efforts to create a new post-Kyoto framework on climate change.
Fifty years ago, the rest of the world might have carried on with remedying the problem of conventional and greenhouse gas emissions and let China and the US stew in their own waste.
But the world is now so interdependent that what happens in one place affects all others.
For example, visitors and residents alike have long thought of Hong Kong as a beautiful city clinging to the South China coast.
But, for at least five years, Hong Kong’s citizens have found themselves starting to cough and wheeze from the city’s increasingly degraded air.
Corporate employers are even complaining about not being able to attract overseas talent.
Pollution from Hong Kong’s own power generation plants, growing number of vehicles, and burgeoning shipping industry can certainly be reduced.
But the lion’s share of this industrial haze – like the growing pollution of its coastal waters – is a direct result of the rapid industrialization of the Pearl River Delta across the border in China’s Guangdong Province.
China is exporting not only more and more goods, but also its environmental degradation.
The inescapable truth is that the futures of Hong Kong and China are integrally linked.
There are roughly 58,000 factories in the Pearl River Delta with Hong Kong connections, and together they employ more than 10 million workers.
Guangdong accounts for about 30% of China’s total foreign trade, while Hong Kong is China’s international finance center.
Officials in both Hong Kong and Guangdong are powerless to clean up their environmental problems on their own.
In fact, development plans in China may be heading in the opposite direction.
Political heavyweights in Guangdong still favor a form of development that relies on speed and quantity while ignoring overall environmental quality.
And Hong Kong’s economic blueprint also focuses on accelerating large infrastructure projects whose environmental impact has not been rigorously examined.
It will not be easy for leaders on either side of the border to reverse gears, but there is still chance that people and companies can make a difference.
Increasingly loud complaints about deteriorating air quality have goaded Hong Kong and Guangdong into embarking on a joint program in which a series of monitoring stations now provides emissions data.
Hong Kong’s data have been released regularly, and in 2006, Guangdong’s data were made publicly available for the first time.
There is now also talk about monitoring water quality.
These are laudable steps for China, given its poor record on transparency.
Indeed, the joint air-monitoring network provides a foundation for the region to develop a sophisticated regional air management program.
Furthermore, new coal-fired power plants may no longer be allowed on either side of the border, necessitating greater use of natural gas and renewable energy sources.
The first challenge for authorities is to regulate power generation very differently.
People are used to paying for the electricity that they actually use.
But, to optimize efficiency, utilities need to be rewarded for what they help consumers save.
In other words, utilities must be given incentives to help consumers use less power.
This idea is clearly feasible.
Amory Lovins of the Rocky Mountain Institute has proposed what he calls the “negawatt,” or energy that is never used.
All that is needed are the right financial incentives to induce utility companies to produce less electricity (and still be more profitable) and consumers to reduce their use (and gain savings without sacrificing comfort).
This can be done by refitting households with high-efficiency light bulbs and other technological improvements, and by retrofitting industrial plants with energy-saving technologies.
Another innovative idea that Hong Kong and Guangdong are exploring is the “P2E2” scheme.
To help industries in the region upgrade environmentally, firms can now obtain special loans for which the Asian Development Bank assumes the risk – a program made possible by Hong Kong’s sound banking practices.
Another initiative worth watching is the Hong Kong stock exchange’s exploratory project to offer a trading platform for emissions derivatives, which will most likely include conventional pollutants as well as carbon.
The exchange will undertake a study this summer, with trading to begin as early as 2008.
If these reforms are not trumped by efforts to maintain high growth at all costs, the region could not only clean itself up while continuing to prosper, but could also establish a model for all of China.
Nothing is more necessary in a country that, according to the United Nations Development Program, contains 16 of the world’s 20 most polluted cities.
Hong Kong’s leaders to do not want to end up on that infamous list.
By saving themselves, they may also be able to play an instrumental role in saving China.
The Greening of Work
MONACO – When environment ministers from some 100 countries meet here on February 20-22 for UNEP’s Governing Council and Environmental Forum, talks will focus on environmentally friendly “green growth” and ways and means by which the world can achieve a low-carbon economy.
The employment and development potential of combating climate change is only now being understood as a part of this effort.
UNEP has invited the International Labour Organization and the International Trade Union Confederation to contribute to these discussions.
Changes underway are a result of the Kyoto Protocol, but they are also partly being made in anticipation of deeper emission cuts to come.
Equally important, the perception of organized labor and industry concerning environmental issues is changing dramatically.
Environmental regulation was sometimes viewed with suspicion and concern for business and labour.
Now, business sees profits and unions see jobs.
Consider these facts: