As manufacturing wages rise and labor intensity falls, Asia will need to rely more on services to create jobs for the millions of people who join the workforce each year.
While little investment is needed to upgrade the service sector, dismantling excessive regulations will require strong political will.
Moreover, recent natural disasters have highlighted the importance of climate resilience as a means to improve quality of life.
Protecting the poor and managing urban migration would help in this regard, and requires a subtle mixture of innovation and public fortitude.
Measures should include issuing land titles, removing slumlords, and providing basic services.
Asia’s ongoing transformation – rooted in the long-term conviction that more equitable, inclusive, and increasingly knowledge-led growth will help to reduce poverty and offer greater prosperity to its citizens – requires a short-term commitment to mitigating any global economic slowdown caused by new shocks. It also demands determined efforts to reduce global imbalances by rebalancing Asia’s own sources of growth.
If successful, the Asia that emerges from this transformation will not only be prosperous; it will also be a bulwark of world peace – the ultimate global public good.
Asia’s Fragile Special Relationship
NEW DELHI – “Tzu-Ch’in asked Tzu-Kung a few questions; Tzu-Kung answered: …Our Master gets things (done) by being cordial, frank, courteous, temperate, deferential.
That is our…way.”
But will Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao live up to that standard, as conveyed in the Analects of Confucius, on his current visit to India?
The world has a variety of “special relationships.”
The United States’ partnership with the United Kingdom is one forged in war – and a pillar of the West for more than a half-century.
The US-Soviet rivalry of the Cold War era was special in that relations between those two countries shaped the fate of the world until the USSR imploded.
The US and China are said to be forging a new special relationship.
But, in looking toward the future of Asia – and, indeed, the future of world diplomacy – it is the relationship between the world’s two most populous countries and largest emerging economies, India and China, which will increasingly set the global agenda.
Japan’s change of military doctrine for the first time since the start of the Cold War – a shift that implicitly makes China the greatest threat – suggests that the Chinese leadership needs to take a hard look at its regional grand strategy.
Wen’s priorities for his trip to India are clear: trade, security, and, far behind, the territorial disputes between the two countries.
Such an approach might make tactical diplomatic sense, as long as there is no background clatter.
Small wonder that, on the eve of Wen’s visit, China’s ambassador in New Delhi finds relations between the two countries to be “very fragile, easily damaged, and difficult to repair.”
But, despite all this diplomatic friction, Wen’s entourage for his visit is dominated by a large business delegation.
Currently, both countries’ economies are thrusting confidently forward; both are thirsty for more and bigger markets.
India is growing at an annual rate of around 9%; China at around 10%.
So the opportunities for trade between the two are certainly enormous.
But, for both countries, economic growth is not hurdle-free.
India’s economy is continuing to grow, but faces rising inflation, fiscal and current-account deficits, a slowdown in agricultural growth, and infrastructure bottlenecks.
China’s problems arise mainly from widening income disparities, which are inciting hitherto unheard of levels of labor unrest – though this should not be viewed as a precursor to change of the sort that marked the rise of the Solidarity trade union and the end of communism in Poland.
But labor unrest and the desire to maintain 10% growth suggest that China should be taking the lead in ensuring peace on the Korean peninsula and preventing other political developments from derailing its economy.
After all, as the Chinese leadership knows, only continued strong growth will provide the government with the wriggle room it needs to begin to revalue the renminbi.
Revaluation of its currency is necessary in part because the undervalued renminbi has become yet another a source of friction in Asia, as many in the region now believe the Chinese are using their currency as a “policy weapon.”
To untangle the complex policy web surrounding the renminbi’s value will demand greater regional stability, not less.
Yet China’s international grand strategy does not appear to reflect this.
Instead, it remains focused on Northeast Asia, Tibet, Taiwan, and on its aspirations to move into the Indian Ocean, that great global highway of trade in the twenty-first century.
China’s leaders recognize that their country needs time, space, and peace for economic development.
Yet their pursuit of a dominant position on the strategic chokepoints in the Indian Ocean undermines these goals by raising tensions not only with India, but with Asia’s other powers and the US.
Their focus on inhibiting India seems particularly misguided, given that China’s core interests (Tibet, Taiwan, and the heartland of the Chinese mainland) are far beyond the reach of most of India’s military capabilities.
By contrast, India’s most important national security concerns – the unsettled border between the two countries, and Beijing’s ties with Pakistan, which often operates as a Chinese surrogate – are closely connected to China: Both factors are directly linked to China’s perceived threat to India’s Himalayan territory and its rapid development of strategic infrastructure in that region.
India’s concerns also focus on China’s ongoing supply of arms, including missiles and nuclear weapons technology, to Pakistan.
No amount of discussion over trade can obscure the true issues of vital concern between China and India.
China may take comfort in remaining focused on non-core issues, because such an approach suggests tactical cooperation with India.
That is a convenient international ploy, but it leaves the sources of bilateral discord unattended.
The idea of collaboration only in areas of interest to China while neglecting issues of substance to India is untenable, even in the short term.
Indeed, neglect of the core disputes is what has resulted in the relationship’s “extreme fragility.”
India cannot and will not abandon its territorial sovereignty, or its pursuit of secure land borders or a greater balance in trade.
These are challenges that cry out for clarity, not diplomatic fudges.
But surely two great and ancient civilizations can find their way to the type of “cordial, frank, courteous, temperate, deferential…” relations that would have pleased Confucius.
Asia’s Giants Colliding at Sea?
NEW DELHI – Even in an age of 24-hour globalized news, some important events only come to light well after the fact.
Something of this sort happened several months ago in the South China Sea – and may shape how relations between the world’s two most populous countries, China and India, develop in the years ahead.
While returning in late July from a goodwill visit to Vietnam in waters recognized as international, an Indian naval ship was “hailed” on open radio and advised to “lay off” the South China Sea.
Although naval incidents between China and its near neighbors – particularly Vietnam, Japan, and the Philippines – are not unusual, this is the first one to involve India.
Why did China attempt to interfere with a ship sailing in open seas?
Was this “merely” another of China’s unwarranted assertions of sovereignty over the whole South China Sea, or was something more malevolent afoot?
At China’s Foreign Ministry, a spokesperson explained: “[W]e are opposed to any country engaging in oil and gas exploration and development activities in waters under China’s jurisdiction.”
Then, in passing, he added that “countries outside the region, we hope…will respect and support countries in the region” in their efforts “to solve…dispute[s] through bilateral channels.”
India’s government responded promptly: “Our cooperation with Vietnam or any other country is always as per international laws, norms, and conventions,” it declared, stating that “cooperation with Vietnam in the area of energy is very important.”
Indeed, Indian companies already have invested heavily there, and are seeking to expand their operations.
Although India’s statement is explicit enough, doubts persist.
Is the two countries’ argument merely about who will develop the South China Sea’s untapped energy resources, or are we dealing with the beginning of a struggle for spheres of influence?
To find an answer requires confronting civilizational norms, which are reflected in the intellectual games that the countries favor.
India has traditionally favored the game of chaupad (four sides), or shatranj (chess), concentrating on contest, conquest, and subjugation.
So where do things stand?
It is clear that India, given its years of cooperation with Vietnam on oil and gas development, is not about to acquiesce in China’s claim to the South China Sea.
Moreover, as energy extraction begins, a new memorandum of understanding between India and Vietnam is scheduled to be signed later this year.
China was most likely reacting to these developments by accusing India of violating its territorial waters.
For India, the sense that a struggle for regional mastery is occurring has become increasingly keen.
There was a more broader, more ominous message as well, one that belies China’s official rhetoric of harmony: “We should not leave the world with the impression that China is only focused on economic development, nor should we pursue the reputation” of being a “peaceful power, which would cost us dearly.”
It is this “triumphalist” foreign policy, as Henry Kissinger calls it, with which India has to contend.
The “Chinese approach to world order,” writes Kissinger in his new book On China, is dissimilar to the Western system of “balance of power diplomacy,” primarily because China has “never engaged in sustained contact with another….” on the basis of the concept of the “sovereign equality of nations.”
As Kissinger, a committed Sinophile, points out: “That the Chinese Empire should tower over its geographical sphere was taken virtually as a law of nature, an expression of the Mandate of Heaven.”
Perhaps India and others should contend with China’s assertiveness by heeding Sun Tzu’s counsel: “Contain an adversary through the leverage of converting the neighborhood of that adversary into hostiles.”
Just as China has cultivated Pakistan, is India’s growing embrace of Vietnam a counter-move on Asia’s strategic chessboard?
Perhaps.
After all, just as India recognizes China’s vital interests in Tibet and Taiwan, there must be reciprocal recognition of India’s national interests.
China must fully accept that any effort at strategic encirclement of India will be countered.
That is an Indian national-security imperative.
So is restraint and mutual cooperation – as is true for China as well.
Asia’s Next Axis
SEOUL – Last month, the leaders of China, Japan, and South Korea agreed to begin negotiations later this year on a trilateral free-trade agreement.
If the talks succeed, the global trade map will need to be redrawn.
An FTA that encompasses, respectively, the world’s second, third, and 12th biggest economies (in purchasing power parity terms in 2011), with a population of 1.5 billion, would dwarf the European Union and the North American Free Trade Agreement, comprising the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
Indeed, Northeast Asia would become the third major axis of regional economic integration, following the EU and NAFTA.
Until now, the region has been unable to institutionalize economic cooperation as vigorously as Europe and North America have.
But if the proposals discussed in Beijing last month are realized, the resulting FTA could surpass NAFTA in its degree of integration and importance to the world economy.
In addition, the formation of a China-Japan-South Korea FTA would most likely trigger a chain-reaction.
For example, the momentum could expand southward and stimulate ASEAN, which has bilateral FTAs with all three countries, to join the group.
Such a turn of events would be equivalent to establishing the East Asia Free Trade Area, which the ASEAN+3 envisioned about a decade ago.
If that happened, other countries – Australia, New Zealand, and, most importantly, India – might seek to jump on the bandwagon.
The US would, of course, need to respond to the conclusion of any trilateral Northeast Asian FTA in order to preserve its own role in global trade – and in the supply chains that dominate the Asian economies.
It would likely seek to expand and deepen the infant Trans-Pacific Partnership, the trade agreement that President Barack Obama committed the US to last year.
In particular, the US would strongly encourage Japan to join the TPP, because the US might want a united Asia-Pacific economic community, rather than a division between Asia and the Pacific.
Because Japan would not want to be disconnected from the US for strategic reasons, it might indeed accept America’s invitation.
In this scenario, both Japan and South Korea would have to find some means to bridge a Sino-centric Asia and a US-centered Pacific.
Despite its smaller economy, South Korea seems to be better prepared than Japan to play this critical role.
South Korea has already concluded an FTA with the US, after years of difficult negotiations, and plans to negotiate a bilateral FTA with China this year.
Thus, the key question is whether and how much Japan will be willing to take on a similar bridging role.
Robust Japanese participation would mitigate Asia-Pacific polarization and contribute to building momentum for regional integration.
But the magnitude of domestic challenges that Japan faces nowadays seems too great for its political leaders to play a proactive international role.
Japan’s governments have been fragile and short-lived for close to a decade, and the current debate over raising the value-added tax could cause another change of administration.
Moreover, Japan’s powerful agricultural interest groups, especially the Central Union of Agricultural Cooperatives, may strengthen their opposition to both a trilateral FTA with China and South Korea and the TPP with the US.
But Japan’s leaders are being squeezed from both directions.
If they do nothing while South Korea continues to conclude FTAs, Japan will lose markets in the US and China.
But if they act, domestic political opposition would likely be so severe as to drive them from power.
This is the main reason why it will be difficult for Japan to conclude the proposed trilateral FTA, despite Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda’s recent endorsement of it.
Indeed, only a looser FTA that would exclude each country’s sensitive economic sectors appears to be viable.
For China, political considerations seem to be the strongest motivation for pursuing a Northeast Asian FTA.
But using the trilateral FTA to expand its economic and political influence would require China to increase transparency, open its service sector, and remove non-tariff barriers.
In essence, it would have to accept a rules-based system for its relations with its two neighbors, something of which China’s government has been wary.
One advantage for China, however, in pursuing an FTA strategy is that it is still an authoritarian state, and thus could overrule domestic opposition far more easily than could governments in Japan or South Korea.
Finally, South Korea, which has concluded FTAs with almost every important economic actor in the world – the US, the EU, ASEAN, India, and others – may be better prepared to conclude a trilateral FTA than Japan.
But it, too, will have to face strong opposition from domestic agricultural interest groups and manufacturing sectors, which might mobilize even more strongly than they did in opposing the FTA with the US.
If a trilateral Northeast Asian FTA can be concluded, the three countries would be able to generate more market demand domestically at a time of weak demand from the West, and would gain greater influence in the global political economy.
A trilateral FTA would also most likely contribute to stabilizing the three countries’ troublesome political relations with each other, and could provide a better environment for North Korea’s eventual economic reconstruction.
The myriad benefits of a Northeast Asian FTA are clear.
The question is whether it is an ambition too far.
Asia’s Overlooked Great Power
Mention Asia, and most people think of the region’s fascinating, rising giants, China or India – or both.
Or people think about North Korea’s nuclear program, some terrorist incident, or the humanitarian consequences of the latest earthquake or tsunami.
But often overlooked – or at least underestimated – is Japan.
This is odd, given that Japan is still the world’s second largest economy, with a GDP of $5 trillion – more than China and India combined.
Despite Japan’s relatively modest rate of economic growth, its GDP per capita is roughly $38,000, more than ten times that of either China or India.
Moreover, there are important stirrings in Japan that suggest change on both the economic and security fronts.
The 1990’s may have been a lost decade, but Japan’s economy has begun to recover, now growing at more than 2% a year and boasting several firms that are truly global and hugely successful.
Changes in foreign and defense policy are more considerable.
Japan’s self-defense agency was upgraded in January to a full ministry.
Japan now spends more than $40 billion a year on defense and maintains one of the world’s most diverse and modern militaries.
Approximately 1,000 Japanese forces serve in and around Iraq.
Intellectuals, journalists, and politicians are now saying and writing things about Japan’s role in the world that were unthinkable a decade ago.
It is a question of when, not if, the Japanese amend Article IX of their constitution, which limits the role of Japan’s armed forces to self-defense.
Not everyone will welcome these changes.
Japan’s neighbors, who continue to harbor concerns stemming from World War II and Japan’s failure to deal adequately with its history, will worry about Japanese nationalism.
Nevertheless, a more active and more capable Japan, with a robust democracy and a thriving economy, is in its neighbors’ best interests.
The danger is not renewed Japanese militarism, but rather a Japan that is unable and unwilling to do its share to meet the regional and global challenges facing Asia.
Japan, for its part, needs to continue to open and reform its economy, improve its military, and make its forces available for the sort of low-intensity but manpower-intensive missions, ranging from genocide prevention to nation-building to peacekeeping, that are increasingly required in the greater Middle East and Africa.
Japanese leaders also need to act with sensitivity.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is off to an uneven start.
On one hand, he is wise not to have visited the Yasukuni shrine, which honors millions of Japan’s war dead, including 14 Class A war criminals.
On the other hand, Abe’s public statements denying Japan���s coercion of “comfort women” in China and Korea have been clumsy at best, insensitive at worst.
It is essential that Japan and China forge a modern relationship.
The increasing frequency of high-level visits – Prime Minister Abe went to China in October, and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao was just in Japan – is a welcome development.
But more is needed.
Trade and investment flows can and should be expanded, which is likely only if political relations improve.
Both countries should commit themselves to a diplomatic resolution of competing claims to offshore resources.
Exchanges of every kind – military, educational, touristic – should be facilitated.
The world also needs to take into account Japan’s importance.
Japan should no longer be denied fair treatment because of events more than 60 years ago.
There is no reason Japan should not hold a permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council.
Japan should also be a full participant in Asian regional arrangements.
Asia is rich in dynamism, but relatively thin in influential political, economic, and security-related institutions, in contrast to Europe, which often lacks dynamism but is institution-heavy.
The Franco-German relationship, central to much twentieth-century conflict, now forms the core of modern Europe.
The goal should be the same for China and Japan.
The agenda is virtually limitless, including trade and investment, energy and climate change, and confidence-building in the security sphere.
A new regional institution could be based on an existing one (such as the six-party arrangement used to manage North Korea’s nuclear challenge) or start afresh.
Moreover, just as the United States continues to play a major role in Europe, so, too, should it act as a guarantor of Asia’s stability and a source of regional prosperity.
The US-Japan alliance is central to America’s position in Asia.
The goal is not to enlist Japan in any anti-Chinese coalition, but rather to increase the depth and breadth of US-Japanese cooperation.
Both countries have many reasons to pursue this goal, considering North Korea’s missile and nuclear programs, terrorism, and the numerous challenges to stability around the world.
Abe’s visit to Washington in late April is an opportunity to continue to modernize a relationship conceived in an earlier geopolitical era.
It is to be hoped that it will not be overshadowed by calls in Congress for Japan to apologize more formally than it already has for the comfort women.
Rather, the focus should be on the future and on welcoming the emergence of a Japan that is increasingly able and willing to act as a partner of the US in addressing regional and global challenges.
Asia’s Post-Tsunami Future
There can be no underestimating the scale of the human devastation wrought by Asia’s horrific tsunamis.
Family members have been lost, homes destroyed, and livelihoods ruined.
As is often the case in natural disasters, the poor are suffering the most.
And yet, even with damage to infrastructure such as road and rail links, the tsunamis’ overall economic impact is expected to be minor.
In the worst hit parts of India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, the immediate interior was unaffected, while the tourism and fishing industries – the lifeblood of wrecked coastal areas – account for only a tiny share of these countries’ GDP, as liberalizing reforms have fueled economic diversification and rapid growth.
It was not always this way.
Historically, it has been difficult to convince Asians that international trade is not a zero-sum-game, with Asia invariably the losers.
This is one reason why, after Mao Zedong’s communists triumphed in China in 1949 and other Asian nations gained independence, most Asian countries adopted protectionist inward-looking economic policies aimed at building domestic strength, keeping the “imperialists” out, and achieving self-reliance.
Historical experience incites this suspicion.
In 1820, Asia’s share of global GDP was 60%, with China accounting for slightly more than half. That was two decades before the first Opium War.
With the emergence of truly global world trade over the ensuing century and a half, Asia’s economic dominance withered.
By 1950, China’s share of world GDP had fallen to under 5%, while all of Asia accounted for just 18%, the biggest chunk of which was attributable to Japan, despite its defeat in WWII.
The winds of global change began sweeping through Asia roughly two decades ago, first in East Asia, then engulfing China, and in the course of the 1990’s blowing on to South Asia, most importantly India.
What we are witnessing is thus not “emerging” Asia, but the “re-emergence” of a continent that comprises 60% of humanity.
Its two giants, India and China, are especially determined, as Indian author Ashutosh Sheshabalaya recently put it, “to return to their nineteenth-century status, when they accounted for well over half of world economic output.”
One result of this is that China and India are seeking to make a bigger impact on global economic policy.
Both countries were signatories of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT, the precursor to today’s World Trade Organization) in 1948, but China under Mao subsequently left.
Although India remained a member, it was often a recalcitrant one.
Asia’s current share of global GDP (about 38%) is still far from what it was in 1820, but both countries feel that they can – and must – participate in calling the global shots.
It took China’s government a protracted sixteen years to negotiate its re-entry into the GATT/WTO, but it soon showed its mettle by assuming joint leadership (along with Brazil, India, and South Africa) of the G-20, a group of primarily dynamic developing countries that threw down the gauntlet to the industrialized powers at the Cancún WTO ministerial meeting in September 2003.
So the Asians are coming: as markets, as states, as consumers, as financiers (Asian central banks, for example, are responsible for financing America’s whopping budget deficits), as scientists and engineers, and as corporations.
Is the West ready?
In an article in the Financial Times in July 2004, Standard Chartered CEO Mervyn Davies wrote, “westerners are realizing how big Asia’s corporate ambitions are.”
There is, however, a large difference between recognizing that change may be coming and making the necessary adjustments.
In contrast to the emergence of the West in the nineteenth century, which proved such an economic disaster for most of Asia, the continent’s re-emergence can have an immensely positive effect on the twenty-first century’s global economy, including, needless to say, the West.
Global economic policy-making remains very much a Western game.
It beggars belief that China and India are not members of the G-7.
The Bretton Woods organizations – the IMF, the World Bank and the WTO – remain heavily Western in structure, leadership, and mentality.
This is especially true of the WTO, where Washington and Brussels seem more concerned at settling old scores and protecting their respective turfs than in engaging with the new players.
China will soon be the world’s biggest trading power. Yet euroatlantic introversion still permeates the WTO.
This mindset is also pervasive in Western governments, industry, business schools, and the media.
None of these institutions in the West is ready for Asia’s re-emergence.
History is not particularly encouraging when it comes to adjusting to profound changes – new actors and shifting balances of power – as the twentieth century tragically and repeatedly demonstrated.
The tsunami that so devastated much of Asia has provided an opportunity for all key players – in government, industry, academia, the media, and civil society – to look at Asia anew, at both the challenges and the opportunities that have arisen from Asia’s resurgence.
These opportunities need to be seized with as much alacrity as the world has responded to Asia’s sorrow.
Asia’s Stifled Services
MANILA – The eurozone crisis has dominated discussion among policymakers over the last few years, but the economic slowdown in Asia’s two giants – the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and India – has become a source of growing public concern as well.
How worried should we be about an additional drag on the global economy?
After years of double-digit GDP growth, the PRC’s economy is decelerating.
At the Asian Development Bank, we predict that its growth will slow to 7.7% this year, from 9.3% in 2011.
The PRC’s population is aging, real wages are rising, and growth is moderating toward more sustainable rates.
Asia’s boom was driven largely by intraregional manufacturing linkages: intermediate goods and parts were sourced from within Asia for assembly into final goods exported to advanced economies.
But, with budget-tightening around the world, demand for Asia’s exports is expected to continue to falter.
Where, then, should Asia look for another source of growth?
Upgrading the service sector – for example, business processing, tourism, and health care – could play a critical role in the region’s future growth.
Asia’s service sector is already large, contributing significantly to growth and employment.
Services accounted for nearly half of developing Asia’s GDP in 2010, two-thirds of India’s growth from 2000 to 2010, and 43% of growth in the manufacturing-oriented PRC in the same period.
In addition, service workers comprise more than one-third of total employment in developing Asia.
If these countries follow the same path traveled by the advanced economies, agriculture’s dominance will give way to industry, which in turn will be supplanted by services, further broadening their role.
There is certainly room to grow: the share of industry in developing Asia’s output surpassed the OECD average in 2010 (41% vs. 24%), but the share of services still lags by a wide margin (48% vs. 75%).
Making Asia’s service sector more dynamic is essential to future growth.
But the sector is still dominated by traditional services, such as restaurants, taxis, and barbers.
Modern services – such as Internet connectivity technology, or financial, legal, and other professional business services – account for less than 10% of Asia’s service economy, well below the 20-25% in advanced economies.
While traditional service industries are able to provide jobs, they do not generate much income.
Labor productivity is also quite low: For most economies in the region, service-sector productivity is less than 20% of the OECD average.
Even in South Korea, labor productivity in industry is 118% of the OECD figure, but only 43% of the average for services.
A vibrant service sector could have broad economic benefits.
Synergies between services and industry could improve overall productivity.
For example, industrial design, marketing, and legal services could facilitate investment and development of new manufactured products.
The service sector also tends to be more effective in job creation, particularly for women, thus supporting inclusive growth.
Developing the service sector could also diversify the production base, thereby enhancing economic resilience and boosting growth momentum.
Modern services are becoming increasingly tradable, providing new export opportunities.
India and the Philippines, for example, have established themselves as world leaders in the export of outsourced business processes.
Skills gaps and a lack of infrastructure are frequently cited as factors that hinder service-sector dynamism in Asia.
But burdensome regulations are the biggest barrier.
Excessive regulation that protects incumbent firms and other vested interests undermines market competitiveness and limits prospects for improved productivity and efficiency.
For example, legal markets are dominated by rich lawyers, schools are controlled by teachers’ unions, and the medical sector is influenced by powerful doctors, resulting in high business costs that also hamper industrial development.
Many service firms in Asia are owned by the public sector, so governments have less incentive to deregulate services.
But the same authorities have already opened their economies’ manufacturing and agriculture sectors for the common good, even at the expense of minority groups like farmers and factory workers.
Why, then, are they maintaining policies that protect the special-interest groups that dominate the service sector?
Many argue that regulations protect small domestic firms against undue competition from large foreign firms.
But the truth is that regulations are stifling even for domestic competition.
In India, for example, there is fear that small mom-and-pop retailers will be crushed when Wal-Mart enters the market in the next few months.
But policymakers must recognize that there are ways to protect small retailers without stifling competition.
The government can, say, impose zoning regulations, help small retailers find&nbsp;specialized niches in the market, or provide skills training to displaced workers.
The survival of artisanal retailers should not be used as an excuse to introduce or uphold business regulations that ultimately protect the incumbent rich.
Asian policymakers must remember how they successfully developed their manufacturing sector – through competition.
The same logic should be applied to services.
Upgrading the service sector is low-hanging fruit for Asia, because tremendous investments are not required.
And yet service-sector reform remains just out of reach for the region, owing to the absence of the political will needed to dismantle the vested interests that keep it there.
Asia’s Take on Austerity
NEW HAVEN – The austerity debate was the topic du jour at this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos. With good reason.
Europe is slipping back into recession just when recovery in the United States is finally getting some traction.&nbsp; That has undermined the case for fiscal consolidation, which is so heavily favored in Europe.
Yet I took away a different conclusion from Davos.
I moderated a session on “The New Context in East Asia,” addressed by a panel of senior representatives from Thailand, South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Japan. With the exception of the Japanese participant, all had first-hand experience with the devastating Asian financial crisis of the late 1990’s.
I couldn't resist the temptation to draw Asia into the debate between Europe and the US.
Rather than ask the Asian panelists to theorize about the impact of austerity in the overly indebted developed West, I asked them to assess their own experiences during and after the crisis of the late 1990’s.
Frankly, I was surprised by what I heard.
The panelists agreed on two points: first, they initially detested the wrenching adjustment programs dictated by the terms of the International Monetary Fund’s so-called conditional bailouts (the South Koreans still refer scornfully to the “IMF crisis” of the late 1990’s).
Second – and here’s where the surprise came – they all agreed that, with the benefit of hindsight, these excruciating adjustments were worth it, because their crisis-torn economies were forced to embrace structural reforms that paved the way for their spectacular economic performance today.
On the surface, the numbers speak for themselves.
In 1998, during the depths of the Asian crisis, aggregate output in the so-called ASEAN-5 – Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam – plunged by 8.3%.
Real GDP in South Korea – long considered the darling of Asia’s newly industrialized economies – contracted by 5.7% that year.
But then the tough conditionality of IMF bailouts and adjustment programs – Asia’s own dose of austerity – kicked in.
In response, current-account balances – the Achilles’ heel of the so-called East Asian growth miracle – went from deficit to surplus.
Beginning in 1999, the ASEAN-5 began a ten-year spurt of 5% average annual GDP growth (5.5% in South Korea over the same period).
In short, there were no lasting negative effects from the short-term dose of austerity, and, to the extent that austerity was essential to post-crisis healing, the long-term benefits have proven to be both enduring and astounding.
Three lessons for the rest of us come to mind. First, there is no gain without pain.
Few of us in the developed world can fathom aggregate-output contractions on the scale that crisis-torn Asia suffered in 1998, let alone muster the political will to impose them on our economies.
The economic dislocations and the humiliation of proud nations were, indeed, devastating (as Greeks today can attest).
But, once the excesses were purged, Asia’s post-crisis rebounds were both strong and sustainable.
Second, currencies played an important role as an escape valve in the early days of Asia’s post-crisis adjustment process.
As the region moved from hard exchange-rate pegs to floating rates, Asian currencies plunged – with drops against the dollar ranging from 28% in South Korea and roughly 37% in Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines to almost 80% in Indonesia.
Finally, there is no substitute for restructuring.
In Asia in the late 1990’s, measures aimed at the financial sector dominated IMF-imposed structural adjustment programs, but there were also programs that focused on tax and expenditure reforms, corporate governance, privatization, and business-debt restructuring.
While not all of these programs were implemented in strict compliance with IMF conditionality, they played a key role in promoting significant improvements in Asian competiveness.
None of these lessons should be lost on either Europe or the US.
While individual countries obviously lack currency flexibility in a monetary union – one of Europe’s most obvious and important differences from Asia in the late 1990’s – there is nothing to prevent a depreciation of the euro from boosting pan-regional competitiveness.
The same, of course, is true of the US dollar.
But no country – or group of countries, in Europe’s case – has ever devalued its way back to prosperity.
So Asia’s structural lessons are equally important to the developed world.
Indeed, Germany’s economy is out-competing and out-growing the rest of Europe, largely owing to labor-market reforms and deregulation.
The same medicine might prove equally beneficial to the rest of Europe – to say nothing of the US, which faces a major competitiveness challenge of its own.
In the end, Asia’s developing economies had no choice but to accept draconian measures as the price of bailouts in the late 1990’s.
It remains to be seen if rich developed countries are willing to take the same route.
Two decades ago, in their book Changing Fortunes, Paul Volcker and Toyo Gyohten underscored the glaring double standard of crisis resolution: “When the [International Monetary] Fund consults with a poor and weak country, the country gets in line.
When it consults with a strong country, the Fund gets in line.”
Perhaps that is the key lesson from the Asian crisis of the late 1990’s: austerity can work.&nbsp; But its success or failure ultimately boils down to power politics – namely, a resolution of the tension between short-term palliatives and the commitment to a long-term strategy.&nbsp; That’s where the battle still rages in the West.&nbsp;
The Road to Asian Unity
NEW DELHI – Asia’s lack of institutions to ameliorate regional tensions is often lamented.
But greater Asian unity may be arising by the backdoor, in the form of new and impressive infrastructure links.
Today’s efforts to expand regional infrastructure projects are all the more remarkable for linking even countries locked in diplomatic, and sometimes open, conflict.
New bus routes between India and Pakistan may not make headlines, but they deliver a degree of normalcy to relations riddled with mistrust.
Elsewhere, rail links between China and Vietnam, road developments connecting India and Bangladesh, and new ports, harbors, and pipelines in Myanmar and Pakistan are forging a new form of economic unity alongside the region’s manufacturing supply chains.
Such ventures now dot Asia’s geography, even as tensions over unsettled boundaries and sovereignty claims are fueling turbulence.
Consider Afghanistan, which faces yet another phase of internal dislocation.
There, India nonetheless continues to build a strategic ring road around the country, as well as a vitally important dam at Salma.
And a gas pipeline from Turkmenistan to Pakistan, which would traverse the country, is coming closer to reality.
Then there is the Bay of Bengal, where Chinese infrastructure investment is set to transform the backward Myanmar seaside town of Kyaukpyu and the surrounding region by tapping offshore gas fields and constructing a pipeline to Yunnan Province in southern China.
These initiatives reflect not only China’s voracious drive for natural resources and new trade routes, but also Myanmar’s own plans to create a “mini-Singapore” within its borders.
Of course, China is not investing in such infrastructure out of altruism.
Almost a decade ago, outgoing Chinese President Hu Jintao identified the country’s “Malacca Dilemma,” referring to the channel between the Malay Peninsula and the Indonesian island of Sumatra that connects the Indian and Pacific Oceans, as a grave strategic threat.
Roughly 80% of China’s energy imports pass through that potential chokepoint, which is mostly policed by the US Navy.
The links now being developed in Myanmar will reduce China’s dependence on the Strait of Malacca by more than one-third.
The plans are illustrative of Myanmar’s pragmatic new outlook.
Sandwiched between China and India, Myanmar, which had earlier suspended construction of the Chinese-backed Myitsone Dam, may one day be the link that facilitates closer economic ties between the two giants.
Japan, not wishing to be left out of the great infrastructure game in Myanmar, is investing billions in port reconstruction.
To the west, in Pakistan, one can travel on the Makran coast along a road built with Chinese assistance, eventually coming to the ancient fishing port of Gwadar, with its natural deep-water harbor.
With a development plan by the Port of Singapore Authority having fallen through, the China Overseas Ports Holding Company has taken over, raising strategic concerns in India, Japan, and the US.
Indeed, despite intense opposition from the US, China’s project in Gwadar may soon be followed by a joint project with Iran to lay a pipeline carrying 750 million cubic feet of natural gas per day.
China is also actively pursuing the construction of a Pan-Asia Railroad, which, when complete, will form an enormous circular route.
Starting in Kunming in Yunnan Province, it will extend through Myanmar and south to Bangkok, where a spur will traverse Malaysia to Singapore.
From Bangkok, the line will run east through Cambodia and north through Vietnam to Hanoi, then through Laos and back to Kunming.
This sounds like an enormous undertaking, and it is; but, with some rail lines already existing (some for many decades), the project could be completed by the 2015 target date.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations’ long-held dream of unity might first arrive by rail.
Meanwhile, India has already opened up road communications linking the East Indian state of Manipur to North Myanmar, with India’s Border Roads Organization completing the first all-weather road connecting the two countries.
And, in Central Asia, India has projects at Ayni Air Base near Dushanbe in Tajikistan, including a functioning field hospital (where the late Ahmed Shah Massoud, the leader of Afghanistan’s anti-Soviet war, died following an assassination attempt on September 9, 2001).
These infrastructure investments clearly hold the potential to bind Asia closer together than ever before.
But there are geopolitical risks in this scramble for development.
Predictably, the West is ramping up its aid, particularly in Myanmar, where the streets of Yangon are now choked with traffic created by aid and government development agencies (and investors).
Of course, tension is probably unavoidable as these links develop.
Tellingly, Myanmar’s pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi has spoken of her country in terms of the “vicinity of China, the geographical distance of the US, and the cultural linkages with India.”
The question is whether Asia’s infrastructure investments, particularly those by China, will be used to create Asian satellites of the Middle Kingdom, or become tools to be used among equals.
Asia can use its geography either to keep its states isolated, or to trade with one another and develop to the benefit of all.
After centuries of isolation and colonial slumber, the region is now awake to the potential benefits of greater unity.
It will not matter that the infrastructure may not have been built solely for that purpose if Asia’s leaders keep their eyes on prosperity, rather than only on power.
Breaking Asia’s Data Drought
MANILA – Many parts of Asia have been gripped by searing temperatures and the worst drought in decades.
Millions of people face shortages of food or water, leading to the loss of lives, livelihoods, crops, and livestock.
As water shortages depress productivity, reduce energy output at hydro plants, and cut food exports, economies are suffering.
To find relief, we must look to the skies – but not in the way one might expect.
While rainfall would obviously be welcome, there is a tool for coping with extreme weather over which we actually have some control: satellites.
The extreme weather confronting Asia is not expected to abate anytime soon.
The current drought can be blamed partly on an unusually strong El Niño that has been warming the Pacific Ocean since mid-2015.
More and stronger El Niños are expected this century, reflecting the impact of climate change.
This will aggravate Asia’s already serious water problem, which is becoming particularly serious in cities, owing to rapid urbanization.
The region’s urban population is set to double, to 3.2 billion people, by 2050, by which time nearly three-quarters of its total population could face water stress.
Controlling these forces may seem impossible.
But preventing further water shortages is not.
What is needed now is bold action to improve our understanding of the nature and scale of Asia’s water crisis, thereby strengthening our capacity to respond to it.
A lack of data about, say, riparian flows, including how much water is diverted for agriculture and human consumption, undermines efficient resource management.
Likewise, the absence of detailed rainfall records, particularly in remote areas, impedes efforts to assess flood and drought risk.
Accurate data are also needed to design the right irrigation systems, dams, and embankments – not to mention building them where they will have the greatest impact in terms of mitigating the effects of climate change.
Missing data frustrate sound policymaking in myriad ways.
Though agriculture consumes about 80% of freshwater stocks in Asia, most countries cannot correctly measure how much water is used to grow a crop, and how much of that water is re-used downstream.
Greater clarity about how much water enters and leaves catchments, and for what purposes, would enable smarter policies, just as savvy investors rely on good financial accounting.
As some water-scarce countries, such as Australia, have already shown, such accounting helps countries to allocate water more efficiently among agriculture and energy producers and urban consumers.
Here is where satellite technology comes in.
Regular sweeps over cropped areas using remote sensing – something like a full-body health scan – can quickly gather information on rainfall, land temperature, and even groundwater levels that would otherwise take months to obtain.
When combined with physical measurements on the ground, these data can help governments gain a better accounting of water resources, prepare for droughts and floods, and plan future water use.
Already, the Water Accounting Plus software system – developed by UNESCO-IHE, the International Water Management Institute, and the Food and Agriculture Organization – uses open-access remote-sensing data to assess land use, rainfall, and temperature.
The data enable the system to determine how much water is available in a river basin, how much is being used for various purposes, and how water use has changed over time.
With such information, countries like Cambodia and Vietnam can confront the surge in water demand they face.
To help propel them toward that goal, UNESCO-IHE, with support from the Asian Development Bank, has been working with their governments – as well as the authorities in India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Uzbekistan – to create a pilot program to answer key questions about land and water use.
More such initiatives are needed – and quickly.
One area of focus must be agriculture.
In Vietnam’s parched central highlands and coastal provinces, for example, there is an urgent need to harvest “more crop per drop” and improve emergency responses.
If satellite technology is fully exploited, farmers could receive real-time information on their mobile phones about how much water to use and when.
Moreover, the region’s most productive farmers could be identified and encouraged to share their best practices with other farmers.
Another key step will be to map water stocks and usage across entire countries, and to make this information available online.
Rather than allowing vital data to gather dust, as has occurred in the past, we must augment it, update it, and share it widely, so that it can be put to use.
Breaking the data drought will not by itself end Asia’s water crisis.
But it is a crucial first step to ensure that the region’s destiny is not dictated by its weather.
Officially, I was there to inaugurate a reconstruction plan for buildings that had fallen into disrepair in the old buffer zone.
More personally, I wanted to see for myself the divide that for too long had kept Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots apart.
As I walked the street, people from both communities crowded around and began chanting, “Solution now! Solution now!”
As a Korean, I know only too well the pain of a land divided.
The Greek Cypriot leader, Demetris Christofias, and his Turkish Cypriot counterpart, Mehmet Ali Talat, are working hard to reach an agreement. But it will elude them without a further concerted push.
The United Nations is in Cyprus to help however it can. UN Peacekeepers have stood watch for more than 45 years.
My envoy, Alexander Downer, is facilitating the negotiations.
I had lengthy discussions with both leaders – individually and together – and told them that the destiny of Cyprus is entirely in their hands.
No one is under the illusion that any of this is easy – peace negotiations never are. The issues are exceedingly complex and embedded in a troubled history.
There will be skeptics and critics every step, and there will be those who seek to divert or derail the process in pursuit of their own interests and agendas.
Courage and conviction will be required of leaders to do what they know to be right.
Any agreement will face a popular referendum within both the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities.
Yet it is clear that a solution to the Cyprus problem would be overwhelmingly in the interests of the island’s people, North and South.
A settlement would also send a message to the world that disputes as long-standing and complex as that in Cyprus can be resolved peacefully. That is why, despite all the obstacles, the negotiators must persevere along the road to peace.
The people’s call on Ledra Street must be heard.
For Cyprus, it is time for a “solution now.”
A South Asian Grand Bargain
NEW DELHI – South Asia is riddled with multiple antagonisms and mutual suspicions.
India mistrusts Pakistan, and vice versa.
Afghanistan and Pakistan are at loggerheads.
On the sidelines, China, Iran, and Russia look to Afghanistan for opportunities to help themselves, and crimp the United States.
The Americans, meanwhile, are preparing to retreat from a decade of war in the Afghan hills and valleys.
Given all of these rivalries, I believe that the only path to regional peace and stability runs not through incremental agreements, but through a “grand accord” that reconciles all of the powers’ deepest national-security interests.
But is such an accord feasible?
On the surface, one would not think so.
US-Pakistan relations have turned poisonous, with blunt statements proliferating from both governments.
In Istanbul, a recent gathering of Afghanistan’s concerned “neighbors” produced only a rather anodyne statement in preparation for a meeting in Bonn later this year.
When confronted by such a diplomatic snarl, there are, in reality, only two options: either allow the disputes to boil in their own cauldrons, or lower the temperature on all of the region’s antagonisms before a cataclysmic explosion occurs.
Clearly, today’s frozen regional diplomacy must end; far too much of global importance is at stake.
India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the US form a rectangle of relationships in South Asia, with India, China, and the US constituting a triangle that not only contains the South Asia region, but is also a major theater in an increasingly global struggle.
The emerging geopolitical centrality of the Indian Ocean, through which an ever-increasing share of world trade passes, is a third, complicating, factor.
Untangling this web, and imparting to it a cooperative order, should be high on the agenda of all countries involved.
Consider India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the US.
Can these relationships be transformed into anything resembling a cooperative effort?
To be sure, US-Pakistani relations now appear at an all-time low.
Bitter congressional testimony by former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen about Pakistani perfidy in supporting terrorism deepened suspicion on both sides, which a high-profile visit to Islamabad by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton did little to ameliorate.
On the contrary, Clinton reiterated an earlier warning to Pakistan against keeping “snakes in the backyard.”
Not surprisingly, Pakistan has reacted angrily to such statements; they are also alarmed.
General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, Pakistan’s army chief, cautioned the US against intervening in the terrorist bastion of North Waziristan.
“The US must think 10 times” before doing so, he said.
General Hamid Gul, a former head of Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence, went further, warning the US of the “dangers of a third world war.”
In the midst of this turmoil came the assassination of the Afghan government’s chief peace negotiator with the Taliban, former President Burhanuddin Rabbani.
Soon after, an outraged President Hamid Karzai signed a “strategic partnership” agreement with India (though he added, as a placatory afterthought, that “Pakistan is our twin brother”).
Long wars can end in one of three ways: unconditional surrender and an imposed peace; a conditional settlement, such as in Korea or Vietnam; or a diplomatic solution that reconciles all of the concerned parties’ interests.
If South Asia is to begin to build a future of peace and prosperity, the latter option is the only viable way forward.
Despite the blunt rhetoric and cold stares between the US and Pakistan, a parting of ways between the two is simply not feasible.
America is leaving Afghanistan, but without victory.
So reaching some agreement with Pakistan, one that both India and Afghanistan can live with, is essential.
Yet that is where the bilateral relationship is headed, given China’s efforts to secure maritime supremacy in the Indian Ocean.
China may reason that its naval build-up in the Indian Ocean is only about protecting sea lanes vital to shipping the resources that its economy needs.
But others, like India, are bound to see something more sinister afoot, an effort at encirclement.
After all, military power is about its potential use, not the rationalizations for its existence.
With their burgeoning bilateral trade and shared commitment to eradicating poverty, both India and China have common cause to cooperate in creating a mutually acceptable geopolitical map of South Asia and the Indian Ocean.
Of course, this is not to suggest that competition between India and China can or should cease.
But their overlapping layers of commercial and political interests do offer hope for agreement – if the two governments seize the opportunity.&#160; Chinese assistance in encouraging Pakistan to reach agreement with India and the US on Afghanistan’s future is a good place to start, and will also benefit Chinese security by crimping the ability of terrorists to infiltrate China’s Xinxiang province from either Pakistan or Afghanistan
Clinton recently offered a vision of a “strong, constructive relationship among India, the US, and China.”
She admitted, realistically, that building one will be difficult because “there are important matters on which we all disagree.”
Yet she also pointed to “significant areas of common interest,” arguing that, “if we want to address, manage, or solve some of the most pressing issues of the twenty-first century, India, China, and the US will have to coordinate our…efforts.” &#160;
The prospect of a grand accord for South Asia is before us.
It is an idea whose time has come, because there is no longer an alternative path from conflict.
The Bezzle Years
LONDON – More than a half-century ago, John Kenneth Galbraith presented a definitive depiction of the Wall Street Crash of 1929 in a slim, elegantly written volume.
Embezzlement, Galbraith observed, has the property that “weeks, months, or years elapse between the commission of the crime and its discovery.
This is the period, incidentally, when the embezzler has his gain and the man who has been embezzled feels no loss.
There is a net increase in psychic wealth.”
Galbraith described that increase in wealth as “the bezzle.”
In a delightful essay, Warren Buffett’s business partner, Charlie Munger, pointed out that the concept can be extended much more widely.
This psychic wealth can be created without illegality: mistake or self-delusion is enough.
Munger coined the term “febezzle,” or “functionally equivalent bezzle,” to describe the wealth that exists in the interval between the creation and the destruction of the illusion.
From this perspective, the critic who exposes a fake Rembrandt does the world no favor: The owner of the picture suffers a loss, as perhaps do potential viewers, and the owners of genuine Rembrandts gain little.
The finance sector did not look kindly on those who pointed out that the New Economy bubble of the late 1990s, or the credit expansion that preceded the 2008 global financial crisis, had created a large febezzle.
It is easier for both regulators and market participants to follow the crowd.
Only a brave person would stand in the way of those expecting to become rich by trading Internet stocks with one another, or would deny people the opportunity to own their own homes because they could not afford them.
The joy of the bezzle is that two people – each ignorant of the other’s existence and role – can enjoy the same wealth.
The champagne that Enron’s Jeff Skilling drank when the US Securities and Exchange Commission allowed him to mark long-term energy contracts to market was paid for by the company’s shareholders and creditors, but they would not know that until ten years later.
Households in US cities received mortgages in 2006 that they could never hope to repay, while taxpayers never dreamed that they would be called on to bail out the lenders.
Shareholders in banks could not have understood that the dividends they received before 2007 were actually money that they had borrowed from themselves.
Investors congratulated themselves on the profits they had earned from their vertiginously priced Internet stocks.
They did not realize that the money they had made would melt away like snow in a warm spring.
The stores of transitory wealth that were created seemed real enough to everyone at the time – real enough to spend, and real enough to hurt those who were obliged to pay them back.
Fair value accounting has multiplied opportunities for imaginary earnings, such as Skilling’s profits on gas trading.
If you measure profit by marking to market, then profit is what the market thinks it will be.
The information contained in the accounts of the business – the information that should shape the market’s views – is to be derived from the market itself.
And the market is prone to temporary fits of shared enthusiasm – for emerging-market debt, for Internet stocks, for residential mortgage-backed securities, for Greek government debt.
Traders need not wait to see when or whether the profits materialize.
IBGYBG, they say – I’ll be gone, you’ll be gone.
There are numerous routes to bezzle and febezzle.
In a Ponzi scheme, early investors are handsomely rewarded at the expense of latecomers until the supply of participants is exhausted.
Such practices, illegal as practiced by Bernard Madoff, are functionally equivalent to what happens during an asset-price bubble.
Tailgating, or picking up dimes in front of a steamroller, is another source of febezzle.
Investors search for regular small gains punctuated by occasional large losses, an approach exemplified by the carry trade by which investors borrowed euros in Germany and France to lend in Greece and Portugal.
The “martingale” doubles up on losing bets until the trader wins – or the money runs out.
The “rogue traders” escorted from their desks by security guards are typically unsuccessful exponents of the martingale.
And the opportunity to switch between the trading book and the banking book creates ready opportunities for financial institutions to realize gains and park losses.
The essential story of the period from 2003 through 2007 is that banks announced large profits and paid a substantial share of them to their traders and senior employees.
Then they discovered that it had all been a mistake, more or less wiped out their shareholders, and used taxpayer money to trade their way through to new levels of reported profit.
The essential story of the eurozone crisis is that banks in France and Germany reported profits on money they had lent to southern Europe and passed the bad loans to the European Central Bank.
In both narratives, traders borrowed money from the future.
And then the future came, as it always does, turning the bezzle into a bummer.
What Could Go Wrong in America?
CAMBRIDGE – Although the United States economy is in good shape – with essentially full employment and an inflation rate close to 2% – a world of uncertainty makes it worthwhile to consider what could go wrong in the year ahead.
After all, if the US economy runs into serious trouble, there will be adverse consequences for Europe, Japan, and many other countries.
Economic problems could of course originate from international political events.
Russia has been acting dangerously in Eastern and Central Europe.
China’s pursuit of territorial claims in the East and South China Seas, and its policies in East Asia more generally, is fueling regional uncertainty.
Events in Italy could precipitate a crisis in the eurozone.
But within the US, the greatest risk is a sharp decline in asset prices, which would squeeze households and firms, leading to a collapse of aggregate demand.
I am not predicting that this will happen.
But conditions are becoming more dangerous as asset prices rise further and further from historic norms.
Equity prices, as measured by the price-earnings ratio of the S&P 500 stocks, are now nearly 60% above their historical average.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond is so high that it implies a yield of about 2.3%; given current inflation expectations, the yield should be about twice as high.
Commercial real-estate prices have been rising at a 10% annual pace for the past five years.
These inflated asset prices reflect the exceptionally easy monetary policy that has prevailed for almost a decade.
In that ultra-low-interest environment, investors have been reaching for yield by bidding up the prices of equities and other investment assets.
The resulting increase in household wealth helped to bring about economic recovery; but overpriced assets are fostering an increasingly risky environment.
To grasp how risky, consider this: US households now own $21 trillion of equities, so a 35% decline in equity prices to their historic average would involve a loss of more than $7.5 trillion.
Pension funds and other equity investors would incur further losses.
A return of real long-term bond yields to their historic level would involve a loss of about 30% for investors in 30-year bonds and proportionately smaller losses for investors in shorter-duration bonds.
Because commercial real-estate investments are generally highly leveraged, even relatively small declines in prices could cause large losses for investors.
The fall in household wealth would reduce spending and cause a decline in GDP.
A rough rule of thumb implies that every $100 decline in wealth leads to a $4 decline in household spending.
The return of asset prices to historic levels could therefore imply a decline of $400 billion in consumer spending, equal to about 2.5% of GDP, which would start a process of mutually reinforcing declines in incomes and spending leading to an even greater cumulative impact on GDP.
Because institutional investors respond to international differences in asset prices and asset yields, the large declines in US asset prices would be mirrored by similar declines in asset prices in other developed countries.
Those price declines would reduce incomes and spending in other countries, with the impact spread globally through reduced imports and exports.
I must emphasize that this process of asset-price declines and the resulting contraction of economic activity is a risk, not a prediction.
It is possible that asset prices will come down gradually, implying a slowdown rather than a collapse of spending and economic activity.
But the fear of triggering a rapid decline in asset prices is one of the key reasons why the US Federal Reserve is reluctant to raise short-term interest rates more rapidly.
The Fed increased the overnight rate by just 0.25% in December 2015 and is likely to add just another 25 basis points in December 2016.
But that will still leave the federal funds rate at less than 1%.
With the inflation rate close to 2%, the real federal funds rate would still be negative.
Market participants are watching the Fed to judge if and when the process of interest-rate normalization will begin.
Historical experience implies that normalization would raise long-term interest rates by about two percentage points, precipitating substantial corrections in the prices of bonds, stocks, and commercial real estate.
The Fed is therefore trying to tamp down expectations concerning future interest-rate levels, by suggesting that changes in demography and productivity trends imply lower real rates in the future.
If the Fed succeeds, the decline in asset prices may be diminished.
But the danger of sharp asset-price declines that precipitate an economic downturn should not be ignored.
The Morocco Option
RABAT – Three years after the Arab Spring revolutions, the democratic world appears more confused than ever about how to respond.
US Secretary of State John Kerry has re-launched American mediation efforts in the Middle East at a time when his country’s most reliable partners are estranged: Egypt’s military rulers resent the West’s early support for the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi in his presidential tenure, and Saudi Arabia fears that an Iran that talks to the US may prove to be an even more ambitious regional hegemon.
It was against this background that Morocco’s King Mohammed VI recently convened a high-level meeting of the Al Quds Committee, which he chairs.
The Palestinian Authority’s president, senior diplomats of the countries involved in the Palestine-Israel peace process, and the secretary general of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation all attended the two-day summit.
Taking place at a critical moment for this sensitive region, the meeting constituted an effort to contribute to the renewed negotiations and build on Kerry’s efforts to revive the peace process.
Morocco is an ideal setting for regional diplomacy.
Its strategy of gradual reform, economic modernization, and social development has made the country an oasis of stability in a region rife with violence and strategic rivalries – and thus a reliable partner for Europe and the United States as they seek to influence events in North Africa and across the Middle East.
Indeed, with Morocco’s proximity to Europe making it a gateway to Africa, its full economic and geopolitical potential has yet to be realized.
By contrast, the Egyptian government’s struggle to suppress the banned Muslim Brotherhood is fueling seemingly endless turmoil.
And Tunisia is still without a prime minister to head a caretaker government, further delaying the “national dialogue” that the Tunisian General Labor Union has agreed to mediate.