CAMBRIDGE – In April 2014, Japan’s consumption-tax rate is set to rise from 5% to 8% in an effort to address the long-term problem of high public debt.
But will the resulting loss in purchasing power bring an end to the Japanese economy’s fragile recovery, as many fear?
The question is reminiscent of April 1997.
Larry Summers, who was then Deputy Secretary of the United States Treasury, repeatedly warned the Japanese government that if it proceeded with a scheduled consumption-tax hike, Japan’s economy would slide back into recession.
I was in the US government at the time.
As the date drew near, I asked Summers why he persisted in offering Japan’s leaders this unwanted advice, given that they were clearly locked in politically.
Summers told me that he knew he was unlikely to change anyone’s mind, but that he wanted to be sure that Japanese officials recognized their mistake when they went ahead with the increase.
Sadly, his prediction proved correct.
Today, Japan’s fiscal problems resemble those of the US and many other countries.
The economy is weak, but the Bank of Japan (BOJ) cannot make monetary policy much more expansionary than it already is.
And, while fiscal stimulus is called for in the short run, the long-term outlook for Japan’s public finances is deeply troublesome, owing to the huge debts run up in the past.
What is required is easy fiscal policy today, together with plans to achieve fiscal rectitude in the long run.
The difficulty with this Augustinian approach – “Lord, make me chaste, but not yet” – is that promises of future discipline usually are not credible.
Politicians often say that they will achieve budget surpluses in the future, but seldom do so.
Given this, governments should provide specific fiscal-consolidation mechanisms that are visibly likely to take effect when the time comes.
Raising the retirement age for future pension benefits qualifies as such a mechanism.
Legislating phony sunset provisions for current tax cuts, as the US did during the George W. Bush years, does not.
For Japan, I like a proposal by Koichi Hamada (a Yale economics professor who is an adviser to Prime Minister Shinzo Abe) and others: the planned jump in the consumption-tax rate should be replaced with a gradual pre-announced path of increases, with the rate rising, say, one percentage point per year for five years.
Because a gradual path establishes long-run fiscal discipline, it would not crash the bond market, as an outright cancellation of the tax increase might.
At the same time, it spares an already-weak economy damaging fiscal contraction in the short run.
Indeed, the expectation that tax-included prices will rise in the future can stimulate households to buy cars, appliances, and other consumer goods today.
Such a gradual path has positive implications for monetary policy, too.
In normal times, central banks want to reduce inflation.
The problem is that pre-announced hikes in tax rates or administered prices can have the undesirable effect of building annual price increases into public perceptions, undermining the central bank’s inflation-fighting efforts.
But these are not normal times.
Inflation and interest rates in Japan lately have been even lower than in the US.
The most important component of “Abenomics” this year has been the BOJ’s efforts to ease monetary conditions further, despite zero interest rates, and thus end the threat of deflation.
Under these circumstances, inflation expectations are not a cause for concern.
On the contrary, positive expected inflation would reduce the real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate – not a bad thing under current conditions.
There are useful analogies for policies in other countries.
The US could legislate a pre-announced path of slow but steady increases in energy or carbon taxes (accompanied by immediate short-term offsets, such as a reduction in the distortionary payroll tax or an end to the damaging spending sequester).
As in Japan, such measures would enhance long-run fiscal sustainability without weakening demand at a time when the economy has not yet fully recovered from the Great Recession.
In addition, the environmental and national-security arguments in favor of discouraging fossil-fuel consumption work better if the increase in energy prices is phased in gradually.
That way, people have sufficient time to make effective decisions about automobiles, home heating systems, power plants, research into new technologies, and so forth.
Similar lessons are relevant in emerging-market economies.
Countries like India and Indonesia are now facing possible financial crises, in part owing to large budget deficits, a major component of which has long been food and energy subsidies.
Keeping domestic prices for food and energy artificially low has proved to be not only ruinously expensive, but also very ineffective in achieving the declared goal of helping to alleviate poverty.
Some leaders in these countries are aware of the need to reduce these subsidies.
A credible, pre-announced phase-out path would provide much-needed reassurance to skittish global investors, without imposing immediate hardship on the poor.
At the same time, the ability to plan ahead in anticipation of the price increases would allow more effective responses, as farmers plant different crops, manufacturers switch to more energy-efficient equipment, and so forth.
Governments worldwide face a similar imperative: maintain policy credibility without undermining economic recovery.
Bold measures like those envisaged by Abenomics may help.
But slow and steady wins the race.
Li Keqiang’s Bottom Line
SHANGHAI – Everyone is talking about China’s economic slowdown.
Last year, Chinese GDP growth reached a 13-year low, and no upturn is in sight.
But, as Premier Li Keqiang seems to recognize, this trend could actually be beneficial, spurring the structural reforms that China needs to achieve its longer-term goal of more balanced and stable GDP growth.
Recent assessments have offered a downbeat picture of the world’s second-largest economy.
In its latest Global Economic Prospects report, the World Bank cut its 2013 economic growth forecast for China from 8.4% to 7.7%.
Moreover, recently released central-bank data show that Chinese banks increased their lending by only about ¥667 billion ($108 billion) in May – a roughly ¥125 billion decline from the same period last year.
But simply lending more would not improve the situation.
Given that outstanding loans already amount to nearly double China’s GDP – a result of the country’s massive stimulus since 2008 – new loans are largely being used to pay off old debts, rather than for investment in the real economy.
Thus, the more relevant concern is that the balance of outstanding loans has not risen.
In recent years, tight monetary policy and increasingly strict controls on the real-estate sector have caused the growth rate of fixed-asset investment to fall, from more than 25% annually before 2008 to around 20% today.
Furthermore, the growth rate in China’s less developed eastern regions amounts to less than half of the national average.
As a result, growth of industrial value added – which contributes almost half of China’s GDP – is slowing even faster, from an average annual rate of 20% during China’s boom years to less than 10% in 2010-2012 and just 7.8% in the first quarter of this year.
The key to restoring China’s GDP growth is, therefore, returning fixed-asset investment growth to at least 25%.
With a new round of stimulus, China’s excess production capacity and underused outlays (for example, built-up real-estate assets) could be mobilized immediately, restoring 9% annual GDP growth.
But the willingness of China’s new leadership to initiate another round of growth-securing stimulus depends on what rate of GDP growth Li can tolerate.
With China’s leaders having offered no indication that they will change current monetary policy, some economists have estimated that Li will not act until GDP growth falls below 7%.
The reason for Li’s inaction emerged in early June, when Chinese President Xi Jinping told his American counterpart, Barack Obama, that China had deliberately revised its growth target downward, to 7.5%, in order to pursue structural reforms aimed at supporting stable and sustained economic development.
Given that China was moving toward such reforms before the 2008 global economic crisis prompted former Premier Wen Jiabao to launch his ¥4 trillion stimulus plan, Xi’s statement suggests that the new government will seek to restore the economy’s pre-2008 fundamentals.
In 2005, China was experiencing currency appreciation, which, as other fast-growing economies in East Asia have demonstrated, can stimulate the government and businesses to pursue structural reforms and industrial upgrading.
But the subsequent increase in official fixed-asset investment – which rose by 32% in 2009 alone – delayed structural reforms, while over-capacity and a real-estate bubble became even larger and more deeply entrenched problems.
The government must now dispel the remaining vestiges of the stimulus-fueled over-investment of 2008-2010, however painful it may be.
This means allowing the economy to continue to slow, while maintaining relatively tight macroeconomic policies that force local governments and the business sector to find new sources of growth.
The combination of external shocks and internal pressure from rising wages can serve as a powerful incentive for governments and businesses to pursue structural reforms.
For example, firms in China’s export-dependent coastal regions have been burdened by renminbi appreciation since 2004.
When the economic slowdown hastened the relocation of many manufacturers to inland provinces or neighboring countries, those in the coastal regions began to call for increased openness, deeper structural reforms, and industrial upgrading.
The view that Li will tolerate slower growth only above a particular threshold is based on the belief that GDP growth below 8% would hurt economic development more than it helped, and lead to social instability.
And, indeed, if unemployment pressure had become as acute today as it was in the 1990’s, the prolonged economic slowdown would undoubtedly have precipitated government intervention.
But, over the last decade, structural changes to China’s economy have caused unemployment pressure to decline significantly – a trend that can be corroborated by across-the-board wage increases.
Now, the setting is very favorable to build the stronger, more stable economy that Li wants – and that China needs.
The Trade-and-Aid Myth
Trade and aid have become international buzzwords.
More aid (including debt relief) and greater access to rich countries’ markets for poor countries’ products now appears to be at the top of the global agenda.
Indeed, the debate nowadays is not about what to do, but howmuch to do, and how fast.
Lost in all this are the clear lessons of the last five decades of economic development. Foremost among these is that economic development is largely in the hands of poor nations themselves.
Countries that have done well in the recent past have done so through their own efforts. Aid and market access have rarely played a critical role.
Consider a developing country that has free and preferential market access to its largest neighbor, which also happens to be the world’s most powerful economy.
Suppose, in addition, that this country is able to send millions of its citizens to work across the border, receives a huge volume of inward investment, and is totally integrated into international production chains.
Moreover, the country’s banking system is supported by its rich neighbor’s demonstrated willingness to act as a lender of last resort.
Globalization does not get much better than this, right?
Now consider a second country.
This one faces a trade embargo in the world’s largest market, receives neither foreign aid nor any other kind of assistance from the West, is excluded from international organizations like the WTO, and is prevented from borrowing from the IMF and the World Bank.
If these external disadvantages are not debilitating enough, this economy also maintains its own high barriers on international trade (in the form of state trading, import tariffs, and quantitative restrictions). 
As the reader may have guessed, these are real countries: Mexico and Vietnam.
Mexico shares a 2,000-mile long border with the United States, which provides not only privileged market access in goods and labor, but also a claim to the resources of the US Treasury (as became apparent during the 1995 peso crisis).
By contrast, America maintained a trade embargo against Vietnam until 1994, established diplomatic relations only in 1995, and did not provide most-favored nation treatment to Vietnamese imports for years after that.
Vietnam still remains outside the WTO.
Now consider their economic performance.
Since NAFTA was signed in December 1992, Mexico’s economy has grown at an average annual rate of barely over 1% in per capita terms.
This is not only far below the rates of Asia’s economic superstars; it is also a fraction of Mexico’s own growth performance during the decades that preceded the debt crisis of 1982 (3.6% per year between 1960 and 1981).
Vietnam, however, grew at an annual rate of 5.6% per capita between the onset of its economic reforms in 1988 and the establishment of diplomatic relations with the US in 1995, and has continued to grow at a rapid 4.5% pace since then.
Vietnam witnessed a dramatic fall in poverty, while in Mexico real wages fell.
Both countries experienced sharp increases in international trade and foreign investment, but the pictures are utterly different where it counts most: rising standards of living, particularly for the poor.
What these examples show is that domestic efforts trump everything else in determining a country’s economic fortunes.
All the opportunities that the US market presented to Mexico could not offset the consequences of policy mistakes at home, especially the failure to reverse the real appreciation of the peso’s exchange rate and the inability to extend the productivity gains achieved in a narrow range of export activities to the rest of the economy.
What matters most is whether a country adopts the right growth strategy.
With none of Mexico’s advantages, Vietnam pursued a strategy that focused on diversifying its economy and enhancing the productive capacity of domestic suppliers.
Broader post-war experience supports the conclusion that domestic policies are what matter most.
South Korea took off in the early 1960’s not when foreign aid was at its apex, but when it was being phased out.
Taiwan did not receive foreign aid or preferential market access.
China and India, today’s two economic superstars, have prospered largely through sui generis reform efforts.
It is tempting to ascribe the rare African successes – Botswana and Mauritius – to foreign demand for their exports (diamonds and garments, respectively), but that story goes only so far.
Obviously, both countries would be considerably poorer without access to foreign markets.
But, as in other cases of successful development, what distinguishes them is not the external advantages they possess, but their ability to exploit these advantages.
Witness the mess that other countries made of their natural-resource endowments.
The word “diamond” hardly conjures images of peace and prosperity in Sierra Leone.
Similarly, few of the export processing zones proliferating around the world have delivered the results observed in Mauritius. 
None of this absolves rich countries of their responsibility to help.
They can make the world less hospitable for corrupt dictators – for example, by greater sharing of financial information and by not recognizing the international contracts that they sign.
Similarly, increasing the number of poor-country workers allowed to work in rich countries, and providing greater scope for growth-oriented policies by relaxing WTO rules and conditionality from the US, would produce greater long-term development impact.
It is far from clear that expanding market access and boosting aid are the most productive use of valuable political capital in the North.
Development should focus not on trade and aid, but on improving the policy environment in poor countries.
The Tragedy of President Chen
Taiwan’s Public Prosecutor has indicted the wife of President Chen Shui-bien for embezzling public funds.
Chen, as a sitting president, cannot be indicted even though the prosecutor says that he has evidence to prove his guilt.
But Chen’s legacy was already in tatters.
Chen can remain in office until his term ends in 2008, or he could resign now in order to let his vice president and pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) rebuild to win the next election.
Whatever his decision, Taiwan’s first DPP president will go down in history as a pathetic failure, because he used his office to divide the island’s citizens, as if his domestic political opponents were Taiwan’s mortal enemies.
The root of Chen’s moral demise is something the classical Greeks identified: hubris.
Chen’s popularity among his party followers, whose fervency often bordered on fundamentalism, changed him from a person with deep democratic instincts into a textbook case of a man who regards power and its prerogatives as being his by right.
Chen once had political courage.
Jailed years ago for his anti-Kuomintang (KMT) activities, he stood up at great odds to the Chinese Communist Party, which sought in vain to subjugate him in cross-Strait relations and in global politics.
The world has largely deserted Taiwan and its 23 million people – the only democracy among 1.2 billion Chinese.
Only 24 countries, mostly tiny island states, maintain diplomatic relations, while all but one of the world’s major powers and all important international institutions, including the United Nations, dance to the mainland’s tune on the issue.
But Chen’s behavior did not help.
Indeed, he even angered the United States, Taiwan’s only military protector, by his frequent confrontational tactics, such as pushing Taiwan towards independence, which runs counter to America’s longstanding “One-China” policy.
After winning the presidency, Chen could have risen above theatrics by focusing on two Taiwanese strengths: its economy and its unbroken humanist Chinese cultural tradition.
Instead, Chen balked at further integration into the global economy, refusing to open all of Taiwan’s economic sectors to foreign participation, which would have strengthened Taiwan’s competitiveness and efficiency.
For years, forward looking Taiwanese industrialists, including many hi-tech entrepreneurs, urged Chen to de-bureaucratize and de-politicize Taiwan’s increasingly isolated economy.
Failing to persuade him, they decamped to mainland China.
Unwisely, Chen went out of his way to shut out mainland Chinese capital and to retain barriers to other foreign investors in order to protect the domestic businesses of his political allies.
Indeed, indicators of economic freedom and competitiveness compiled by the Heritage Foundation, the Cato Institute, the World Economic Forum, and others show that Taiwan’s relative ranking has stagnated or even declined on Chen’s watch.
This stands in sharp contrast to the communist mainland, which has reinvented itself to become one of world’s more open, competitive, and dynamic economies.
As a result, big international corporations and Wall Street banks now flock to China, bypassing Taiwan.
They do so not because Taiwan is small – witness Hong Kong and Switzerland – but because it retains too many restrictions against foreign institutions.
Taiwan’s missed opportunity reflects its government’s sheer incompetence, arrogance, and ignorance.
Chen squandered six valuable years as his administration engaged mainly in polemics with its opposition parties while he pandered to the extreme wing of the DPP and mobilized his government to “de-Sinicize” Taiwan culture.
Indeed, Chen even argued that the Taiwanese were never Chinese.
He ordered the Education Ministry to revise school textbooks to promote the idea that the Taiwanese people were fundamentally different, practically a different race from the Chinese.
Clearly, Chen’s hatred of dictatorship, whether Communist or KMT, consumed him, limiting his ability to think clearly.
In fact, Taiwan’s moral superiority over mainland China lies not only in its democratic institutions, but also in its unbroken adherence to the ancient culture that the Chinese communists nearly succeeded in annihilating after coming to power in 1949.
Ironically, it is China’s rulers who are now scrambling to resurrect Confucius as a moral anchor in a culture dominated by the pursuit of money.
Chen should have celebrated Taiwan’s “Chineseness” proudly and loudly, thereby distinguishing the island from the barbaric legacy of the Chinese Communist Party.
Instead, Chen’s futile effort to “de-Sinicize” Taiwan created a wastefully divisive contentious society, pitting “mainlanders” and “locals” against each other.
Chen’s record suggests he will hang on to his failed presidency.
He will use his legal training to fight on technicalities.
But to the rest of the world, Chen has been revealed as a petty liar over a pitiful amount of money.
He and his wife lied about their involvement.
Their close aides have confessed that they forged documents and perjured themselves to protect their political boss.
What a pathetic ending for a man who could have become one of the most important leaders in modern Chinese history.
The Tragedy of Trade Blindness
LONDON – The Doha Round of global free-trade negotiations is on the brink of collapse after ten years of talking.
This is a tragedy in the making, because the gains available from what has already been agreed upon in the negotiations are considerable, and would provide a major boost to the global economy.
Failure would thus constitute a serious indictment of political leaders in major trading countries in both the developed and developing worlds, possibly costing the global economy $700 billion in additional annual income.
By contrast, if the Round is completed, aside from this generalized gain, specific and important improvements would benefit the world’s least developed countries.
The European Union, for example, has already agreed that all such countries will be afforded duty- and quota-free market access for their exports.
Furthermore, EU export subsidies for agricultural products will be abolished from 2013.
Other such examples abound. But probably none will be realized if the general agreement completing the Round is not concluded.
For the rule governing global trade rounds is that nothing is deliverable until everything is agreed.
Moreover, completing the Doha Round is crucial for the World Trade Organization.
Brazil’s ambassador to the WTO, Roberto Azevedo, said recently that his country “rejects the notion that this organization’s credibility and legitimacy are in a death embrace with the Round. The WTO is bigger than the Round and transcends it.”
Of course, he is right: even if the Doha Round fails, the WTO will survive.
But it would be no minor event, and it would take years for the organization to recover.
Indeed, all previous trade rounds – even the Uruguay Round, which took eight years to complete – concluded favorably.
To pretend that the Doha Round’s failure would not have negative and lasting effects for the WTO betrays a profound lack of understanding of the risks we run, as well as of the Round’s vital importance for weaker and smaller states.
So, what will happen?
Either the Round will fail outright, or some parts of it will be salvaged, with the rest (most of the areas under negotiation) put to one side amid promises to return to them after the 2012 elections in the United States.
Either way, the consequences promise to be far-reaching.
During the last 20 years, the world has witnessed dramatic proliferation of regional and bilateral preferential trade agreements.
Indeed, bilateral trade flows covered by such agreements now amount to roughly half of the world’s imports, and have contributed significantly to the dramatic growth of trade.
Yet such agreements pose great dangers if they are not subject to effective WTO oversight.
For one thing, they are largely negotiated by states with great asymmetries of power.
There is a big difference between multilateral negotiations of universal rules and the effective imposition of rules – and even concessions – in a negotiation between the EU or the US and a smaller trade partner.
While large developing countries – such as Brazil, Russia, India, and China – can avoid such impositions from developed economies, most others cannot.
Aside from the great damage caused by unequal bargaining power outside of the multilateral framework, the path of bilateral negotiations threatens to remove the focus from universal outcomes, which are the bedrock of globalization. The basic principle of non-discrimination is at risk: once trading countries negotiate separately with each other, various forms of discrimination become inevitable, giving rise to various kinds of conflicts.
A focus on preferential agreements would fragment the global trading system, rather than integrating it.
The gradual marginalization of the WTO would also erode its credibility in fulfilling its key role as adjudicator of trade disputes.
The success of the WTO’s adjudication system is reflected in its widespread acceptance. Even when WTO decisions have had serious negative effects on a trading partner, they have generally been accepted.
This constitutes a remarkable advance in global governance.
But it will be endangered if the credibility of the WTO is damaged by a Doha Round failure.
Yet, with even a little flexibility, the Round could still succeed.
The US administration’s heart has not been in this negotiation for a long time.
The Tragedy of Zidane
Those who the gods may destroy, they grant their wishes.
Zinedine Zidane may be pondering that bit of ancient Greek wisdom today.
Having announced that he would end his professional career with the World Cup, Zidane had his wish fulfilled.
After France barely survived the tournament’s first round, Zidane performed at the top of his game and led the team to the brink of a second World Cup championship.
But instead of finishing his career in triumph, or at least with an ovation, he was ejected from the final for head-butting an Italian player.
There have been few such tragic moments in football history.
Whatever the provocation that led to Zidane’s behavior (probably a racial comment), his violent act, seen around the world, has tarnished his image.
The sad paradox is that while the world had been learning of and celebrating his legendary kindness as a person, he will now be distinguished for all time by an act of aggression.
Indeed, Zidane’s status as an emblematic champion of the world’s most universal and popular sport does not fully explain why people have been so obsessed with him.
His human qualities, as much as his talent and technical feats on the field, counted equally in establishing his popular acclaim.
Football has always been this way.
For Argentineans, the diminutive Diego Maradona represented the revenge of the weak and the deprived.
As a result, his countrymen excused his frequent bad behavior time and again.
Similarly, Pelé became the symbol of a harmonious, inter-racial Brazil.
Zidane offered neither of these romantic images.
Moreover, after his career is over, he is unlikely to become a manager of his sport like Jean-Claude Killy, the former Alpine skier who was co-president of the 1992 winter Olympics, or his fellow football legend Michel Platini, who helped coordinate the 1998 World Cup.
After all, Zidane, arguably the world’s best football player, left with a gesture that has no place in any game.
Nevertheless, Zidane will remain a global icon, owing to his profoundly human character and his extreme simplicity.
Here is a man who is known in the most hidden corners of the planet, yet he retained the presence and discretion of a silent next-door neighbor.
At a moment when integration is being debated in France, Zidane embodied the ideal of success through talent and hard work – while never betraying himself or his Algerian origins.
Moreover, Zidane incarnated values that seem threatened nowadays, but to which ordinary people remain attached: loyalty to family, diligence, and cooperation.
Here is a man who was not only a world champion, but also a model son and father.
The almost timid way in which, after France’s victory over Spain, he expressed his love for his mother touched viewers around the world.
To understand Zidane’s popularity, one need only set his modesty and attention to others against the arrogance and indifference that characterize the behavior of so many other celebrities, including football players.
At a time when, in France as in the rest of the world, the chasm between the elite and ordinary people has never been so wide, when the smugness of the affluent has never been so cruelly felt by the less fortunate, Zidane, a son of despised immigrants, became an international star, and yet preserved the simplicity of his origins.
For this, Zidane was not only admired, but also respected.
His success was never to the detriment of others.
On the contrary, he is active in causes such as helping sick children.
It is obvious that he could one day become a tremendous ambassador of peace, or for children, working with the United Nations or another international organization.
But now the hero has fallen.
Zidane was not Superman, but a human being.
In a single instant of unfathomable fury, his moment of glory was transformed into one of madness and a curse.
His tragedy is ultimately a personal one.
Nevertheless, it would be a great loss – extending far beyond the world of football – if Zidane’s disgraceful exit as a player comes to define his legacy as a man.
The Transatlantic Muslim Divide
Compared with the tension that exists in Muslim communities across Europe, America’s Muslims are a more contented lot.
A recent Pew Forum study found Europe’s Muslims to be “markedly less well off than the general population, frustrated with economic opportunities and socially isolated,” while most American Muslims say that “their communities are excellent or good places” to live; 71% say they can succeed in the US if they work.
Both income and college graduation levels match the national norms.
63% of American Muslims report no conflict between religious devotion and living in modern society.
Although 53% of US Muslims think that life is more difficult since the terrorist attacks of 2001, most think that this is the fault of the government, not their neighbors.
Indeed, 73% said they had never experienced discrimination while living in America. Moreover, 85% said suicide bombing is rarely or never justified, and only 1% said violence to defend Islam was “often” permissible.
In Europe, significantly higher percentages of Muslims believe that suicide bombings are “often” or “sometimes” justified.
“What emerges,” according to Amaney Jamal, an adviser to Pew, “is the great success of the Muslim American population in its socioeconomic assimilation.”
Yet “assimilation” is not what succeeds.
“Assimilation” means dissolving into the mainstream, but Muslim-Americans do not, remaining devoutly Muslim in a country overwhelmingly Christian.
America’s Muslims do not so much assimilate as participate in economic, political, educational, and social life.
This might reflect a self-selection process: only the most educated Muslims immigrate to America, as poor social services allow only the best-prepared to survive.
Yet even middle-class Muslims in Britain become alienated, and, unlike the Muslim poor in Europe, poor Muslims in America don’t express alienation or sympathy with al-Qaeda.
It can be argued that only those poor eager for the harsh but open possibilities of American life immigrate to the US.
Yet this doesn’t explain why these poorer immigrants remain religious; wanting to succeed US-style, they should want to be quick to “assimilate.”
Why do US Muslims do well while remaining devout and distinctive-looking?
Why can they participate without assimilating?
Indeed, America’s secular institutions were designed to support pluralism.
They allow people of many creeds to work in them—a workplace of multiple faiths.
The prohibition against a state religion together with freedom of conscience preserves the plurality of religion in civil life.
This design was crafted not only from enlightened principle but from necessity: America needed to persuade people to cross the ocean and endure the hardships of the frontier and, later, industrialization.
Freedom to practice one’s religion was an advertisement for America.
The benefit of that accidental generosity was the American deal: immigrants have to participate in the economic and political fracas of the nation, but without much of a social service safety “net.”
On the other hand, they can get in.
And they can keep not only their private faith but practice it publicly.
Tolerance for other people’s religion is the price paid for tolerance of one’s own.
Prejudice has tended to fall as participation increases.
It has been in no one’s interest to disturb this live-and let-live pragmatism for very long.
One result of the deal is the paradoxical-sounding “familiarity with difference.”
Because immigrants participate in America’s economic and political arenas, Americans are used to different sorts of people and so distinguish those differences that might damage the country from those that will not.
Americans, indeed, are familiar with difference, or at least they tend not to panic.
Even after 2001, there were only a few anti-Muslim incidents.
Europe, however, demands greater assimilation and offers a less porous economy and politics.
This means less participation and thus less familiarity with difference on the host country’s side.
On the immigrants’ side, there is more resentment against the host, more lassitude about the economy and politics, possible violence or an insistence on maintaining symbolic differences—ironically, in a society less able to accept them precisely because of its discomfort with difference.
This is Europe’s headscarf debate in a nutshell.
It speaks to none of the barriers to participation or to immigrant responses to them, but demands symbolic assimilation.
But such demands are a dead end.
To get out of it, greater entry into the economy and politics is needed, but also less demand for quick-fix assimilation.
All the religions that descend from Abraham have internal mechanisms for change that allow them to reckon with new circumstances in ways that the confessional community can respect.
Both fundamentalism and the demands of assimilation — be like us, now! — pre-empt these mechanisms.
They should be allowed to work.
But Europe demands assimilation before participation in an economy that immigrants can’t get into anyway.
This, sadly, is a road to the ghetto.
The New Obama
NEW YORK – After the second debate between US President Barack Obama and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, Obama’s supporters chorused in near-unison, “He’s back!”
The languid, disengaged, and lackluster performer of the first debate had disappeared, and the impressive, beloved figure of the victorious 2008 campaign had reappeared.
As the commentator Andrew Sullivan put it, “I saw the person I first saw...I saw the president I thought I knew.”
To my eye, however, the old Obama was not back.
A new Obama had appeared.
The old Obama was youthful, charming, graceful, and full of hope.
His demeanor was crisp yet easy-going.
His rhetoric soared.
His smile could light up a stadium.
The Obama on display in the second debate – and the third – was harder, chillier, sadder, and more somber.
There was tension in the lines of his mouth.
His speech was clipped, as if under continuous rigorous control.
His rhetoric did not soar, could not soar.
The smile was rare and constrained.
But his command of detail and argument was rock solid.
His sentences parsed.
He spoke with a cold, disciplined energy.
In repose (as witnessed on the split screen in the reaction shots) he was often perfectly immobile, almost stony, as if posing for a portrait.
One word for all of this would be “presidential,” in the sense of competent, seasoned, and sobered by reality.
But that word also connotes the fearsome qualities of ruthlessness and brutality that any honest portrayal of the office of President of the United States must include in our day.
Obama has inhabited the White House for four years; now the White House inhabits him.
Twice this autumn, Obama had already performed before tens of millions of people – in his acceptance speech at the Democratic convention and in the first debate.
Each time, his performance was flat.
At the convention, he seemingly hoped to summon the old Obama, to charm and soar, but that man was simply no longer available.
The truth appears to be that his muse deserted him sometime in the first year of his presidency.
The result was a simulacrum of the old Obama, as if he were acting the part of himself.
Then, in the first debate, no such futile effort was even made, and there was no Obama at all, neither old nor new.
As so many commentators noted, in some sense he simply failed to show up.
Perhaps he also thought that, well ahead in the polls, he did not have to bother to engage the pesky fellow who imagined replacing him in the White House.
At the second debate, the loss of the old Obama was apparently accepted and a new one –existing, real, available, and now working in the Oval Office – made its first appearance.
Has the presidency hardened Obama?
Has it brutalized him?
There are reasons for thinking that it has.
First, Obama has taken, perhaps, a heavier beating from his political opposition than most presidents.
The theme of Obama’s life, clearly expressed in his eloquent memoir Dreams from My Father, and shown in the recent Frontline documentary The Choice, is reconciliation. He is not a man whose identity was handed to him by birth.
Born of a white mother and an absentee Kenyan father, residing in Indonesia as a boy, raised in adolescence by a white single mother in Hawaii, he was forced to figure out his place in life on his own.
The dreams from his father were at an end, and he was left, as he only slowly realized, with the themeless pragmatism that has become the hallmark of his administration.
Unable to find common ground with the Republican opposition, he cut deals with the other powers that immediately surround the presidency: the military and security apparatus, big pharmaceutical companies, big banks, and big media.
Perhaps more important was the permission that he gave himself for violence and suppression of rights: drone strikes that have killed children as well as terrorists, the futile “surge” in Afghanistan, the continued operation of the prison at Guantánamo Bay, reliance on military tribunals, an unprecedented campaign against whistle blowers, and the assertion of a right to order the assassination of foreigners and Americans alike at his sole discretion.
All this, too, stood behind the performance of the man on stage during the second two debates.
And if he is elected, it is this man who will govern.
The Obama of 2008 is not back.
He is not coming back. He is gone forever.
The Transition to Sustainability
NEW YORK – The global economic crisis will be with us for a generation, not just a year or two, because it is really a transition to sustainability.
The scarcity of primary commodities and damage from climate change in recent years contributed to the destabilization of the world economy that gave rise to the current crisis.
Soaring food and fuel prices and major natural disasters played an important role in undermining financial markets, household purchasing power, and even political stability.
These investments are needed in the short term to offset the decline in worldwide consumption spending that underlies the global recession.
More importantly, they are needed in the long term, because a world crowded with 6.8 billion people (and rising) simply cannot sustain economic growth unless it adopts sustainable technologies that economize on scarce natural resources.
In practice, the global crisis means that sustainable investments are being curtailed rather than expanded in the developing world.
As access to international bank loans, bond flotations, and foreign direct investment is lost, infrastructure projects talked about in the past are now being shelved, threatening the political and economic stability of dozens of developing countries.
In fact, every part of the world has a huge backlog of vital infrastructure investments.
It is time for a concerted global effort to bring those projects on line.
This is not easy to do.
Most infrastructure investment requires public-sector leadership to forge partnerships with the private sector.
Typically, the public sector must enter into contractual agreements with private firms not only to build the infrastructure, but also to operate it as a regulated monopoly or on a concession basis.
Governments generally lack the needed technical capacity to design such projects, opening up possibilities of favoritism and corruption when major contracts are awarded.  Such charges are likely to be hurled at governments even when they are not true, though all too often they are.
Still, the backlog of such projects is now wreaking havoc with the world economy.
The world’s major cities are clogged with traffic jams and pollution. The atmosphere is filling with greenhouse gases from heavy use of fossil fuels.
Water scarcity is hitting virtually every major economic center, from North America to Europe, Africa, India, and China.  
Governments should thus strengthen their ministries of infrastructure (including power, roads, water and sanitation, and information and communication technologies), as well as their national development banks, so that they can properly design long-term infrastructure projects and programs.
The ability to offset the crisis in a constructive manner through expanded public-private partnerships will determine the subsequent success of countries and regions.
Interestingly, the US is about to create a National Infrastructure Bank for the first time. 
Nevertheless, American and European economic advisers generally believe that a short sharp stimulus will be enough to restore economic growth.
This is wrong.
What will be needed is an overhaul of the world economy towards sustainability.
Moreover, policymakers in the rich world believe that they can continue to neglect the developing world, or leave it to its fate in global markets.
This is also a recipe for global failure, and even future conflict.
Developed countries will have to do far more to help poor countries through the transition to sustainability.
Whereas most of the “stimulus” legislation to date has been short-term and inward-looking, increased funding for sustainable infrastructure in poor countries would provide a powerful boost to rich-world economies.
Developed countries should agree to channel considerable savings to developing countries to finance the scale-up of sustainable investments.
This can be done directly on a bilateral basis, for example, through long-term loans from developed countries’ export-credit agencies.
It can also be done multilaterally, by raising the infrastructure investment flows from the World Bank and the regional development banks (including the Inter-American Development Bank, European Investment Bank, African Development Bank, and Asian Development Bank).
Both channels should be used. 
Developed countries also fail to recognize that without much greater financing of sustainable infrastructure in the developing world – especially sustainable power generation and transmission – a global agreement on climate change later this year (or any time soon) will be impossible.
The rich world somehow expects poor countries to restrict their use of fossil fuels without any significant help in financing new and sustainable sources of energy.
In almost all of the rich-country proposals about targets, limits, commitments, and permits for greenhouse gases, there is hardly a word about helping poor countries to finance the transition to sustainable technologies.
The G-20 meeting in London on April 2 offers hope for a true global effort to repair the failing world economy.
This is the time and place to launch the global drive toward sustainability.
If we fail to meet the challenge, the global crisis will endanger the world for years to come.
The Triumphant Return of John Maynard Keynes
NEW YORK – We are all Keynesians now.
Even the right in the United States has joined the Keynesian camp with unbridled enthusiasm and on a scale that at one time would have been truly unimaginable.
For those of us who claimed some connection to the Keynesian tradition, this is a moment of triumph, after having been left in the wilderness, almost shunned, for more than three decades.
At one level, what is happening now is a triumph of reason and evidence over ideology and interests.
Economic theory had long explained why unfettered markets were not self-correcting, why regulation was needed, why there was an important role for government to play in the economy.
But many, especially people working in the financial markets, pushed a type of “market fundamentalism.”
The misguided policies that resulted – pushed by, among others, some members of US President-elect Barack Obama’s economic team – had earlier inflicted enormous costs on developing countries.
The moment of enlightenment came only when those policies also began inflicting costs on the US and other advanced industrial countries.
Keynes argued not only that markets are not self-correcting, but that in a severe downturn, monetary policy was likely to be ineffective.
Fiscal policy was required.
But not all fiscal policies are equivalent.
In America today, with an overhang of household debt and high uncertainty, tax cuts are likely to be ineffective (as they were in Japan in the 1990’s).  Much, if not most, of last February’s US tax cut went into savings.
With the huge debt left behind by the Bush administration, the US should be especially motivated to get the largest possible stimulation from each dollar spent.
The legacy of underinvestment in technology and infrastructure, especially of the green kind, and the growing divide between the rich and the poor, requires congruence between short-run spending and a long-term vision.
That necessitates restructuring both tax and expenditure programs.
Lowering taxes on the poor and raising unemployment benefits while simultaneously increasing taxes on the rich can stimulate the economy, reduce the deficit, and reduce inequality.
Cutting expenditures on the Iraq war and increasing expenditures on education can simultaneously increase output in the short and long run and reduce the deficit. 
Keynes was worried about a liquidity trap – the inability of monetary authorities to induce an increase in the supply of credit in order to raise the level of economic activity.
US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has tried hard to avoid having the blame fall on the Fed for deepening this downturn in the way that it is blamed for the Great Depression, famously associated with a contraction of the money supply and the collapse of banks. 
And yet one should read history and theory carefully: preserving financial institutions is not an end in itself, but a means to an end.
It is the flow of credit that is important, and the reason that the failure of banks during the Great Depression was important is that they were involved in determining creditworthiness; they were the repositories of information necessary for the maintenance of the flow of credit.
But America’s financial system has changed dramatically since the 1930’s.
Many of America’s big banks moved out of the “lending” business and into the “moving business.”
They focused on buying assets, repackaging them, and selling them, while establishing a record of incompetence in assessing risk and screening for creditworthiness. Hundreds of billions have been spent to preserve these dysfunctional institutions.
Nothing has been done even to address their perverse incentive structures, which encourage short-sighted behavior and excessive risk taking.  With private rewards so markedly different from social returns, it is no surprise that the pursuit of self-interest (greed) led to such socially destructive consequences.
Not even the interests of their own shareholders have been served well.
Meanwhile, too little is being done to help banks that actually do what banks are supposed to do – lend money and assess creditworthiness. 
The Federal government has assumed trillions of dollars of liabilities and risks.  In rescuing the financial system, no less than in fiscal policy, we need to worry about the “bang for the buck.”
Otherwise, the deficit – which has doubled in eight years – will soar even more.
In September, there was talk that the government would get back its money, with interest.
As the bailout has ballooned, it is increasingly clear that this was merely another example of financial markets mis appraising risk – just as they have done consistently in recent years.
The terms of the Bernanke-Paulson bailouts were disadvantageous to taxpayers, and yet remarkably, despite their size, have done little to rekindle lending.   
The neo-liberal push for deregulation served some interests well.
Financial markets did well through capital market liberalization.
Enabling America to sell its risky financial products and engage in speculation all over the world may have served its firms well, even if they imposed large costs on others. 
Today, the risk is that the new Keynesian doctrines will be used and abused to serve some of the same interests.
Have those who pushed deregulation ten years ago learned their lesson?
Or will they simply push for cosmetic reforms – the minimum required to justify the mega-trillion dollar bailouts?
Has there been a change of heart, or only a change in strategy?
After all, in today’s context, the pursuit of Keynesian policies looks even more profitable than the pursuit of market fundamentalism!
Ten years ago, at the time of the Asian financial crisis, there was much discussion of the need to reform the global financial architecture.
Little was done.
It is imperative that we not just respond adequately to the current crisis, but that we undertake the long-run reforms that will be necessary if we are to create a more stable, more prosperous, and equitable global economy.
The Triumph of Politics in Europe
MADRID – Economics, particularly economic theories, always yield in the end to political imperatives.
That is why Europe’s fast-changing political landscape, reshaped by electoral insurrections in France and Greece against German-backed fiscal austerity, is bound to affect Europe’s economic policies as well.
Such an imperative has been at work throughout Europe’s postwar history.
Indeed, Europe’s shift from the modest customs union of the European Economic Community to the single market and common currency of today’s European Monetary Union was itself a fundamentally political move, one with strategic implications, of course.
France wanted to tame German power by harnessing it to the European project, and Germany was prepared to sacrifice the Deutsche Mark for the sake of France’s acceptance of a united Germany, the nightmare of Europe’s recent past.
An economically robust Germany is, without doubt, vital to the European project, if only because history has shown how dangerous an unhappy Germany can be.
Indeed, it was thanks to the euro – and the captive European market that goes with it – that Germany today is the world’s second-leading exporter (China surpassed it in 2009).
Europe, however, has always found it difficult to come to terms with an over-confident, let alone arrogant, Germany.
The current political turmoil in Europe shows that, regardless of how sensible Chancellor Angela Merkel’s austerity prescriptions for debt-ridden peripheral Europe might be in the abstract, they resemble a German Diktat.
The concern for many is not just Europe’s historic “German problem,” but also that Germany could end up exporting to the rest of Europe the same ghosts of radical politics and violent nationalism that its economic success has transcended at home.
Once the crisis became a sad daily reality for millions of unemployed – particularly for what appears to be a lost generation of young, jobless Europeans – EU institutions also became a target of popular rage.
Their inadequacies – embodied in a cumbersome system of governance, and in endless, inconclusive summitry – and their lack of democratic legitimacy are being repudiated by millions of voters throughout the continent.
Europe’s experience has shown that the subordination of society to economic theories is politically untenable.
Social vulnerability and frustration at the political system’s failure to provide solutions are the grounds upon which radical movements have always emerged to offer facile solutions.
A concomitant of such Kurzschluss between mainstream leaders and voters has always been the politics of accentuated ethnic identity, ultra-nationalism, and outright bigotry.
Former French President Nicolas Sarkozy ended up trying desperately to appeal to those very sentiments in his last-ditch effort to avert his political demise.
What we have seen across Europe of late is a rebellion of voters against mainstream politics.
In the first round of French presidential elections, the extreme right and left received more than 30% of the vote, with Martine Le Pen’s anti-EU National Front threatening to supplant the center-right Union for a Popular Movement as the country’s new mainstream rightist party.
In Greece, the party system’s dangerous fragmentation into a range of smaller groups, combined with the robust emergence of a new anti-austerity left, Alexis Tsipras’s Syriza, and a neo-Nazi right, has plunged governance into to a state of total paralysis.
Ironically, what the civilized protests of mainstream parties in peripheral Europe failed to achieve – a relaxation of the dogma of austerity – might come about as a result of the politics of brinkmanship proposed by the Greek radical left.
By its blatant rebellion against German-dictated austerity, and by making Greek withdrawal from the euro a credible possibility, Syriza is bringing closer than ever the euro’s chaotic collapse in Europe’s periphery, if not beyond.
By insisting that the choice is between new terms for the Greek bailout or a Doomsday scenario, Syriza could be creating the possibility for a quasi-Keynesian resolution of the European crisis.
Tsipras might be “impetuous,” as his mainstream adversaries from the center-left Pasok and the center-right New Democracy would say, but he is not irrational.
His is a rather sober reading of reality: the austerity plan has become a highway to social hell for his countrymen, and would likely condemn Greece to long years of ruinous depression within a permanent debt trap, and possibly to a breakdown of democracy.
Merkel’s now legendary obstinacy eventually might have to succumb to the imperatives of politics.
It is one thing to ignore European Commission President José Manuel Barroso’s call for a more flexible economic policy, and quite another to dismiss out of hand the powerful message coming from French and Greek voters.
Nor is it a minor political headache for Merkel to have to face an anti-austerity alliance of Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti and the new French president, François Hollande.
Spain’s capacity to withstand an austerity “cure” that only sinks it deeper into recession must also have its limits.
So now Germany’s finance ministry, the guardian of fiscal rectitude, is considering measures such as using the European Investment Bank to foster growth, issuing EU “project bonds” to finance infrastructure investment, and allowing wages in Germany to rise at a faster pace than in the rest of Europe.
The imminent – indeed, inevitable – victory of politics over recalcitrant economics may well be at hand.
The Trouble with Hope
PARIS – America’s presidential election campaign is being followed in Europe with passionate interest.
It is seen as a long saga full of surprises.
The human and intellectual qualities of the three remaining candidates are even viewed with some envy on this side of the Atlantic, where you can hear statements such as: “Could we borrow just one of your candidates?”
Many Europeans feel all three candidates are superb, and that, contrast to previous elections, America is suffering from an embarrassment of riches.
But Europeans’ interest in this presidential election cannot mask the fact that what they expect from it is far from clear.
Europeans may want a more “normal” America, closer to their own values, but they simultaneously worry that a more modest America would demand more of them in the realm of “hard” military power.
America as a model or America as a protector – this “European dilemma” is in itself new.
For, in the immediate aftermath of World War II, most Europeans viewed the United States as both its defender against the Soviet Union’s expansionist aims and the key external actor for their deeply wounded continent’s moral and economic reconstruction.
This is no longer the case.
The collapse of the USSR, America’s self-inflicted wounds – particularly in Iraq – and the spectacular rise of Asia have changed European perceptions of the US.
America is no longer the protector or model that it used to be, nor is it alone in terms of influence and power.
One can even say that the European Union has slowly become a “normative” force in the world in reaction to the evolution of America’s power.
Europe has long known that it could never balance America in the realm of “hard power”; but, with the decline of America’s “soft power,” it became more important than ever to incarnate the “humane” and law-abiding face of the West.
In this sense, Europe has come to see itself, at least in part, as an alternative dream for everyone who had stopped dreaming about America.
But, seen from within, the EU model often appears less convincing.
Thus, many Europeans continue to be nostalgic for America as a model.
For these Europeans, Barack Obama, campaigning under the banner of “hope,” is the ideal choice to restore, as if by magic, America’s soft power.
After all, he himself incarnates the American Dream.
But some Europeans prefer Hillary Clinton or even John McCain, because they are apprehensive about the consequences for America’s European partners of a more restrained and less experienced president.
They worry about not only competence, but also the old transatlantic issue of “burden sharing.”
The implicit question behind some European reservations about Obama may be formulated in one question: “Will we have to do more in Afghanistan and beyond?”
Could the restoration of America’s international reputation turn out to be bad for Europe, by eroding its new monopoly on representing Western values and calling it back to its hard power duties?
Could it be that a candidate of fear – McCain or, increasingly, Clinton – really serves Europe’s interests better than a candidate of hope?
With Obama in power, it would become – at least initially – more difficult for Europeans to denounce America, even if the “New France” of Nicolas Sarkozy has already moved away from this easy temptation.
But it would also be less easy to reject a call for greater burden sharing in the world.
This “defensive” view of transatlantic relations is problematic.
The best America for Europe and the world is a confident America – an America that sheds its culture of fear and rediscovers the roots of its culture of hope.
This is Obama’s America.
Of course, the greater your expectations are, the greater the risk of disappointment.
But, after eight years of America’s self-imposed isolation under Bush, it is a risk worth taking.
Even if America is no longer the world’s only superpower, it still remains the “indispensable nation.”
So Europeans are right to be fascinated by America’s presidential election.
Regardless of who wins, the consequences of the outcome will reverberate throughout the world.
The Trouble With Interest Rates
BERKELEY – Of all the strange and novel economic doctrines propounded since the beginning of the global financial crisis, the one put forward by John Taylor, an economist at Stanford, has a good claim to being the oddest.
In his view, the post-crisis economic policies being carried out in the United States, Europe, and Japan are putting a ceiling on long-term interest rates that is “much like the effect of a price ceiling in a rental market where landlords reduce the supply of rental housing.”
The result of low interest rates, quantitative easing, and forward guidance, Taylor argues, is a “decline in credit availability [that] reduces aggregate demand, which tends to increase unemployment, a classic unintended consequence.”
Taylor’s analogy fails to make sense at the most fundamental level.
The reason that rent control is disliked is that it forbids transactions that would benefit both the renter and the landlord.
When a government agency imposes a rent ceiling, it prohibits landlords from charging more than a set amount.
This distorts the market, leaving empty apartments that landlords would be willing to rent at higher prices and preventing renters from offering what they are truly willing to pay.
With the economic policies Taylor criticizes, this mechanism simply does not exist.
When a central bank reduces long-term interest rates via current and expected future open-market operations, it does not prevent potential lenders from offering to lend at higher interest rates; nor does it stop borrowers from taking up such an offer.
These transactions don’t take place for a simple reason: borrowers choose freely not to enter into them.
So how does Taylor arrive at his analogy?
My intuition is that his reasoning has become entangled with his beliefs about the free market.
Taylor and others who share his view probably begin with a sense that current interest rates are too low.
Given their belief that the free market cannot fail (it can only be failed), they naturally assume that some government action must be behind the unnaturally low rates.
The goal then becomes to figure out what the government has done to make interest rates so wrong.
And, because any argument that treats government action as appropriate can only be a red herring, the analogy to rent control emerges as one of the possible solutions.
If my intuition is correct, Taylor and his fellow travelers will never be convinced that they are wrong.
Accepting the idea that central bankers may be doing the best they can in a difficult situation would require entertaining the possibility that markets are imperfect and fallible.
And that is one thing they will never do.
We have seen this play out before.
Five years ago, Taylor and his intellectual allies wrote an “Open Letter to Ben Bernanke,” warning that the quantitative easing planned by the Federal Reserve’s then-chairman risked “currency debasement and inflation.”
But, although their prediction turned out to be spectacularly wrong, that has not led Taylor or any of the other signatories to rethink their theories or to consider that perhaps Bernanke knows something about monetary economics.
Instead, Taylor seems to have settled on another theory – his rent-control analogy – for why the government is doing everything wrong.
The only possible response is to point to logic and evidence.
Given real economic conditions, European and American monetary policy is not too loose; if anything, it is too restrictive.
The “natural” interest – what would be ground out by the Walrasian system of general equilibrium equations – is actually lower than what current monetary policy is producing.
Yes, the inertial expectations of the economy have combined with monetary policy to distort interest and inflation rates, but not in the direction that Taylor is proposing.
On the contrary, compared to what is needed (given the current state of the economy) or to what a free-market, flexible-price economy in proper equilibrium would deliver, interest rates are too high and inflation is too low.
There is indeed something wrong with today’s interest rates.
Why such low rates are appropriate for the economy and for how long they will continue to be appropriate are deep and unsettled questions; they call attention to what MIT’s Olivier Blanchard calls the “dark corners” of economics, where research has so far shed too little light.
What Taylor and his ilk fail to understand is that the reason interest rates are wrong has little to do with the policies put in place by central bankers and everything to do with the situation that policymakers confront.
The Trouble with Japanese Nationalism
Barely half a year into his premiership, Japan’s Shinzo Abe is provoking anger across Asia and mixed feelings in his country’s key ally, the United States.
But will the Bush administration use its influence to nudge Abe away from inflammatory behavior?
Abe’s predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi, was a mold-breaking leader, reviving Japan’s economy, reforming the postal savings system, and smashing the long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party’s faction system.
But Koizumi also legitimized a new Japanese nationalism, antagonizing China and South Korea by his annual visits to the Yasukuni Shrine.
If anything, Abe is even more committed to building an assertive and unapologetic Japan.
Anyone who believes that the Yasukuni controversy is an obscure historical matter that Chinese and Koreans use to badger Japan for political advantage has probably never spent much time there.
The problem is not the 12 Class-A war criminals interred at the shrine; the real problem is the Yushukan military museum next door.
Walking past the Mitsubishi Zero, tanks, and machine guns on display in the museum, one finds a history of the Pacific War that restores “the Truth of Modern Japanese History.”
It follows the nationalist narrative: Japan, a victim of the European colonial powers, sought only to protect the rest of Asia from them.
Japan’s colonial occupation of Korea, for example, is described as a “partnership”; one looks in vain for any account of the victims of Japanese militarism in Nanjing or Manila.
One might be able to defend the museum as one viewpoint among many in a pluralist democracy.
But there is no other museum in Japan that gives an alternative view of Japan’s twentieth-century history.