IRVING, TEXAS – Saudi Arabia wants it all: to salvage OPEC, achieve income diversification and industrialization, and preserve its market share in crude oil, petroleum products, petrochemicals, and natural gas liquids (NGLs).
Whether the Saudis succeed will be determined largely by the shale-energy industry in the United States.
The US shale revolution divided OPEC according to the quality of its members' crude oil.
Exporters of light sweet crude – such as Algeria, Angola, and Nigeria – lost nearly all of their market share in the US, while exporters of sour or heavier crude, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, have lost little.
Because almost all crude oil produced by the Gulf States is sour, and most of the global surplus is sweet, any production cut by Saudi Arabia and its neighbors would not drive prices back up and rebalance the oil market.
The only way to do that – and prevent an OPEC breakup – would be to reduce the production of light sweet crude, including by US producers, which would thus lose market share.
If this occurred, oil prices could be expected to rise again relatively quickly.
If, however, Saudi Arabia remains more committed to its strategic development objectives, low oil prices could persist.
Since the 1970s, several OPEC members, led by Saudi Arabia, have worked to diversify their industrial base by promoting sectors with a comparative advantage, such as petrochemicals, and building mega-refineries to enable the export of value-added products.
At the same time, to boost revenues, they expanded exports of NGLs, which are not counted in OPEC quotas.
But just when these countries were beginning to achieve success, the US shale revolution emerged, threatening all three of their main strategic objectives.
The key to the competitiveness of Saudi Arabia's petrochemical industry was its use of natural gas and ethane, which was far less expensive than the oil product naphtha on which its global competitors depended.
Now that the US is producing massive amounts of low-price natural gas and ethane, Saudi Arabia's competitive advantage – and market share – is beginning to deteriorate.
The same goes for refining.
Since the US does not allow exports of crude oil, the shale revolution pushed down the US benchmark price, the West Texas Intermediate, relative to international crude prices, sometimes with differentials as wide as $20.
US refiners took advantage of lower prices to increase their exports of petroleum products – so much so, that they are now threatening the market share of Saudi refineries in Asia and elsewhere.
Likewise, US companies have increased NGL production considerably, enabling the country to slash its liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) imports and expand its NGL exports significantly.
As a result, Saudi Arabia has lost market share to US producers in Central and South America.
But the recent collapse in oil prices could change this dynamic.
In refusing to cut its own production, Saudi Arabia seems to be hoping that low oil prices will drive down investment in US shale energy, undermining production growth there.
Low prices may already have contributed to delays in America's decision to begin exporting crude oil, as well as to the political viability of US President Barack Obama's veto of the Keystone XL pipeline, intended to transport oil from the Canadian tar sands to the Gulf of Mexico for export.
Add to that the delay in the opening of the Mexican energy sector, and it seems that low oil prices could amount to a net gain for the Kingdom.
Though Saudi Arabia's motivation in not cutting production was probably almost entirely economic, low oil prices could also offer distinct political advantages.
Most notably, the decline in prices is creating serious challenges for Iran, the Kingdom's main rival in the region, as well as for the unstable, oil-dependent economies of Russia and Venezuela.
None of these countries has adequate savings to cushion the blow of reduced revenues.
Under these circumstances, it seems likely that Saudi Arabia will continue to refuse to cut oil production, leaving prices low until market forces trigger a rebound.
And even then, the price increase could be limited. After all, game theory dictates that, once the surplus is eliminated, the dominant producer must prevent oil prices from rising high enough to cause it to lose market share again.
That means that Saudi Arabia will try to compel non-OPEC countries, mainly in North America, to keep oil-production increases commensurate with growth in global demand.
In short, it is in Saudi Arabia's interest for oil prices to rise high enough to sustain its own economy, but not so high that they can sustain significant increases in non-OPEC supply.
In order to keep prices in this ideal range, Saudi Arabia may even increase production again.
This strategy is not without risk.
In the short run, excessively low prices could trigger political instability in some oil-producing countries, driving up prices.
Similarly, delays in upstream investment, especially megaprojects, could push prices above the ideal level in the medium and long term.
But perhaps the biggest risk lies with the US shale-oil industry.
Over the next few years, US producers are likely to retrench, focus on sweet spots, improve technology, reduce costs, and increase production once again.
At that point, Saudi Arabia's current strategy may no longer be adequate to sustain its market dominance.
Saudi Arabia’s Democratic Baby Step
This month’s elections in Iraq and for the presidency of the Palestinian Authority may be claiming all the world’s headlines, but another potentially far-reaching ballot is also underway, albeit to far less acclaim: the registration process for the municipal elections in Saudi Arabia in mid-February.
As the heartland of some of the strongest Islamist forces anywhere, this Saudi effort – if successful and a harbinger of other needed changes – may have an even more profound impact than the elections in Iraq and Palestine.
Roughly 40,000 Saudis are expected to compete for 1,700 seats in 178 municipal councils.
The enthusiasm is obvious, and the campaign is already under way and highly spirited.
Members of the Saudi royal family are not entering the race, as they already enjoy ultimate political power.
But, sensing the public’s excitement, they have made sure to be photographed by local and international media while registering to get their electoral ID card.
By the standards of Western, and even emerging Third World democracies, the Saudi municipal elections are an extremely modest affair.
But in the Saudi context they are a real breakthrough.
For Saudi Arabia is a country in which both rulers and ruled are equally arch- conservative, adhering, for the last two centuries, to the puritanical Wahhabi doctrine of Islam.
During the last fifty years, repeated attempts by reform-oriented elements to open up Saudi Arabia’s society and polity had failed.
But recent democratic trends worldwide have now reached the shores of this medieval desert kingdom and can no longer be ignored.
To begin with, members of the small but steadily growing Saudi middle class have increasingly expressed their discontent publicly.
Despite legal prohibition, Saudi women have defiantly driven their cars in the streets of Riyadh, while prominent intellectuals have published open letters to King Fahd and Crown Prince Abdullah demanding social and political reform.
This pressure for change has been building for years.
The first Gulf War (1990-91), brought nearly one million foreign fighters from 35 countries to the Arabian Peninsula, along with their modern weapons systems, communications gear, and different lifestyles.
Such a massive foreign influx into so hermetic a country could not but have a significant domestic impact.
Nearly all countries neighboring Saudi Arabia already practice one form of electoral participation or another, although most of these nods toward democracy are defective in some way.
For years, ordinary Saudis watched with envy parliamentary debates on Arab satellite channels, in countries richer than theirs, such as Kuwait, as well as in poorer ones, such as Yemen and Jordan.
Even the tiny state of Qatar has the rabble-rouser Al-Jazeera television channel, which is watched by more viewers in Saudi Arabia than in any other Arab country.
Messages by their dissident compatriot Osama Bin Laden are periodically beamed from that channel, inciting Saudis against the royal family.
Bin Laden’s constantly highlights the House of Saud’s corruption and repugnant connections with the United States.
While democracy is not part of his agenda, his messages, as well as his followers’ periodic armed attacks inside the country, have no doubt contributed to the erosion of the regime’s legitimacy.
But it was the terrorist attacks on the US in September 2001 that brought a sea change in the thinking, if not yet the practice, of at least part of the Saudi regime.
The fact that most of the perpetrators of the attacks were identified as Saudis highlighted the country’s backward realities and provoked mounting international pressures for change.
No doubt some of these pressures were motivated by sincere concerns, but others were driven by the desire of anti-Saudi groups in the US to settle old scores.
The call for democratizing the Middle East has become a battle cry for the Bush administration, especially after the invasion and occupation of Iraq.
Despite its reluctance to change, the Saudi royal family is obviously yielding to these multiple pressures from within, from neighbors, and from the wider world, although the extent of change is still nominal and obviously leaves much to be desired.
Thus, for example, Saudi women, but not convicts, are barred from participating in the forthcoming municipal elections.
Moreover, tens of human rights activists are currently in prison or on trial.
To be sure, the Saudi system is still worlds away from being a Westminster-style democracy; indeed, it will probably never become one.
All the same, this municipal election should be looked upon as a giant first step in the arduous journey toward Saudi democracy.
Despite many misgivings regarding its conduct in other areas, the Saudi regime should be commended for this initiative.
Saudi Arabia’s Old Regime Grows Older
LONDON – The contrast between the deaths, within two days of each other, of Libya’s Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and Saudi Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdel Aziz is one of terminal buffoonery versus decadent gerontocracy.
And their demise is likely to lead to very different outcomes: liberation for the Libyans and stagnation for the Saudis.
But the death of Sultan, at 86, marks the beginning of a critical period of domestic and foreign uncertainty for the Kingdom.
After all, Sultan’s half-brother, King Abdullah, 87, is still hospitalized in Riyadh, following a major operation last month.
The regime is aging and ailing, and is perceived by the population as being on life support.
Meanwhile, the succession is still being argued.
Sultan’s death is the first time that the burial of a Saudi royal has been delayed to give the ruling family time to decide on the next in line – a sign of internal discord (and concord on the continuation of dynastic rule).
The Saudi regime’s stability now depends on its ability to maintain unity and establish clarity in its system of succession.
With the Crown Prince’s death, schisms are particularly threatening to the Kingdom’s stability (and that of oil exports), because the ruling Al Saud have swelled to 22,000 members, which has given rise to factional clashes among increasingly numerous claimants to power.
Sultan had already been dead – politically, that is – for the last three years; indeed, since June 2011, when he left for New York for medical treatment, young Saudis speculated on numerous Web sites that this was also literally the case.
Abdullah’s octogenarian line of successors recalls the final years of the Soviet Union, when one infirm leader after another succeeded to power for a brief period of inert rule.
Many Saudi subjects feel the same pattern of continuous uncertainty and torpor.
Making matters worse, the rule of succession is ambiguous.
After Abdullah succeeded his brother Fahd, who ruled for 23 years until his death in 2005, he created an Allegiance Council, an ambiguous and mysterious family body that resembled the Vatican’s College of Cardinals.
But here, restrictions are not based entirely on age, but on family bloodlines.
The Council included the surviving royal princes of the 43 sons of Ibn Saud, the Kingdom’s founder, and the sons of their deceased brothers – for example, the late King Faisal’s brood.
But, as Sultan’s health deteriorated, Abdullah bypassed his own creation and appointed Prince Naif, the interior minister, as a second deputy.
In other words, Naif will be anointed Crown Prince.
But, befitting this increasingly exsanguinous imperium, Naif, 82, is known to suffer from leukemia.
Sultan’s fortune is estimated at $270 billion, which he distributed between his sons prior to his death in order to shore up their political position in the competitive princely arena.
The reality is that every senior prince has placed his favorite sons in important positions in the Kingdom.
Sultan secured the defense ministry for his son Khaled, and brought back Khaled’s notorious brother, Bandar to head the Intelligence Security Council.
Abdullah guaranteed his son Mitaeb’s position as head of the National Guard.
The new Crown Prince-in-waiting, Naif, has established his son Mohammed as the next interior minister.
In short, despite Abdullah’s innovations in the succession process, it is an open secret that nothing guarantees a transition to a younger generation of leaders – or that an effective ruler will emerge.
The story of the Al Saud’s succession struggle is no longer whispered behind closed doors.
The Internet has opened a window on all of the royal family’s plots, ambitions, and double-dealings.
The Al Saud resembles a family business, established in 1932.
Ibn Saud managed to conquer and unite the vast territory of the Arabian Peninsula, give it his family name, and alienate, divide, and control his cousins and brothers in order to establish a clear and undisputed line of succession through his sons.
After Ibn Saud’s death, his sons, though never entirely united, maintained enough coherence to keep the store running.
That is no longer true of the thousands of princes that they produced.
As the older generation dies off, the new generation has fallen to fighting in front of the customers.
Indeed, with the ratio of royals to commoners now at one to a thousand (compared to one to five million in the United Kingdom), the challenge of managing princely privileges, salaries, and demand for jobs has never been more intense.
Royal perks include lifetime sinecures and domination of the civil service, which enable the princes to award contracts and receive commissions on top of their salaries.
So the Saudi regime is divided, its legitimacy is questioned, and sectarian tensions are growing.
Moreover, while oil-export revenue is booming, the neighborhood is in revolutionary flames.
In the short term, the iron-fisted Naif, as Crown Prince, will push the Kingdom into greater repression, in part by strengthening the hardline Wahhabi clerics’ place in the country’s power nexus.
Magnificent sums of money, backed by Wahhabi dogma, will be deployed to ensure popular submission and silence.
Whereas Abdullah at least talked about reform (though with no real consequences), Naif can barely bring himself to utter the word.
Denial remains the Saudi rulers’ dominant mindset.
The royals believe that custodianship of Islam’s holy places gives them a special status in the Arab world, and that no revolution can touch them.
And, if anyone tries, they will follow Naif’s counsel: “What we took by the sword we will hold by the sword.”
Throughout the region, newly mobilized (and thus empowered) Arab youth are trying to move their countries towards reform and liberalization.
Saudi Arabia, unfortunately, is moving in the opposite direction.
Visi Tegas Arab Saudi untuk Diversifikasi Ekonomi
LOS ANGELES – Arab Saudi menarik perhatian dunia ketika mengumumkan sebuah agenda ambisius, disebut Visi 2030, yang bertujuan untuk merombak struktur perekonomian negaranya.
Rencana tersebut diusung untuk mengurangi ketergantungan terhadap minyak sejak dahulu melalui transformasi cara-cara penerimaan negara, serta metode pengelolaan dan pengeluaran sumber dayanya yang melimpah.
Visi ini ditunjang oleh rencana aksi yang mendetail, implementasi awal yang sudah melibatkan perubahan-perubahan kelembagaan yang menarik sorotan media sebagai fenomena yang berlangsung di negara yang dikenal akan kehati-hatian dan gradualisme.
Ketika katalis yang mendorong restrukturisasi ekonomi adalah dampak  merosotnya harga minyak dunia secara tajam, alasan reformasi ini sudah muncul sejak lama.
Sadar akan penjualan dari minyak yang menghasilkan sebagian besar pendapatan bagi negara dan sektor publik yang menjadi pemberi kerja utama, sudah lama Arab Saudi khawatir bahwa rendahnya keragaman (diversity) ekonomi dapat mengancam keamanan finansial negaranya dalam jangka panjang.
Penurunan harga minyak lebih dari setengahnya selama 18 bulan terakhir juga disertai dengan perubahan besar pada cara kerja pasar minyak.
Melalui kemajuan sumber-sumber energi non-tradisional – terutama “revolusi shale” yang hampir melipatgandakan produksi di AS hingga 10 juta barel per hari, hanya dalam empat tahun – berkurang pengaruh kartel minyak OPEC yang dipimpin Arab Saudi terhadap harga minyak.
Selain itu, beberapa anggota OPEC, lagi-lagi dipimpin oleh Arab Saudi, kini semakin enggan untuk berusaha melunakkan fluktuasi harga minyak, dengan tepat mengakui bahwa “swing producer” berisiko merugi lebih lama dalam hal penguasaan pasar.
Itu sebabnya Visi 2020 sangat penting.
Berusaha merebut kembali kontrol atas takdir ekonomi dan keuangannya, Kerajaan Arab Saudi telah merancang rencana restrukturisasi perekonomian yang ambisius, dimotori oleh wakil putra mahkota yang baru, Mohammed bin Salman Al Saud.
Sederhanya, Visi 2030 berfokus pada tiga bidang utama, disertai dengan upaya-upaya melindungi kelompok penduduk yang paling rentan.
Pertama, rencana ini berusaha meningkatkan penerimaan negara non-minyak dengan menaikkan biaya dan tarif layanan publik, menambah basis pajak (termasuk melalui penerapan pajak pertambahan nilai), dan menambah pendapatan dari kenaikan jumlah pengunjung ke Arab Saudi.
Kedua, pihak berwenang akan mengurangi pengeluaran dengan menurunkan subsidi, melakukan rasionalisasi atas program investasi publik yang besar, dan mengeluarkan pembelanjaan senjata dari pembelanjaan luar negeri.
Ketiga, pemerintah akan mendiversifikasi kekayaan nasional dan, dalam prosesnya, meningkatkan pendapatan investasi langsung.
Misalnya, rencana ini akan menambah dana melalui penawaran umum perdana (IPO) atas sebagian kecil saham (hingga 5%) milik Saudi-Aramco, konglomerat raksasa sektor minyak, dan menginvestasikan hasilnya dalam berbagai jenis aset di seluruh dunia.
Visi ekonomi yang tegas ini tidak lepas dari risiko.
Transisi ekonomi pasti melekat dengan kerumitan, terutama sebuah transisi dengan skala dan ruang lingkup yang sedemikian besar.
Keberhasilan-keberhasilan di awal diperlukan untuk menguatkan buy-in dari para konstituen terbesar, terutama mereka yang sejak awal menolak perubahan (terutama perubahan yang menghapuskan beberapa keistimewaan keuangan yang tradisional melalui perubahan dari masa sekarang yang familiar, walaupun kurang aman, menuju masa depan yang tidak biasa.
Rencana aksi yang melandasi implementasi Visi 2030 sudah pasti melibatkan pembaruan di sejumlah bidang secara bersamaan dan berdasarkan metode yang dikoordinasikan dan diawasi dengan hati-hati.
Sebagai negara yang memerlukan penyegaran pada sumber daya administratif dan operasi, kebutuhan ini timbul tidak hanya ketika Kerajaan Arab Saudi tengah menghadapi persoalan akibat berkurangnya pendapatan dari minyak dan menurunnya jumlah cadangan, tapi juga semakin memperbesar peranan di regional, terutama di Suriah dan Yaman.
Meskipun demikian, cukup menggembirakan betapa pengumuman Visi 2030 telah diikuti dengan penerapan sejumlah langkah awal dan signifikan.
Kemampuan mempertahankan momentum dengan menjaga komunikasi secara konsistem dengan pemangku kepentingan dalam negeri yang utama akan sangat vital bagi kesuksesan rencana ini.
Kelanjutan Arab Saudi dalam restrukturisasi ekonomi yang penting ini sedang diawasi secara ketat oleh lima negara anggota di Dewan Kerja Sama Negara-negara Teluk (Gulf Cooperation Council) dan negara lainnya.
Perhatian yang bermunculan dari Visi 2030 ini tidak mengejutkan.
Bagaimanapun juga rencana ini berkisar lebih dari reformasi ekonomi secara fundamental.
Jika Arab Saudi berhasil mentransformasi perekonomiannya, termasuk reformasi kelembagaan dan restrukturisasi insentif-insentif ekonomi, negara-negara lain yang menghadapi tantangan serupa, baik di kawasan yang sama atau di luarnya, akan terdorong untuk mencontohnya.
Jalur Reformasi di Arab Saudi
BEIRUT – Hampir dua tahun semenjak harga minyak mulai merosot tajam, produsen-produsen terbesar di dunia menghadapi prospek adanya penyesuaian besar-besaran yang akan menghasilkan konsekuensi ekonomi, sosial, dan politik yang besar.
Meskipun penyesuaian ini tentu akan sangat sulit dan menantang – terutama bagi negara-negara berpendapatan menengah seperti Arab Saudi yang jumlah penerimaan negara/dana abadi yang dimiliki jauh lebih sedikit dibandingkan Uni Emirat Arab – peristiwa ini dapat memberi peluang besar untuk merumuskan cara-cara yang lebih produktif untuk mengatur warganya.
Terkesan bahwa Arab Saudi sudah merangkul tantangan ini.
Pekan ini, pemerintah Arab Saudi mengumumkan rencana Visi 2030 untuk menjamin pertumbuhan jangka panjang yang berkelanjutan.
Rencana ini disambut baik tapi juga dikritisi karena ambisi besarnya, ditunjukkan dengan sasaran menjadikan Kerajaan Arab Saudi masuk sebagai peringkat 15 besar negara-negara berpendapatan tertinggi di dunia dalam 20 tahun ke depan – perekonomian yang ditandai dengan tenaga kerja terampil, pasar terbuka, dan tata kelola pemerintahan yang baik.
Salah satu metode andalan yang menjadi tumpuan Arab Saudi untuk mewujudkannya adalah diversifikasi portolio aset negara, menjual saham perusahaan minyak terbesar yaitu Aramco untuk memperoleh dana abadi atau sovereign-wealth fund.
Namun Visi 2030 gagal menjawab satu isu penting: rendahnya partisipasi tenaga kerja.
Hanya 41% dari populasi angkatan kerja yang saat ini bekerja, dibandingkan rata-rata negara OECD yang mencapai 60%.
Jumlah angkatan kerja yang sudah terserap saat ini bekerja di lembaga-lembaga publik yang umumnya kelebihan staf.
Ini adalah bentuk inefisiensi terbesar dalam perekonomian Arab Saudi dan pemecahannya akan lebih sulit dicapai dibandingkan penyelesaian masalah lain.
Solusinya bukan sekedar menambah jumlah pekerjaan tapi juga meningkatkan produktivitas.
Bagaimanapun juga, berbeda daro negara-negara anggota Dewan Kerja Sama Negara-negara Teluk (Gulf Cooperation Council) atau GCC lainnya dimana populasi penduduknya lebih sedikit, seperti UEA dan Qatar, Arab Saudi dengan populasi 20 juta jiwa (di luar WNA) tidak akan bisa bertahan dengan produktivitas buruh yang rendah.
Memang benar, pendapatan dari minyak saat ini hanya mencapai $5.500 per kapita – tidak bisa diandalkan sebagai opsi yang berkelanjutan.
Supaya berhasil, Arab Saudi harus mengubah struktur insentifnya agar warga negaranya, bukan pendatang, bisa mengisi lapangan pekerjaan baru di sektor swasta.
Saat ini, kesepakatan politik yang berlaku di Arab Saudi bergantung pada kedekatan keluarga kerajaan dengan pelaku bisnis, yang mempunyai kebebasan untuk mengimpor buruh dan menjamin pekerjaan di sektor publik bagi warga negaranya.
Kesepakatan ini bisa kita telusuri kembali ke tahun 1970-an, ketika proyek-proyek infrastruktur yang ambisius mengubah keluarga pedagang lokal menjadi kontraktor yang kemudian melobi penerbitan lebih banyak visa untuk menambah jumlah karyawan.
Seiring dengan berkembangnya firma-firma ini menjadi perusahaan-perusahaan komersial dan industri besar, buruh migran yang bergaji rendah adalah keharusan bagi terpenuhinya profit mereka.
Sekarang GCC adalah satu-satunya kawasan yang terbuka bagi tenaga kerja asing untuk memastikan perusahaan-perusahaan yang beroperasi di dalamnya memiliki rasio upah-keterampilan yang terendah di dunia.
Sebagai akibatnya, ketergantungan Arab Saudi terhadap orang asing tidak ada tandingannya di dalam sejarah ekonomi modern.
Pada tahun 2015, terdapat sekitar sembilan juta pekerja migran di Arab Saudi, setara dengan 60% tenaga kerja.
Sektor swasta seperti dialokasikan khusus bagi ekspatriat yang mengisi setidaknya 83% pekerjaan.
Memang di beberapa negara tidak semua warga negaranya menerima persaingan terbuka dengan buruh asing.
Tapi penduduk Saudi menerima kebijakan ini sebab mereka dipekerjakan oleh negara dengan gaji di atas rata-rata pasar.
Sekitar 3.4 juta penduduk Saudi saat ini bekerja di administrasi publik dan badan keamanan dan memperoleh gaji 2-4 kali lebih besar dibandingkan sektor swasta.
Jika selisih gaji antara pekerja migran dan pegawai publik tidak berkurang secara signifikan, warga negara Arab Saudi tidak akan bisa dipekerjakan di sektor swasta.
Namun setiap kali pemerintah Arab Saudi berusaha mengurangi rekrutmen pegawai di sektor publik, angka pengangguran selalu melonjak.
Berdasarkan sistem insentif yang berlaku sekarang, rencana pemerintah untuk memprivatisasi perusahaan dan menaikkan produktivitas aparatur negara akan justru menghilangkan lapangan kerja yang dipenuhi penduduk Saudi.
Tantangan dalam penciptaan lapangan kerja bagi penduduk Saudi mungkin terkesan seperti masalah orang-orang kaya.
Beberapa orang berpendapat bahwa Kerajaan Arab Saudi hanya perlu mengganti pekerja asing yang saat ini mengisi posisi tersebut dengan penduduk Saudi.
Namun pergantian saja tidak akan berhasil.
Pekerjaan saat ini mungkin terlampau tinggi kualifikasi keterampilannya atau justru sangat rendah.
Perubahan struktural diperlukan untuk memutakhirkan pekerjaan-pekerjaan yang manual.
Ketergantungan yang semakin tinggi pada modal dan teknologi juga akan menghapuskan banyak posisi di level bawah.
Di saat yang sama, banyak pekerjaan yang memerlukan keterampilan tinggi, sebagai akibat dari besarnya subsidi energi dan modal, yang perlu disederhanakan untuk menciptakan lebih banyak posisi dengan keterampilan menengah.
Perusahaan tidak bisa hanya membayarkan gaji yang sesuai untuk menarik kemauan warga negara Arab Saudi ditempatkan di posisi-posisi ini, tapi juga harus mendidik dan melatih mereka agar produktivitasnya meningkat.
Semua kondisi ini berdasarkan asumsi bahwa pasar tenaga kerja akan menjadi lebih ketat.
Dengan demikian solusi yang produktif memerlukan penurunan jumlah pekerja asing secara drastis agar gaji karyawan swasta akan naik ke tingkatan yang setara dengan gaji penduduk Saudi.
Atau alternatif lainnya adalah perlahan-lahan menjadi welfare state yang miskin.
Kerajaan Arab Saudi telah memasuki program “Saudisasi” yang mewajibkan perusahaan di sejumlah sektor untuk mempekerjakan warga asli.
Sejauh ini sektor swasta umumnya menolak kebijakan-kebijakan tersebut.
Pengelolaan pasar tenaga kerja berdasarkan paksaan dinilai sulit.
Perlu dirumuskan metode-metode yang lebih efektif untuk mengalokasi sebaran pekerjaan migran, namun ini memerlukan kemampuan pengaturan dan kemauan politik.
Bahkan sekarang angka pengangguran resmi adalah 11,6% – 32,8% bagi perempuan dan 29,4% bagi pemuda – sementara angka ini bisa melonjak jika kita juga memasukkan jumlah pekerja putus asa.
Lebih dari 200.000 orang pemuda memasuki pasar tenaga kerja setiap tahun.
Dan seiring dengan peningkatan pendidikan – hampir dua pertiga pemuda Saudi mengejar studi di universitas – tekanan sosial pun dipastikan akan bertambah.
Keterbatasan utama dalam penciptaan lapangan kerja di Arab Saudi sebetulnya terletak pada kondisi ekonomi politik yang unik.
Dengan berkurangnya sumber daya minyak, kontrak sosial domestik akan diuji.
Pencabutan dukungan bagi pengusaha atau penduduk akan semakin melemahkannya.
Lalu bagaimana Kerajaan Arab Saudi yang berkuasa akan menyesuaikan diri terhadap perubahan, hal ini masih berupa tanda tanya.
Pemberian dukungan bagi pengusaha memerlukan adanya paksaan lebih besar; dukungan bagi penduduk akan mengakibatkan munculnya seruan untuk demokratisasi.
Pada akhirnya, pilihan apapun yang diambil, baik yang jelas atau tersirat, akan sangat berpengaruh pada keberhasilan Visi 2030 dan agenda reformasi lainnya.
Saudi Arabia vs. the Arab Spring
PRINCETON – Saudi Arabia is widely perceived as leading the counter-revolution against the Arab Spring uprisings.
In reality, the Kingdom’s response is centered, as its foreign and domestic policy has long been, on “stability.”
The Saudis don’t want anti-Saudi forces, including such enemies as Iran and Al Qaeda, to increase their influence in the Middle East.
Some of the older Saudi leaders have seen this movie before.
The nationalist revolutions of the 1950’s and 1960’s, inspired and galvanized by Gamel Nasser’s Egypt, nearly toppled the House of Saud.
Nonetheless, today’s Saudi princes appear to recognize that something has genuinely changed in the Middle East: The younger generation of Arabs is no longer prepared to accept unaccountable, corrupt, and brutal governments.
Saudi Arabia, a self-proclaimed bulwark of Islamic conservatism, where popular democracy has never been considered a legitimate form of rule, has been more aggressive in some arenas than in others.
Domestically, the royal family struck quickly, adopting a ban on public demonstrations and acts of civil disobedience.
The Kingdom’s traditional interpretation of Islam construes political legitimacy in terms of a ruler’s proper application of Islamic law. In return, his subjects owe him obedience within the constraints of Sharia religious law.
Dissent, should it arise, must always take the form of well-intentioned advice given to the ruler in a private setting.
Public demonstrations of dissent are regarded as contrary to Islam, because they foster divisiveness and lead to civil strife.
The highest council of Saudi religious scholars recently declared demonstrations to be categorically un-Islamic.
Confronted with the possibility of mass demonstrations on March 11 – the so-called Day of Rage on a Facebook page – the Saudi rulers enforced that ruling by deploying massive numbers of security forces in the streets.
They also played the Shia card, an effective trump in Sunni-majority Saudi Arabia.
The rulers argued that public protests throughout the region were being orchestrated by Shia Iran, and were anti-Sunni and sectarian.
The threat of chaos, evident now in Libya, Syria, and Yemen, also weighed in the royal family’s favor.
The House of Saud has a long historical claim on rule in Arabia, and its promise of stability remains key to its durability.
A massive government subsidy package also accounted for domestic calm.
Abruptly, some $130 billion was added to spending projections over the next five years.
Salaries for all public servants, a majority of the national work force, were raised, as was the total number of public-sector jobs.
King Abdullah pledged large numbers of new housing units, an important gesture in a country where young people, especially young married couples, cannot easily access the housing market.
In neighboring Bahrain, the Saudis also moved quickly to bolster the Sunni-minority regime against a rising tide of protest led by the island kingdom’s Shia majority.
Saudi troops marched into Bahrain under the banner of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), and the Saudi rulers issued clear instructions to adopt an iron-fisted policy with the demonstrators, again arguing that Iran’s nefarious hand was at play in subverting the country.
No doubt, the Saudis believe that a Shia-led Bahrain would lead to Iranian dominance at their very doorstep.
Here, too, the Kingdom employed its policy of largesse through the GCC, promising Bahrain $10 billion over the next decade.
Other large-scale financial commitments were made to Oman and Jordan, both Saudi allies that have managed to silence early whispers of mass protest.
Farther away, in Libya and Syria, the Saudis have said little, perhaps to avoid picking the losing side in uncertain circumstances.
The Kingdom has no love for Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi, who tried to assassinate King Abdullah and has waged a concerted anti-Saudi propaganda campaign for at least a decade.
The Saudis would surely like to see Qaddafi deposed, but they have no real stake in the Libyan uprising’s outcome.
Closer to home, the Kingdom despises Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for his alliance with Iran and duplicity in Lebanon.
But his fall would present the Saudis with the risk of a country led by the Muslim Brotherhood.
Even worse is the prospect of Syria falling into chaos, dragging Lebanon – and maybe the broader region – with it.
The Assad regime’s use of excessive force, especially the deliberate killing of thousands of mainly Sunni civilians, has nonetheless recently spurred a tougher stance.
King Abdullah has called the killings unacceptable, and has withdrawn his ambassador from Damascus.
The actual policy implications, however, remain to be determined.
Neighboring Yemen is a much more immediate threat.
The opposition is hopelessly divided, and the tribal and military leadership is utterly compromised.
Ominously, the south is being taken over by hardcore Islamists, some allied with Al Qaeda.
Throwing money around won’t work in Yemen, which is too large and complex to be pacified.
In fact, the country is on the verge of total collapse.
Today, the Saudis see 24 million Yemenis – hungry, heavily armed, and envious of Saudi wealth – looking across the border.
If civil war erupts, the Saudis will not be able to stop the waves of refugees.
But the Kingdom remains paralyzed, still wavering on whether to allow President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who is convalescing in Riyadh from injuries sustained in a bomb attack, to return to Sana to resume his rule.
For all of their wealth and planning, the Saudis remain vulnerable to the turmoil surrounding them.
At home, the legacy of Saudi family rule, fear of chaos, increased public spending, and abundant security forces have produced calm.
But a modest political opening and economic diversification away from state-owned industry have been sacrificed.
In Bahrain, things are quiet now as well, but the chances of further radicalization of the country’s Shia majority have increased, possibly benefiting Iran in the long run.
Great change is coming to the Middle East.
It is far from clear that a Saudi policy of stability at all costs will strengthen the regime.
Arab Saudi dan Shock Therapy yang Dialami
BEIRUT – Sejak dahulu Arab Saudi bergantung pada minyak untuk menggerakkan roda pertumbuhan ekonomi dan pembangunan.
Tahun lalu, pendapatan dari minyak menyumbangkan tiga-perempat total pemasukan dari ekspor dan sekitar 90% pendapatan negara.
Akan tetapi merosotnya harga minyak baru-baru ini menunjukkan pertanda jelas: Arab Saudi, seperti negara-negara lain di Timur Tengah yang kaya atas minyak bumi dan gas alam, perlu memperkenalkan suatu model pembangunan yang lebih beragam.
Sejak harga minyak jatuh pada pertengahan tahun 2014, laju pertumbuhan PDB di Arab Saudi mengalami penurunan tajam, sama halnya dengan pertumbuhan kredit dan tingkat likuiditas.
Surplus anggaran dan surplus transaksi berjalan berubah menjadi defisit.
Tahun ini, defisit diperkirakan mencapai 13% defisit anggaran dan 6.4% defisit transaksi berjalan dari PDB.
Selain itu, meski berjaya di tahun-tahun sebelumnya, pendapatan asli negara Kerajaan Saudi telah surut.
Sebagaimana dialami negara-negara lain di Timur Tengah, pendapatan dari minyak tidak dialihkan secara tepat menjadi human capital, infrastruktur, dan kapasitas berinovasi yang merupakan prasyarat terciptanya pertumbuhan produktivitas dan diversifikasi ekonomi.
Jadi, di samping mengupayakan penyesuaian terhadap “new normal” yang berlaku terhadap harga minyak, Arab Saudi harus merancang suatu model perekonomian yang mendobrak dan mengatasi hambatan-hambatan struktural yang mengekang produktivitas dan pertumbuhan.
Sebuah target yang sukar sekali dipenuhi, sehingga pemerintah pada umumnya memilih untuk menyelesaikan secara bertahap.
Namun putra mahkota, Pangeran Muhammad bin Salman, meluncurkan Program Transformasi Nasional (National Transformation Program atau NTP) pada bulan Juni lalu, menganjurkan agar Arab Saudi mengambil langkah berbeda dan memperkenalkan shock therapy pada perekonomian.
Sebuah dokumen setebal 110 halaman yang memuat kebijakan dan target yang harus dipenuhi kementerian dan instansi pemerintahan selama periode 2016-2020, NTP mengandung 543 reformasi khusus senilai SAR 270 miliar ($72 miliar), di luar biaya penyesuaian bagi sektor swasta.
Bahkan, inti dari reformasi yang diusulkan adalah penambahan peran sektor swasta dalam perekonomian yang cenderung didominasi negara, agar menghasilkan jumlah lapangan kerja lebih besar dalam bidang-bidang produktivitas lebih tinggi.
Pembiayaan seluruh reformasi tersebut – belum lagi suntikan dana public investment fund sebanyak 2 triliun dolar AS untuk menyokong perekonomian pasca minyak – membutuhkan peningkatan efisiensi, privatisasi dengan cepat, kemitraan publik-swasta yang efektif, pemungutan pajak yang menganut prinsip broad-based (termasuk pajak pertambahan nilai sebesar 5% yang diterapkan tahun 2018 nanti) serta pemotongan belanja atas sejumlah proyek infrastruktur.
Semuanya harus dijalankan secara efisien, apabila pemerintah ingin mencapai sasaran pokok lainnya: anggaran berimbang pada tahun 2020.
Target-target kebijakan khusus juga sangat ambisius.
Pertama, pemimpin Saudi akan melakukan privatisasi sebagian terhadap perusahaan minyak nasional Saudi Arabian Oil Company (Aramco) dan membentuk perusahaan dana investasi.
Selain itu, subsidi energi akan dikurangi secara bertahap agar terjadi peralihan menuju penggunaan energi yang intensif.
Rencana tersebut memuat target-target spesifik yang menargetkan kenaikan kontribusi dari bisnis properti, teknologi informasi, sektor jasa, pariwisata, serta industri pertahanan dan farmasi terhadap PDB.
Apabila NTP diniatkan untuk menghasilkan diversifikasi ekonomi lebih luas, Arab Saudi harus menggabungkan pertumbuhan berorientasi nilai tambah dan bersendi ekspor, pada akhirnya merengkuh integrasi regional dan internasional lebih besar.
Program tersebut menguraikan aspek-aspek fundamental beserta rencana reformasi pendidikan untuk merangsang inovasi dan memenuhi kebutuhan pasar tenaga kerja yang berubah.
Secara khusus, NTP mencakup uraian mencapai kenaikan tingkat penguasaan matematika dan bahasa Inggris setinggi 15% dalam kurun waktu lima tahun, selain target penambahan fokus pada pembelajaran subjek “STEM” (sains, teknologi, engineering, dan matematika).
NTP juga bertujuan meningkatkan partisipasi perempuan di pasar tenaga kerja, dari 22% sekarang menuju 28% pada akhir tahun 2030.
Sasaran tersebut, dilengkapi dengan dukungan dan peluang tambahan bagi kaum muda yang jumlahnya tumbuh dengan cepat, diharapkan mengurangi tingkat pengangguran dari 11.6% menjadi 9% dalam periode lima tahun.
Setiap tindakan, mulai dari pengurangan subsidi sampai dengan usulan pemotongan gaji di sektor publik, reformasi yang diusung NTP mencerminkan kontrak sosial baru di Kerajaan Saudi.
Rencana tersebut ibarat “long march”, mengharuskan kerja sama publik-swasta yang efektif, buy-in dari masyarakat, dan strategi komunikasi yang jelas untuk menerapkan restrukturisasi perekonomian menyeluruh yang ditunjang dengan reformasi kebijakan fiskal dan kebijakan makro lainnya.
Ada sejumlah preseden atas strategi ini: negara-negara penghasil minyak seperti Norwegia, Malaysia, Indonesia, dan Meksiko telah menjalankan diversifikasi ekonomi.
Tetapi konteks eksternal ketika negara-negara tersebut melakukan reformasinya – ditandai dengan lonjakan globalisasi dan pertumbuhan cepat – jauh berbeda dengan konteks sekarang.
Bahkan, transformasi tersebut memakan waktu 20 tahun.
Sebaliknya, implementasi NTP justru berlomba-lomba dengan waktu dan dihantui oleh faktor eksternal seperti harga minyak yang merosot, ekonomi global yang melemah, dan gerakan menolak globalisasi.
Selain itu, pertumbuhan jangka pendek dalam negeri akan meredup akibat ketidakpastian kebijakan, konsolidasi fiskal, efek instan dari reformasi, dan kebutuhan mendesak untuk memutarbalikkan karakter kebijakan moneter dan fiskal, yakni peralihan dari pro-cyclical menuju counter-cyclical.
Belum diketahui apakah Arab Saudi sanggup mengatasi tantangan-tantangan tersebut.
Keberhasilan bergantung pada beberapa faktor, contohnya kapasitas penyerapan di perekonomian negara dan kompetensi kelembagaan pemerintah.
Tidak hanya itu, sukses bergantung pada kemampuan negara untuk membangkitkan energi dan ambisi pemuda-pemudi Saudi yang menantikan reformasi dengan penuh semangat, dan menyingkap “animal spirits” para investor swasta.
Supaya berhasil, Arab Saudi perlu mengambil langkah-langkah tambahan.
Saudi harus melakukan liberalisasi terhadap rezim investasi langsung luar negeri (foreign direct investment), mengizinkan kepemilikan asing 100% dalam kasus-kasus tertentu, menarik dan mempertahankan tenaga kerja asing melalui usulan kebijakan imigrasi “green card”, dan merangsang keterbukaan dan pariwisata melalui kebijakan “open skies”.
Selain itu, pasar modal dalam negeri sangat diperlukan dalam pembiayaan infrastruktur dan defisit pada pemerintah.
Saudi perlu merangkul kekuatan inovatif yang berasal dari teknologi finansial dan membentuk bursa efek atau pasar modal lapis kedua, untuk mengembangkan inklusi keuangan dan memudahkan akses pada pembiayaan untuk usaha kecil dan menengah.
Di luar semua reformasi makro yang sukar, NTP juga menuntut peralihan bertahap menuju sistem hukum civil law untuk mengelola perekonomian dan bisnis.
Kontrak sosial baru juga perlu didampingi oleh peningkatan transparansi dan akuntabilitas sektor publik dan keterlibatan publik.
NTP adalah manifestasi kesadaran pemimpin Arab Saudi atas kendala-kendala yang dihadapi dan kemauan untuk memecahkannya.
Satu-satunya hal yang pasti disini adalah jalan menuju transformasi ekonomi Arab Saudi masih panjang dan sebelum memetik hasilnya, negara harus siap melewati sejumlah kerikil.
Savable Africa
The G-8 Summit in Scotland in early July will bring together the political leaders of the richest countries to consider the plight of the poorest countries.
So far, President George W. Bush has resisted Prime Minister Tony Blair’s call for a doubling of aid to Africa by 2010.
This is a tragic mistake, one that results from a misunderstanding of the challenges facing Africa and of America’s responsibilities.
American policy is based overwhelmingly on the idea that Africa can lift itself out of extreme poverty through its own efforts, that aid is largely misused because of corruption, and that the United States already gives generous amounts.
This is wrong on all counts: Africa is trapped in poverty, many countries are well poised to use aid effectively, and America’s contribution is tiny relative to Africa’s needs, America’s promises, and America’s wealth.
Africa suffers simultaneously from three challenges that trap it in poverty. First, Africa does not grow enough food.
Unlike Asia, Africa did not have a Green Revolution in food production.
In 1965, India averaged 854 kilograms of grain per hectare in use, while Sub-Saharan Africa averaged almost the same, 773 kilograms per hectare.
But, by 2000, India was producing 2,293 kilograms per hectare, while Africa was producing only 1,118.
Second, Africa suffers from disease unlike any other part of the world.
Africa’s AIDS pandemic is well known; its malaria pandemic, which will claim three million lives and a billion illnesses this year, is not.
India controlled malaria after the 1960’s, while Africa did not, one reason being that Africa’s malaria-bearing mosquitoes are particularly adept at transmitting the disease.
Third, Africa is economically isolated, owing to very poor infrastructure, large over-land distances, and many landlocked countries.
These geographical barriers keep much of Africa, especially rural Africa, out of the mainstream of international trade.
Without the benefits of trade, much of rural Africa struggles at subsistence levels.
Bush might think that America is doing a lot to help overcome these problems, but the truth is that US aid is minimal.
Blair’s Africa Commission, as well as the UN Millennium Project, found that Africa needs about $50 billion per year in aid by 2010.
America’s fair share of the total is about $15 billion per year.
Yet official US aid to Africa is only $3 billion per year, and much of that covers salaries for American consultants rather than investments in Africa’s needs.
This tragically small sum amounts to just three cents for every $100 of US gross national product, which is less than two days of US military spending.
Not only is US aid a tiny fraction of what it should be, but American explanations for the lack of aid are wrong.
Bush and others imply that Africa wastes the aid through corruption.
But impoverished and slow-growing African countries like Ghana, Senegal, Mali, Benin, and Malawi are ranked as having less corruption than fast-growing Asian countries like Vietnam, Bangladesh, and Indonesia.
Indeed, America’s own Millennium Challenge Account has already recognized such African countries for their strong governance.
Good governance surely will help in Africa and elsewhere, but corruption should not be used as an excuse not to help Africa.
On hunger, the key is to help Africa achieve its own Green Revolution.
Rich countries should help African farmers use improved seed varieties, more fertilizer, and better water management, such as small-scale irrigation.
The techniques are known, but Africa’s farmers are too poor to get started.
With increased help to African farmers to grow more food (as opposed to shipping food aid from the US), it would be possible to double or even triple crop yields.
On disease, malaria could be controlled by 2008 using proven, low-cost methods.
But, again, Africa cannot afford them.
The first goal should be to distribute long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets to all of Africa’s rural poor within four years.
The best estimates show that Africa needs about 300 million bed nets, and that the cost per net (including shipping) is around $10, for a sum of $3 billion.
This cost would be spread over several years.
In addition, Africa needs help with anti-malaria medicines, diagnostic equipment, and training of community health workers.
On economic isolation, Africa needs help with the basics – roads and ports – but there is also an opportunity to “leapfrog” technology.
Cell phones and Internet connectivity could reach all of Africa at low cost, ending the economic isolation of hundreds of millions of people.
Some reasonable estimates put the cost at around $1 billion for an Africa-wide fiber-optic network that could bring Internet connectivity and telephone service across the continent’s villages and cities.
Africa is ready to break out of poverty if the US and other rich countries help.
Europe appears poised to do more, while the US appears to be the main obstacle.
The G-8 Summit provides an opportunity for the US, which will spend $500 billion on its military this year, to make a lasting – and certainly more cost-effective – contribution to global security by saving millions of lives in Africa and helping its people escape extreme poverty.
Saved by Taxes
What do we owe to our great-great-great-grandchildren?
What actions are we obligated to take now in order to diminish the risks to our descendants and our planet from the increasing likelihood of global warming and climate change?
Almost everyone – except the likes of ExxonMobil, US Vice President Dick Cheney, and their paid servants and deluded acolytes – understands that when humans burn hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide goes into the atmosphere, where it acts like a giant blanket, absorbing infrared radiation coming up from below and warming the earth.
Likewise, almost everyone understands that while global warming might be a much smaller or larger problem than existing models suggest, this uncertainty is no excuse for inaction.
In fact, uncertainty about global climate change should lead us to do more to guard against it than if we knew it would proceed exactly according to the central-case projections.
Finally, almost everyone agrees that governments, non-profit institutions, and energy companies should be spending far more to develop technologies that generate non-carbon-emitting power, that remove it from the atmosphere to forests or oceans, and that cool the earth by reflecting more of the sunlight that lands on it.
Clearly, the world’s rich countries should carry the burden of dealing with climate change over the next generations.
After all, they could take an easy, emissions-intensive path to industrialization and wealth.
Today, China, India, and other developing countries cannot, and it would be unfair to penalize them for that.
So now is the time to build, not disrupt or impede, the international institutions that will manage our response to global climate change in the years ahead.
But should we be doing anything else now and in the next decade?
Economists like to think of things in terms of prices.
And when economists see behavior that has destructive side effects, we like to tax it.
Taxation makes individuals feel in their wallets the destruction they are causing.
Imposing a tax on those who, say, drive low-mileage SUV’s is a way of harnessing humanity’s collective intelligence to decide when bad side effects are a reason to alter behavior.
But it has to be the right tax.
Assuming that annual per capita income grows at about 2% per year worldwide, a marginal expenditure of roughly $70 today to cut carbon emissions would be worth it if, accounting for damage from global warming and adjustment costs, the world of 2100 would be $500 richer in year-2006 purchasing power.
On the other hand, critics point out that the world today is poor: average annual GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is roughly $7,000.
We expect improved technology and its spread to make the world of 2100, at a 2% annual growth rate, much richer: $50,000 per capita of year-2006 purchasing power.
So the critics argue that we need the marginal $70 per capita today much more than the richer people of 2100 will need the $500 that they would gain from being spared the effects of global climate change.
But what the critics often don’t say is that the same logic applies to the world today.
Average annual per capita incomes in the US, Japan, and Western Europe are currently around $40,000, and less than $6,000 for the poorer half of the world’s population.
The same logic that says we need our $70 more than the people of 2100 need an extra $500 dictates that we should tax the world’s rich more, as long as each extra $500 in first-world taxes generates as little as an extra $70 in poor countries per capita incomes.
In short, if the world’s rich are stingy today toward our much richer descendants, and if we want to leave our environmental mess to them to deal with, we should be lavish toward the world’s poor.
Likewise, if we are stingy today toward the world’s poor, we should be lavish toward our descendents.
At least, that is what we should do, if our actions are based on some moral principle, rather than that of Leonid Brezhnev: what we have, we hold.
Selamatkan Tanah kita
BERLIN – Perserikatan Bangsa-Bangsa (PBB) telah mendeklarasikan 2015 sebagai Tahun Tanah Internasional dan tanggal 19-23 April menandai pelaksanaan Pekan Global untuk Tanah tahun 2015 ini.
Peringatan tersebut, meskipun tidak terlihat megah, tidak mendapatkan perhatian yang sepatutnya diterima.
Tanah tidak terganggu (intact soils) merupakan sumber daya yang sangat berharga dan tidak dapat digantikan, salah satu jenis tanah yang memiliki banyak sekali fungsi untuk mewujudkan tujuan-tujuan pembangunan utama dan lingkungan hidup bagi komunitas internasional.
Kini kebutuhan melindungi tanah tersebut bersifat mendesak.
Tanah yang sehat (healthy soils) sangat penting bagi nutrisi manusia dan upaya melawan kelaparan.
Manusia bergantung pada tanah tidak hanya untuk produksi pangan namun juga perolehan sumber air minum baru.
Tanah membantu pengaturan iklim Bumi, menyimpan lebih banyak karbon dibanding jumlah seluruh hutan dunia (hanya samudera saja yang merupakan carbon sink lebih besar), dan sangat diperlukan untuk menjaga keanekaragaman hayati: segenggam tanah subur mengandung lebih banyak mikroorganisme dibandingkan jumlah manusia di bumi.
Dua pertiga spesies makhluk hidup di bumi hidup di bawah permukaan tanah.
Namun erosi dan kontaminasi menjadikan tanah berada dalam kondisi stres yang buruk.
Secara global, 24 juta ton tanah subur hilang setiap tahunnya, sebagian diakibatkan oleh pertumbuhan perkotaan dan infrastruktur.
Di Jerman saja, proyek-proyek konstruksi menggunakan rata-rata lebih dari 75 hektar tanah per hari.
Praktik pertanian yang tidak layak juga patut dipersalahkan: misalnya penggunaan pupuk sintesis secara sewenang-wenang, akan merusak organisme yang hidup di tanah dan mengubah struktur tanah.
Diperlukan waktu seribu tahun untuk pembentukan topsoil yang subur; di berbagai tempat, hanya dibutuhkan hujan deras untuk menghilangkan semuanya.
Di saat yang sama, kebutuhan global akan pangan, pakan hewan dan biomass sebagai bahan bakar terus meningkat, sehingga turut menaikkan nilai tanah secara signifikan – hal ini merupakan fakta yang masih menjadi perhatian investor asing.
Menurut estimasi Bank Dunia, 10%-30% tanah siap garap di seluruh dunia – tanah yang sejogjanya dapat digunakan oleh jutaan petani kecil, peternak, dan masyarakat adat – terkena dampak investasi skala besar.
Perjuangan untuk menjamin hak-tanah atas tanah bagi individu dan masyarakat menjadi persoalan ketahanan hidup di banyak negara.
Akses terhadap tanah menjadi salah satu faktor penentu utama terjadinya kelaparan dan penyebarannya jauh lebih tidak merata dibandingkan distribusi pendapatan.
Sekitar 20% rumah tangga yang terkena dampak kelaparan adalah mereka yang tidak memiliki lahan, dan 50% rumah tangga dengan keterbatasan pangan adalah keluarga petani kecil.
Di Eropa, sejak lama kami sudah menghabiskan lahan pertanian domestik, sehingga kini kami “mengimpornya” secara besar-besaran dari negara-negara di belahan bumi bagian selatan.
Bahkan untuk memproduksi pakan ternak yang diperlukan untuk memenuhi konsumsi daging di Uni Eropa saja akan membutuhkan lahan pertanian di Brasil seluas wilayah Kerajaan Bersatu Britania Raya dan Irlandia Utara (UK).
Jika setiap orang mengkonsumsi daging dalam jumlah yang sama dengan rata-rata penduduk Uni Eropa, maka diperlukan 80% tanah siap garap di dunia untuk produksinya, dibandingkan persentase sekarang yang hanya 33%.
Agar lebih jelas: mengingat 100 kalori pakan ternak hanya akan menghasilkan maksimal 30 kalori daging, maka penggunaan tanah subur untuk tujuan ini merupakan pemborosan.
Kecenderungan ini akan diperparah sampai pada tingkat dimana “pertumbuhan hijau” ketika banyak pemerintah kini menjanjikan penggunaan biofuel sebagai pengganti bahan bakar fosil seperti minyak dan batubara.
Manfaat biofuel bagi iklim sangat sedikit bila dibandingkan dengan sistem tenaga surya atau angin, sebab biofuel hanya menghasilkan sepersepuluh energi per satu meter persegi.
Sebagai akibatnya, kebutuhan biofuel yang termuat dalam Kerangka Kerja Iklim dan Energi Uni Eropa tahun 2030 (2030 Framework for Climate and Energy) akan memerlukan tambahan 70 juta hektar tanah – luas wilayah yang lebih besar dari Perancis.
Perlindungan terhadap tanah tidak berarti mengurangi kemakmuran.
Justru sebaliknya, upaya-upaya perlindungan tanah secara berkelanjutan dapat menaikkan hasil pertanian – khususnya bagi petani kecil.
Diversifikasi panen, daur ulang, dan tanah penutup dapat berkontribusi pada tanah yang subur dan produktif yang mampu mengoptimalkan pengelolaan air.
Satu pendekatan yang disebut agro-ecology berdasarkan pada pengetahuan tradisional dan pengalaman petani kecil, menjadikan pendekatan ini mampu disesuaikan dengan kondisi lokal.
Suatu studi mengenai praktik pertanian agro-ecological yang dilakukan oleh Jules Pretty di tahun 2006 mempelajari 286 proyek pertanian berkelanjutan di 57 negara dan menyimpulkan bahwa rata-rata hasil panen meningkat sebesar 79%.
Meskipun keberhasilan metode ini belum terbukti, penggunaan pupuk sintetis telah bertambah lima kali lipat selama lebih dari 50 tahun terakhir dan sebagian besar negara-negara di Afrika mengeluarkan hampir 60% anggaran pertaniannya untuk subsidi pupuk tersebut.
Khususnya di lingkungan tropis, produk ini mengakibatkan kerusakan pada topsoil dan hilangnya keanekaragaman hayati (kelebihannya pun akan dibuang ke laut, sehingga merusak ekosistem laut).
Walaupun komponen utamanya, yaitu nitrogen, dapat diproduksi secara biologis dan berkelanjutan, tapi itu akan bertentangan dengan kepentingan sejumlah produsen dan distributor pupuk yang berkuasa.
Pembuat kebijakan harus menjawab pertanyaan berikut: Bagaimana cara agar penduduk miskin akan mampu menghasilkan pangan yang cukup supaya terhindar dari kelaparan dan kemiskinan melalui cara-cara yang tetap melindungi tanah, mengurangi perubahan iklim, dan menjaga keanekaragaman hayati?
Meskipun persoalan ini mendesak, pendekatan-pendekatan seperti produk agro-ecological di mana pun juga belum dikembangkan secara serius.
Perayaan atau kegiatan seperti Tahun Tanah Internasional dan Pekan Global untuk Tanah menawarkan peluang perubahan sejak awal dan secara menyeluruh.
Saving Europe By Reversing Brexit
LONDON – “Never let a crisis go to waste” has always been one of the European Union’s guiding principles.
But what about five simultaneous crises?
Today, the EU faces what Frans Timmermans, European Commission Vice President, describes as a “multi-crisis”: Brexit, refugee flows, fiscal austerity, geopolitical threats from East and South, and “illiberal democracy” in central Europe.
Rather than wasting its crises, the EU could be laid to waste by them.
If so, Brexit will be the detonator for that demolition.
By legitimizing the concept of an EU breakup, and thus turning a fantasy among political extremists into a realistic option of mainstream politics throughout Europe, Brexit threatens to trigger an irresistible disintegration process.
It will also transform economics, by paralyzing the European Central Bank in the next euro crisis: while the ECB can always defeat market speculation, it is powerless against breakup pressures from voters.
The EU therefore urgently needs to put the genie of disintegration back in its bottle.
That means persuading Britain to change its mind about Europe, which, according to conventional wisdom on both sides of the English Channel, is impossible.
But many “impossible” things are happening in politics nowadays.
The referendum majority on June 23 was much narrower than that in Scotland’s 2014 independence referendum, or the negative votes on EU treaties in Ireland, Denmark, and the Netherlands, all of which were subsequently reversed.
More important, the 52% who voted for Brexit were sharply divided in their aims, with some prepared to accept economic sacrifice for a “hard Brexit” (total separation from Europe), and others hoping for a “soft Brexit” that would minimize the impact on the UK economy.
According to post-referendum polling, three-quarters of “Leave” voters expect Britain’s economy either to strengthen or to be unaffected by Brexit, and 80% believe the government will have more money to spend on public services as a result of their vote.
Brexit voters are so optimistic because they were told (most prominently by current Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson) that Britain could “have our cake and eat it” – a new deal that would preserve all of the economic benefits of EU membership with none of the obligations or costs.
When these expectations are disappointed, public opinion will change.
Already, 66% of voters say maintaining market access is more important than restricting immigration, if Britain cannot have both.
This directly contradicts Prime Minister Theresa May’s stated priorities – and probably explains why she refuses to talk about her Brexit strategy.
Because public expectations of an economically innocuous soft Brexit will be impossible to reconcile with the rejection of all EU obligations demanded by the Conservative Party’s “hard Brexit” faction, May cannot win.
Whichever course she chooses, she will antagonize half her party and a large proportion of Brexit supporters, not to mention the 48% of voters who want to stay in the EU.
Once this backlash starts, plenty of ambitious Conservative politicians whom May purged from government will be eager to exploit it.
Already, George Osborne, immediately sacked as Chancellor of the Exchequer when May took office, has thrown down the gauntlet, challenging her democratic mandate: “Brexit won a majority.
Hard Brexit did not.”
Even the weakness of Britain’s opposition parties works against May, allowing opponents to plot against her, secure in the knowledge that they cannot lose power.
All this implies that British politics will become very fluid as economic conditions deteriorate and voters start to change their minds.
The EU should encourage such second thoughts, which means that it must stop treating Brexit as inevitable and instead offer the possibility of a compromise that would meet British voters’ concerns, but only on the condition that Britain remains in the EU.
The obvious way to accomplish this would be to conclude an EU-wide agreement on greater national control over immigration and other symbolic issues related to national sovereignty.
Such an agreement need not be seen as a concession to British blackmail if it were extended to all EU countries and presented as a response to public opinion throughout the Union.
By making a virtue of its response to democratic pressures, the EU could regain Europe-wide support.
But to send a positive message to voters, European leaders will have to rediscover the knack for pragmatic compromise and inter-governmental bargaining that used to be the hallmark of EU diplomacy.
For starters, defusing both Brexit and the refugee crisis will require some modest changes in immigration and welfare rules.
Such reforms, which would be popular in almost all member countries, need not conflict with the EU’s founding principles if they preserve the right to work throughout Europe, but return some control over non-economic migration and welfare payments to national governments.
Second, the interaction of the refugee and euro crises demands new fiscal rules.
Dealing with immigrants is expensive and should ideally be funded by mutually guaranteed EU bonds.
Alternatively, Mediterranean countries must be offered budgetary leeway, in exchange for assuming front-line responsibility for immigration controls.
Third, the need for immigration reform, combined with “illiberal democracy” in Central Europe, calls for changes in EU spending priorities and foreign policy.
Poland and other countries will accept restrictions on their citizens’ mobility only if offered additional structural funds and stronger security cooperation.
Such incentives, in turn, could provide more levers to ensure respect for human rights.
Finally, restoring the EU’s democratic legitimacy means ending the institutional tensions between the eurozone and the broader EU.
The EU authorities must acknowledge that many member countries will never join the euro, which means abandoning their rhetoric about a “two-speed Europe,” with all heading – whether at high or low speed – toward the “ever closer union” that a single currency implies.
Instead, the EU must reshape itself into two concentric circles: an inner core committed to deeper integration, and an outer ring whose voters have no interest in a single currency and a shared fiscal space.
Such reforms may seem impossible, but EU disintegration seemed impossible before the Brexit vote.
In revolutionary periods, the impossible can become inevitable in a matter of months.
This week, former French President Nicolas Sarkozy called unexpectedly for a new European treaty and a second British referendum on its EU membership.
In Europe, a revolutionary period has begun.
Save the Emerging Markets
CAMBRIDGE – If the world were fair, most emerging markets would be watching the financial crisis engulfing the world’s advanced economies from the sidelines – if not entirely unaffected, not overly concerned either.
For once, what has set financial markets ablaze are not their excesses, but those of Wall Street. 
Emerging markets’ external and fiscal positions have been stronger than ever, thanks to the hard lessons learned from their own crisis-prone history.
We might even have allowed these countries a certain measure of schadenfreude in the troubles of the United States and other rich countries, just as we might expect kids to take perverse delight from their parents’ getting into the kinds of trouble they so adamantly warn their children against.  
Instead, emerging markets are suffering financial convulsions of possibly historic proportions.
The fear is no longer that they will be unable to insulate themselves. It is that their economies could be dragged into much deeper crises than those that will be experienced at the epicenter of the sub-prime debacle. 
Some of these countries should have known better and might have protected themselves sooner.
There is little excuse for Iceland, which essentially turned itself into a highly leveraged hedge fund.
Several other countries in Central and Eastern Europe, such as Hungary, Ukraine, and the Baltic states, were also living dangerously, with large current-account deficits and firms and households running up huge debts in foreign currency.
Argentina, the international financial system’s enfant terrible , could always be relied on to produce a gimmick to spook investors – in this case a nationalization of its private pension funds. 
But financial markets have made little distinction between these countries and others like Mexico, Brazil, South Korea, or Indonesia, which until just a few weeks ago appeared to be models of financial health.
Consider what has happened to South Korea and Brazil.
Both economies have experienced currency crises within recent memory – South Korea in 1997-1998 and Brazil in 1999 – and both subsequently took steps to increase their financial resilience.
They reduced inflation, floated their currencies, ran external surpluses or small deficits, and, most importantly, accumulated mountains of foreign reserves (which now comfortably exceed their short-term external debts).
Brazil’s financial good behavior was rewarded as recently as April of this year when Standard &amp; Poor’s raised its credit rating to investment-grade. (South Korea has been investment-grade for years.)
But both are nonetheless getting hammered in financial markets.
In the last two months, their currencies have lost around a quarter of their value against the US dollar. Their stock markets have declined by even more (40% in Brazil and one-third in South Korea).
None of this can be explained by economic fundamentals.
Both countries have experienced strong growth recently.
Brazil is a commodity exporter, while South Korea is not.
South Korea is hugely dependent on exports to advanced countries, Brazil much less so. 
They and other emerging-market countries are victims of a rational flight to safety, exacerbated by an irrational panic.
The public guarantees that rich countries’ governments have extended to their financial sectors have exposed more clearly the critical line of demarcation between “safe” and “risky” assets, with emerging markets clearly in the latter category.
Economic fundamentals have fallen by the wayside. 
To make matters even worse, emerging markets are deprived of the one tool that the advanced countries have employed in order to stem their own financial panics: domestic fiscal resources or domestic liquidity. Emerging markets need foreign currency and, therefore, external support.
What needs to be done is clear.
The International Monetary Fund and the G7 countries’ central banks must act as global lenders of last resort and provide ample liquidity – quickly and with few strings attached – to support emerging markets’ currencies.
The scale of the lending that is required will likely run into hundreds of billions of US dollars, and exceed anything that the IMF has done to date.
But there is no shortage of resources.
If necessary, the IMF can issue special drawing rights (SDRs) to generate the global liquidity needed.
Moreover, China, which holds nearly $2 trillion in foreign reserves, must be part of this rescue mission.
The Chinese economy’s dynamism is highly dependent on exports, which would suffer greatly from a collapse of emerging markets.
In fact, China, with its need for high growth to pay for social peace, may be the country most at risk from a severe global downturn.
Naked self-interest should persuade the advanced countries as well.
So when the G-20 countries meet in Washington on November 15 for their crisis summit, this is the agenda item that should dominate their discussion.
There will be plenty of time to debate a new Bretton Woods and the construction of a global regulatory apparatus.
The priority for now is to save the emerging markets from the consequences of Wall Street’s financial follies.
SOS for China’s SOEs
BEIJING – China’s economic slowdown has been the subject of countless debates, discussions, articles, and analyses.
While the proposed remedies vary considerably, there seems to be a broad consensus that the illness is structural.
But while structural problems, from diminishing returns to capital to the rise in protectionism since the global economic crisis, are certainly acting as a drag on growth, another factor has gone largely unnoticed: the business cycle.
For decades, China’s economy sustained double-digit GDP growth, seemingly impervious to business cycles.
But it wasn’t immune: in fact, the six-year slowdown China experienced after the 1997 Asian financial crisis was a symptom of precisely such a cycle.
Today, China’s business cycle has led to the accumulation of non-performing loans (NPLs) in the corporate sector, just as it did at the turn of the century.
While the rate of NPLs is, according to official data, lower than 2%, many economists estimate that it is actually more like 3-5%.
If they are right, NPLs could amount to 6-7% of China’s GDP.
Most of this debt is held by state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which account for just one-third of industrial output, yet receive more than half of the credit dispensed by China’s banks.
Though the debt-equity ratio of the industrial sector as a whole has declined over the past 15 years, the SOEs’ has increased since the global financial crisis, to an average of 66%, 15 percentage points higher than that of other kinds of firms.
A looming recession undoubtedly spurred this debt accumulation, possibly aided by former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao’s massive 2009 stimulus package.
But it was lax financial discipline that enabled the debt buildup.
Banks feel safe lending to SOEs, no matter how indebted, because the government implicitly guarantees the debt.
As a result, the SOEs, not surprisingly, have developed a habit of debt-financed growth.
That may not have been a problem when China’s economy was growing, but it represents a serious economic risk today, which is why the government has set deleveraging as one of its major tasks for this year.
But execution has been slow, owing partly to China’s failure to enforce its bankruptcy law fully.
The fact that commercial banks are not allowed to hold shares in companies has also impeded deleveraging, as it prohibits the use of direct debt-equity swaps to reduce SOE debt.
This should change.
China has employed debt-equity swaps to reduce NPLs in the state-sector before.
In 1999, it established four asset-management companies (AMCs) to take on the weakest loans of the four largest state-owned banks, thereby improving those banks’ financial stability.
Given China’s high growth rates in 2003-2012, the AMCs made handsome profits from those shares.
Today, too, debt-equity swaps may be the only viable solution to the NPL problem.
But the government does not need to rely on government-owned entities to assume the debt.
Instead, it should allow private equity funds, which have accumulated large amounts of savings as they await good investment opportunities, to act as AMCs, bidding for the NPLs at a discount.