The manufacturing sector is particularly voracious, devouring over half of all raw materials, around 30% of the world’s energy, and 20% of its water.
In the process, it produces too much waste for our fragile ecosystems to absorb.
Now, public opinion is starting to turn against what is increasingly perceived as plunder on a global scale.
Policymakers may not be able to compel citizens to ration their consumption.
But governments can encourage manufacturers to change how they operate, so that they use fewer resources and eliminate unnecessary waste.
Technological innovation and recyclable inputs can make a huge difference to the way the world produces and consumes.
Like the dramatic changes once wrought by mass production, there is similar potential in the development and application of 3D printing, biotechnology, nanotechnology, and other resource-efficient technologies.
And management thinkers from the late C. K. Prahalad to Jaideep Prabhu have shown how industry can be reconfigured to produce high-quality products cheaply and cleanly.
Indeed, these technologies and management ideas amount to something of a new industrial revolution – though one that will be very different from the Industrial Revolution that made Great Britain the dominant world power in the nineteenth century and helped it build a global empire.
The current transformation will be more democratic, spreading through global supply chains and modern communications to all countries that are integrated into the global economy.
And it will be characterized by partnerships between government, the private sector, and civil society.
Our challenge, and our historic opportunity, is to recognize this potential and find ways for diverse groups to collaborate and realize it.
A Green Industry Conference held recently in Guangzhou, China – following similar events in Manila in 2009 and Tokyo in 2011 – provides a template for this kind of broad cooperation.
Delegates shared best practices, discussed ways to accelerate change in a range of sectors, and sought innovative solutions to old management problems.
No one need be left out of this revolution.
Even countries with abundant natural resources do not have to fear the shift to a greener world.
By adopting new economic models, their large but finite reserves will not be rendered useless; they will simply last longer.
At the same time, countries facing shortages will gain greatly from being able to reduce their own resource needs.
Businesses, too, have been quick to adopt new practices.
Many now routinely monitor and report on their environmental impact.
Some are even starting to organize around new industrial concepts such as the “circular economy,” which focuses on reducing waste through multiple rounds of recycling.
This revolution may have been borne out of necessity; but, with ingenuity and cooperation, it will prove to be profitable, over the long run, for countries, manufacturers, and consumers worldwide.
Local Science for Large Disasters
The earth produces a reliable stream of disasters.
Some, like AIDS, are chronic; others, like earthquakes or hurricane Katrina, are sudden displays of natural force.
In each case, it is expected that a well-financed relief effort will descend from a wealthier region.
But importing assistance may not only be less effective; it might actually cause more damage in the long run.
When a tsunami hits, the first impulse is to bring in First-World experts.
Rescue is the initial priority, followed by ensuring food, shelter, and medical aid.
It is just a matter of getting things done, and it must be done the most effective way, so the operations occur according to the institutional philosophies of donor countries.
But siphoning the habits of one culture into another during a rebuilding process can trigger societal changes that are almost as damaging as the disaster itself, as happened in a small fishing villages in the Philippines in the late 1970’s.
In 1978, Typhoon Rita wiped out the fleet of handmade wooden fishing boats in a group of sea-dependant Philippine communities.
Relief was fast and effective, consisting first of subsistence aid, followed by “restoration” of the fishing fleet.
The old boats, which rotted every few years, were replaced by modern fiberglass versions with small gasoline engines.
At the time, this was touted as a textbook case of doing things right.
The fishing economy rebounded and flourished – but only for about ten years. After that, the entire society collapsed.
Over thousands of years, the culture had come to depend on the central role of boat builders.
They were the anchor of society, acting in effect as priests, teachers, and judges.
Subsistence flowed according to their goodwill and was supported by conventions of sharing and trust.
After the relief effort, this complex human balance was replaced by a cash economy, and the power brokers became those who could dole out the rare, precious petrol.
An entire culture was effectively destroyed by efficient relief.
This scenario has been repeated over and over in diverse contexts.
The first impulse is to solve problems in the most established manner.
But, lacking sensitivity to local dynamics, the outcome is severely compromised.
The solution seems simple: create and subsidize small science centers in regions at risk of disaster. The primary objective of these centers would be “normal” science, with missions and profiles that feed from their local context.
At-risk regions would develop culturally appropriate ways to deal with the catastrophes most likely to affect them.
In addition, local talent would be nurtured in its home context.
This philosophy would benefit places like New Orleans as much as Phuket in Thailand.
Indeed, while it might seem as though there would be no problem of cultural transposition in the case of Hurricane Katrina, an examination of the tragedy reveals otherwise.
It has been overwhelmingly observed that the worst-hit people in New Orleans were poor African-Americans living in the city’s low-lying districts.
To be sure, many of these inner-city residents simply lacked the resources to evacuate easily.
But it is beginning to emerge that many also preferred to stay in a social environment that they trusted rather than fleeing to safer, but foreign, surroundings.
Critics also cite the diversion of infrastructure funds and Louisiana National Guard troops to Iraq as contributing causes to the emergency.
These factors clearly played a role, but, overall, if a body of scientifically inclined people from the inner city had been involved in flood control and evacuation planning, the consequences of hurricane Katrina would certainly have been managed more effectively.
By contrast, the inappropriateness of transplanting troops from Iraq into an emergency rescue operation is obvious.
The fight against AIDS – a battle that depends heavily on social modification – highlights in perhaps the clearest way the problems that always occur when local culture is ignored.
Societal mechanisms simply cannot be adjusted without a crisp, practiced understanding of a culture.
And this cannot be merely intuitive. It must be scientific, that is, based on the best methods and models.
For this reason, there should be two points of contact during a catastrophe.
Groups of critical thinkers – the “experts” – should be on hand to advise on how to avoid second-order disasters.
Even though many of them might not have studied the local culture, they can nonetheless provide guidance that has been informed by the world’s most expensive infrastructure.
At the same time, relief efforts should be managed by a local science center that is known and trusted by those in danger.
The implications of this approach extend far beyond disaster relief.
A robust scientific establishment is the root of any economy, and there will be no real development in the Third World without it.
An investment in local science is therefore a direct infusion into a community’s growth potential, one that eventually will reward investors with new breakthroughs.
After all, nothing is better for innovation than a scientist working outside conventional institutions, solving a problem that will save his or her family.
Locust Capitalism
Germany invented socialism.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels were Germans.
The Social Democratic movement that shaped the modern European welfare state also originated in Germany.
Although the country profited greatly from its reintegration into the world trading system after World War II, Germany never really came to terms with Anglo-Saxon capitalism and skepticism about it still runs deep.
Now, with Germany’s economy no longer functioning smoothly, capital moving abroad, and unemployment rising, criticism of capitalism is again gaining momentum.
The public is upset about top managers’ salaries and the fact that big German companies fire workers despite record profits.
In response, the government has urged managers to publish their incomes and abolished the bank secrecy laws that were once considered sacrosanct.
This new critique of capitalism recently culminated in a series of attacks by the leader of the Social Democratic Party, Franz Müntefering.
He accused entrepreneurs who outsource production to low-wage countries of showing excessive greed and lack of social responsibility, and he compared the managers of international equity funds to a plague of locusts that occupy companies, exploit them, and move on after their destructive work is done.
These attacks brought Müntefering vast public support and triggered a major debate.
Germany’s media largely supports the critique.
Günter Grass, a Nobel Prize winner in literature, joined the chorus of critics, complaining about the fading of political power in a time of globalization.
He ridiculed today’s conditions as “stock market-defined liberty.”
Opposition leaders do not like the subject, but they avoid challenging it.
Only a few economic journalists and university professors are willing to object.
One Jewish professor at a Munich university actually compared Müntefering’s language to Nazi slogans.
Entrepreneurs and managers swallow their anger and show their disapproval only by silently speeding up their relocation decisions.
But Müntefering has a point.
Abolition of taxes on realized capital gains increased the sales of shares enormously.
International equity funds stepped in, providing companies with urgently needed liquidity while disentangling the traditional ownership network. Germany, Inc. is on its last legs.
The good news is that Germany’s overblown conglomerates are being scaled down to an efficient size and that the capital market is able to do its job, improving the allocation of resources.
The bad news is that financial capital is moving abroad to finance other overblown conglomerates.
In net terms, though, there may be more growth worldwide as well as in Germany. Whatever the case, for many Germans the capitalist allocation processes they are seeing make no sense.
There were times when German capitalism was shown greater respect.
In the postwar period, Germany’s economic miracle calmed skeptics of capitalism.
Starting with extremely low wages and an underdeveloped currency, German workers succeeded in competing against the world.
Wages rose rapidly and most Germans experienced growing prosperity.
Ludwig Erhard’s liberal economic approach worked and the socialist ideas found in the party programs of the Social Democrats and Christian Democrats were forgotten.
During the 1970’s, Germans went overboard, confusing capitalism with self-service shops.
They began to expand their welfare state, pushing the government’s share in GDP from 39% to 49% and welcoming union-proposed double-digit wage increases.
The signs of the fading miracle became visible when Japanese competitors and other Asian Tigers succeeded in wiping out substantial parts of Germany’s labor-intensive textile, optical products, and precision engineering industries.
Nevertheless, the public still believed in perpetual growth.
Only after the Iron Curtain’s fall and the establishment of market economies in ex-communist countries did the lack of competitiveness of German workers become apparent.
The country with the highest labor costs in the world was confronted with low-wage competitors next door.
Wage costs in the ten new EU member countries are still only one-seventh their level in western Germany; wage costs in Rumania and Bulgaria are one-tenth.
Chinese wages are even lower, at just 4% of the western German average.
German firms reacted by outsourcing the labor-intensive parts of their production chains and curtailing their investment in Germany.
The share of net investment in GNP is now the second lowest in all OECD countries.
Because investment is so low, net capital exports from Germany are nearly 4% of GDP.
Now unemployment is Germany’s biggest problem, standing at a postwar record.
This alarms the public and incites anger against capitalists who do not reinvest their profits.
Müntefering simply caught the popular mood in developing his theory of locust capitalism.
But this useless reaction to the laws of the global market economy hides the fact that Germany’s problems are largely a result of an overblown welfare state and extremely aggressive union policies over the last thirty years.
Even Marx knew that the iron laws of economics could not be overcome by wishful thinking.
Müntefering should have consulted his party’s forefather more carefully before opening his mouth.
London vs. the Eurozone
LONDON – Ever since the United Kingdom joined the European Economic Community in 1973, after the French withdrew Charles de Gaulle’s veto of its membership, Britain’s relationship with the European integration process has been strained.
The British are reluctant Europeans, for historical and cultural reasons.
For centuries, British foreign policy strove to avoid permanent European entanglements; but, most importantly, it aimed to prevent a single continental power from achieving dominance – especially if that power happened to be France.
In the meantime, the British colonized large portions of the globe.
Later, after the sun set on their empire, they tried to maintain a “special relationship” with the United States.
Joining the European Union was not an affirmation of belief in European integration, but rather a reluctant recognition that the transatlantic strategy had run its course.
British public opinion concerning the EU has since remained lukewarm, at best.
In recent years, having opted-out of the single currency and the Schengen area (which allows Europeans to cross borders without passports), the UK has distanced itself from important EU initiatives.
Nonetheless, Prime Minister David Cameron surprised everyone by vetoing a new EU treaty on December 9 – a first for the UK since joining the Union – leaving the other 26 member states to press ahead with greater fiscal integration on their own.
More surprisingly, the negotiations broke down over arcane details of financial regulation.
For example, Cameron wanted to strike a “red line” through the proposal to subject the planned Deposit Guarantee Scheme Directive to the Qualified Majority Voting procedure (meaning that no member state would have veto power).
Cameron also objected to the requirement that third-country financial firms in London without business in other EU states be required to hold a “single passport,” which would enable them to operate in any member country, but would also require them to submit to Europe-wide regulations.
These points are not entirely insignificant, but I would not care to explain them to a meeting of ordinary voters puzzled about Britain’s new European policy.
So why has financial regulation become the unlikely casus belli between the UK and its partners?
The explanation is partly political.
Cameron’s Conservative Party includes members who have been spoiling for a fight with the EU for a long time.
For them, any excuse will do, and EU Internal Market Commissioner Michel Barnier has provided them with ammunition by pursuing what many see as an excessively restrictive regulatory agenda.
When horse-trading for Commission jobs took place in 2009, former UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown was warned of the danger of allowing the French to hold the Internal Market post.
But he chose instead to bid for the EU foreign-policy job for his Labour Party ally, Baroness Ashton.
When Barnier was appointed, French President Nicolas Sarkozy described it as a “defeat for Anglo-Saxon capitalism.”
And so it has proved – though perhaps not in the way he envisaged.
But beneath the politics, there are other substantial conflicts between the UK and its continental neighbors.
Barnier favors European directives that impose uniform rules for all member states – so called “maximum harmonization” measures.
Previously, EU directives tended to impose minimum standards, which individual countries could supplement if they wished.
They could outlaw initiatives that the UK holds dear, such as new rules to ring-fence retail banks’ subsidiaries and impose higher capital requirements on them.
The governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, has voiced his anxieties on that point.
British officials are also deeply concerned about measures that would oblige clearinghouses that transact their business primarily in euros to be located within the single-currency area.
Indeed, the British government was already taking the European Central Bank to court to challenge that policy before the treaty veto.
They may have a point; arguably, the ECB’s proposal is inconsistent with single-market principles.
The key point of contention, however, is the pan-European Financial Transactions Tax, which the European Commission proposed with support from both Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
From a UK perspective, the FTT is highly unattractive.
Between 60% and 70% of the revenue would be raised in London, yet the EU would spend most of the money to shore up eurozone finances.
For Britons, this idea stirs sentiments akin to what Germans might feel if the EU proposed a new tax on liverwurst, with the proceeds to go into the central pot.
They also point out that, unless an FTT were agreed globally, financial companies would quickly migrate from London to New York.
This is Cameron’s best argument on the financial front.
But he did not deploy it strongly, for the simple reason that tax policies in Europe are still subject to the unanimity rule.
In other words, Britain can block the proposed FTT without a special protocol.
This lends weight to the argument that Cameron’s veto was essentially a political move, intended to bolster his domestic support.
That is a big gamble, given that the UK now appears to be shuffling towards the EU exit.
Certainly, the new status quo looks unsustainable, with 26 countries moving towards greater integration while the 27th remains aloof.
How will financial firms react?
Will they be pleased that London has stamped its collective foot, even though Cameron’s regulatory demands were not accepted?
Or will some simply begin to contact real-estate agents to line up office space in Paris or Frankfurt?
The game – London versus the eurozone – has only just begun.
It will make for fascinating viewing in the months and years to come.
The Long-Term Investment Challenge
PARIS – As the deepest economic crisis of our lifetimes stretches into its seventh year, most OECD countries are continuing to underperform.
This year, GDP growth in the world’s advanced economies is expected to average 2%, compared to 3.2% worldwide.
And 2016 is shaping up to be no better, with output in the OECD growing by 2.5%, while the rest of the world’s GDP expands at a 3.8% rate – close to the pre-crisis average.
Investments, both public and private, are needed to foster green growth, support innovation and entrepreneurship, contribute to closing the inequality gaps that have widened during the crisis, and help build the skills that are essential for more resilient economies and more inclusive societies.
And, though meeting these needs will require transformational changes in the behavior of governments and investors, the payoff will be significant.
In short, as we argued during the OECD Forum and annual Ministerial Council Meeting last week, this time we need to promote investments that focus on people and the planet.
The list of structural challenges facing countries around the globe is a long one.
But efforts to overcome at least four – high unemployment, an aging workforce, climate change, and infrastructure deficiencies – would benefit significantly from policies promoting long-term investments.
Addressing the unemployment crisis, which has been particularly burdensome for the young, will require not only a strong recovery, but also a renewed focus on the development of skills.
Investment in high-quality vocational education and training and work-based learning will be essential.
These types of investments continue to be beneficial throughout a worker’s life, as exposure to new skills and knowledge allows him or her to adapt to an evolving technological and business environment.
Empowering today’s workers will also help meet the challenges resulting from aging populations.
Moreover, an increased focus on long-term investment will help resolve the conflicts traditionally associated with addressing climate change and building infrastructure.
One requires cuts in the emission of greenhouse gases; the other has tended to promote the combustion of fossil fuels for transport and energy.
The solution is relatively simple, provided the presence of political will: By putting a price on carbon and repealing policies that incentivize fossil-fuel consumption, investments can be channeled into the creation of a low-carbon economy, including the necessary clean-energy infrastructure.
In order to encourage private investors to pursue long-term, responsible projects, governments need to promote consistent policies and frameworks.
In addition to immediate uncertainties, investors are being held back by a shortage of incentives and a surplus of factors that reduce returns.
These include restrictive regulations that reduce firms’ ability to undertake new activities or enter new markets, especially across borders.
The OECD’s updated Policy Framework for Investment provides a blueprint for the promotion of investment and responsible business conduct.
Governments will also have to facilitate the participation of institutional investors.
The challenge of long-term investment cannot be resolved without attracting more diverse and private sources of finance.
In 2013, institutional investors in OECD countries alone held more than $57 trillion in assets, and pension funds collected around $1 trillion in new contributions.
Tools that could be used to leverage institutional investments include public-private partnerships to develop clear and transparent project pipelines for major green infrastructure projects, green banks and green bonds, and instruments that mitigate risk and enhance the availability of credit.
Regulations for international accounting and funding will have to be examined to identify policies that inadvertently discourage institutional investors from putting their resources into longer-term, illiquid assets.
Finally, public equity markets will have to be strengthened.
Savings must be channeled to firms that need capital for innovation and sustainable job creation.
Today, however, the quality of corporate-governance frameworks worldwide is challenged by the growing complexity of investment chains and the dominance of passive and short-term investment strategies.
In a globally interdependent world, a better financial and investment system cannot be achieved on a country-by-country basis.
There may be no one-size-fits-all model for economic development, but, without global standards and complementary regulations, the long-term outlook for the world economy will remain bleak.
Losing Latin America
When is the United States going to wake up to what is happening in Latin America?
The growing influence of Venezuela’s leftist president, Hugo Chávez, is casting a dark shadow over the region.
Some countries – Chile, Columbia, and Costa Rica, for example – remain committed to progressive growth-oriented and democratic regimes.
But over the past year, allies of Chávez have come to power in countries like Ecuador and Bolivia, and just missed winning in a few others.
In Mexico, Chávez’s admirer Andrés Manuel López Obrador would have seized the presidency, possibly for life, had he convinced just a quarter percent more Mexicans voters to support him.
With almost everyone else in the world successfully pursuing more flexible market-oriented economies, why is Latin America veering dangerously in another direction?
Is it because some voters do not realize that the region has been enjoying greater economic stability than it has in decades?
Is it because they don’t appreciate having single-digit inflation, down from a regional average of more than 300% 12 years ago?
Fortunately, at least half the voters in the region appreciate these improvements; otherwise, the situation would be far worse.
Nevertheless, a growing schism between left and right has led to a distressing level of policy paralysis.
This is nowhere more apparent than in Mexico, the region’s second largest economy after Brazil.
Despite its enviable location next door to the rich and booming US, Mexico’s growth has ranged from poor to tepid since its economic crisis a decade ago.
Why hasn’t Mexico benefited more from the 1992 North American Free Trade agreement?
Part of the problem is the emergence of China, whose ultra-low wages provide tough competition for Mexico, where wages are merely very low.
But Mexico’s real obstacle is a political system unable to achieve any consensus on essential economic reforms.
The new president, Felipe Calderón, has spoken of the need to break up Mexico’s monopolies.
Where will he start, telephones or tortillas?
There is all too much choice.
Peasants toil inefficiently on tiny plots of land, in a form of disguised unemployment similar to that seen in rural China.
The state-owned oil company, which accounts for a major chunk of government revenue, is hugely inefficient, and invests far too little in new equipment and technology.
Crime abounds.
International comparisons of corruption are not flattering.
Worst of all, the election loser, López Obrador, seems willing to throw the country into turmoil rather than accept the constitutional legitimacy of his defeat.
So how is the US planning to react?
By following through on plans to build a 2,000-mile wall across its southern border.
Brazil, meanwhile, has exhibited commendable political and macroeconomic stability.
Yet, if Brazil is to enjoy growth above the modest levels of the past few years, the country badly needs to reform its labor laws, open itself more to foreign trade, and improve the quality of its primary education system.
With Latin America’s two largest economies in a holding pattern on reform, it is that much more difficult for even the region’s high flyers, such as Chile, to achieve escape velocity into a sustained high growth orbit.
Mind you, even the weak growth of the last few years in Latin America marks the region’s best performance since the 1970’s, and incomes are actually catching up slowly to those in the US, Europe, and Japan.
Nevertheless, Latin America remains the slowest growing of any of the world’s developing regions.
It is not only China and India that are growing faster. Central Europe, Central Asia, and the violence-ridden Middle East are growing faster, too.
Even Sub-Saharan Africa, with its wars and famines, has enjoyed more rapid growth in the past few years.
Does the pied piper of Venezuela offer a fairer and better way to grow?
Unfortunately, no.
Venezuela is merely being pulled along in China’s tailwind thanks to high oil prices.
When oil prices collapse, as they will at some point over the next few years, Venezuela’s economy will collapse with them.
Over the long run, commodity exporters need to innovate just as much as manufacturers do in order to maintain profitability.
With Venezuelan oil production still running far below its level when Chávez took over, there is little doubt about how this story will end.
In today’s hyper-competitive global economy, there is no reliable “third way” for countries to avoid continued liberalization and market-oriented reforms.
Instead, the current installment of Latin American socialism is all too likely to produce a re-run of tragic episodes from the past.
In this context, the US’s inexplicable indifference towards the region is both naïve and dangerous.
The incoming Democratic US Congress has signaled that free trade deals with Peru and Columbia need to be “renegotiated.”
What kind of message does that send to the US’s few remaining allies in the region?
If Americans don’t start embracing their friends in Latin America, it may take a generation to undo the damage.
Losing Turkey
OXFORD &#45;&#45; Turkey has long been a haven of geo-political stability.
But, since 2003, Turkey’s virtually unquestioned alliance with the United States has undergone a profound re-evaluation, due to the Iraq War, and the Turkish consensus on its decades-long EU candidacy has begun to wobble, owing to EU dithering.  Given Turkey’s central role not only in maintaining peace in the volatile Caucasus region but also in promoting peace in the Middle East – the talks now underway between Syria and Israel are, after all, being conducted with Turkish mediation – neglecting Turkey is not only foolish, it is dangerous.
Both the dominant Justice and Development Party (AKP) and its secular rivals remain publicly committed to pursuing EU membership, but in practice doubts have emerged.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s insistence that a referendum should be held on Turkey’s admission suggests that years of painful adjustment to EU norms will never produce the payoff of membership.
The US and the EU are evidently convinced that Turkey has nowhere else to go.
The Turks, they think, will fatalistically accept any snub.
But this cozy assumption overlooks a tectonic shift in Turkey’s geo-political position.
Immediately after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Turkey looked to the newly-independent central Asian states in a mood of pan-Turkic romanticism.
These ancestral homelands exercised a hold on Turkish imaginations, but today it is business opportunities, energy resources, and other practical matters rather than ethnic unity that are creating a loose Turkic “commonwealth.”
Most striking is Turkey’s renewal of relations with Russia without damaging its ties to the newly independent post-Soviet states.
Turkey’s ancient antagonism toward Russia briefly revived when the Soviet Union imploded.
In the early 1990’s, some Turkish generals saw the humiliation of Russian troops in Chechnya as part of a long-awaited revenge.
But, while Russia (and Iran) were once Turkey’s great geo-political rivals, today they are export markets and energy suppliers.
Energy is the key to Turkey’s new geo-political position.
Its industry and population are growing dynamically, so its energy demands are producing geo-political synergy with Russia and Iran, neither of which can afford to cut the flow of oil and gas without provoking a massive internal crisis.
Meanwhile, as Turkey’s attitude toward its neighbors has changed, its governing elite has watched the EU embrace ex-communist countries with far shakier market economies and shorter democratic records.
As one Turkish general put it, “If we had joined the Warsaw Pact rather than NATO, we would be in the EU by now.”
Last summer’s re-election of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s AKP, followed by the election of Abdullah Gul as the first president whose wife wears a headscarf, seemed to confirm the fears of anti-Islamic Europeans.
Yet, even if many AKP activists and voters are devout Muslims, Erdogan and Gul remain committed to European integration.
Time is running out, however, for them to satisfy their supporters and silence their critics by achieving it.
The problem is that the AKP’s victories, together with America’s courting of Erdogan and Gul, have triggered a crisis of direction among Turkey’s once-dominant secular and pro-western elite.
Even if the AKP can rely on the allegiance of millions of voters and swarms of new members anxious to join the winning side, the secularists are deeply entrenched in Turkey’s institutions, universities, media, and business.
But both ordinary AKP supporters and disillusioned secularists are now suspicious of America’s actions and motives in the region.
Key military figures’ tacit backing for the Turkish Parliament’s refusal to endorse the March 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq suggests that Turkish nationalism could unite the AKP’s rank-and-file MPs with their otherwise implacable foes in the secular camp.
If the EU were to snub Turkey openly over membership, or if America were to seem too lax on the Kurdish problem in Northern Iraq, a huge swathe of the two camps could well unite.
Turkey’s links with Israel, for example, have been strained by Israeli investment in Kurdistan.
While Shimon Peres made a gesture of reconciliation by choosing Ankara as the setting for the first speech by an Israeli president to the parliament of a predominantly Muslim country, Israel’s concerns about Iran are far more serious than are Turkey’s.
Israel’s two most irreconcilable enemies, Iran and Syria, are in fact among the most vocal supporters of Turkey’s hard-line stance towards the Kurds.
America’s conquest of Iraq de-stabilized Turkey’s Western orientation more than the US cares to admit.
Most Turks don’t want to see their country excluded from the West, but if the EU spurns them while speeding up entry for weaker candidates, Turkey may come to feel sufficiently strong and embittered to strike out on a new geo-political course.
Loving America’s Deficits
With the weak dollar hanging like the sword of Damocles over the global economy, almost everyone laments America’s spendthrift habits.
But did it ever occur to anybody how hard Americans must work to make everyone else look good?
Thanks to America’s gaping trade deficits, the biggest headache of every developing country finance minister nowadays is trying to keep his or her country’s currency from going up too fast against the dollar.
When was the last time that happened?
Chronic debt-crisis countries from Mexico to Russia to South Korea are all fighting off capital inflows from investors looking for an exit as the dollar collapses.
Ordinarily, as the world comes out of a downturn and global interest rates rise, at least one or two emerging market countries suffers a spectacular blowup.
Not likely this time, at least for the next year.
True, policy in some countries has improved markedly.
Brazil and Turkey, for example, have each instituted market-friendly policies that have made their economies more flexible and growth more durable.
But can the same be said for Mexico, where reform has stalled, or for Russia, where reforms have been reversed?
America’s reckless deficit spending is making all their currencies look like good investments for 2005.
So non-Americans should be more appreciative of America’s deficits.
Do people think it is easy for a 12-trillion-dollar economy to spend beyond its means year after year just to prop up other countries’ reputations for stability?
It isn’t.
Going deep into debt when you have that much money to spend takes a lot of hard work.
Start with the American consumer, who consumes everything on earth (helping the United States eat up 25% of world oil production) but saves essentially nothing.
Thanks to America’s gold-plated financial system, its consumers can buy fancy cars with almost no down payment.
They can borrow more and more each year against the value of their homes, and spend every cent.
They can retire earlier and earlier on their smaller and smaller savings.
It takes nerve and energy to live like that.
Of course, the US government does its share, too, and more.
When President George W. Bush took office in 2001, he was staring at giant budget surpluses as far as the eye could see.
It was hard work engineering a five-trillion-dollar deterioration in America’s fiscal position.
Cutting taxes was easy, but hiking spending on virtually every program involves a lot of legislation.
Sure, the decision to invade Iraq was a big help in pushing the country’s finances off a cliff, but that is far from the whole story.
So why is the world so ungrateful?
Maybe some Europeans and Japanese are upset that they have consistently earned such poor returns on their US investments.
Part of the problem has been the sinking dollar, which makes dollar investments look bad when translated into yen or euro.
Part of the blame also lies with bad market timing.
Many Europeans bought into the US stock market at its peak in 1999 and 2000, only to find themselves selling at steep discounts after the collapse of 2001.
The same happened to the Japanese in real estate.
Japanese financiers bought up pricey trophy properties like Rockefeller Center in New York and the Pebble Beach Golf Club in California, and then had to sell later at rock-bottom prices.
These investment failures have been great for Americans, who owe a lot less to foreigners than they would otherwise.
Unfortunately, this cannot go on forever.
Foreigners are either going to start earning much better returns in the US, pushing American debt levels into unsustainable territory, or else they will pull back and invest elsewhere.
Either way, the dollar collapse has to continue.
So how low can the dollar sink?
By my calculations, the dollar still needs to go down another 15% if the US trade deficit is to go back towards balance.
Ideally, Asian currencies would rise much more than 15% while European currencies would rise less.
Unfortunately, there is a real danger that we may see the opposite, with the euro going to $1.50 or beyond.
Governments may try to resist the fall of the dollar, but in today’s world of deep and fluid capital markets, they will not succeed indefinitely, even in Asia.
Moreover, although US policy is making everyone else look good for now, things might not be so comfortable if the dollar collapse leads to skyrocketing interest rates and a sustained global slowdown.
Some of the countries that look so strong today may suddenly experience the kind of financial crises that they thought they had left behind.
Even if countries avoid the immediate blow of a dollar collapse, they still have to watch for a boomerang effect.
Exchange rates have a nasty habit of overshooting their equilibrium values, then knifing back on countries, especially those who have been spending too much based on inflated income valuations.
OK, so maybe it is too soon for the world to start toasting America’s insane consumption patterns.
Even so, isn’t it generous of the Americans to make everyone else look so sober and frugal, if only for the moment?
Alpha, Beta, and Beyond
NEW YORK – Even in normal times, individual and institutional investors alike have a hard time figuring out where to invest and in what.
Should one invest more in advanced or emerging economies?
And which ones?
How does one decide when, and in what way, to rebalance one’s portfolio?
Obviously, these choices become harder still in abnormal times, when major global changes occur and central banks follow unconventional policies.
But a new, low-cost approach promises to ease the challenge confronting investors in normal and abnormal times alike.
In the asset management industry, there have traditionally been two types of investment strategies: passive and active.
The passive approach includes investment in indices that track specific benchmarks, say, the S&P 500 for the United States or an index of advanced economies or emerging-market equities.
In effect, one buys the index of the market.
Passivity is a low-cost approach – tracking a benchmark requires no work.
But it yields only the sum of the good, the bad, and the ugly, because it cannot tell you whether to buy advanced economies or emerging markets, and which countries within each group will do better.
You invest in a basket of all countries or specific regions, and what you get is referred to as “beta” – the average market return.
By contrast, the active approach entrusts investment to a professional portfolio manager.
The idea is that a professional manager who chooses assets and markets in which to invest can outperform the average return of buying the whole market.
These funds are supposed to get you “alpha”: absolute superior returns, rather than the market “beta.”
The problems with this approach are many.
Professionally managed investment funds are expensive, because managers trade a lot and are paid hefty fees.
Moreover, most active managers – indeed, 95% of them – underperform their investment benchmarks, and their returns are volatile and risky.
Moreover, superior investment managers change over time, so that past performance is no guarantee of future performance.
And some of these managers – like hedge funds – are not available to average investors.
As a result, actively managed funds typically do worse than passive funds, with returns after fees even lower and riskier.
Indeed, not only are active “alpha” strategies often worse than beta ones; some are actually disguised beta strategies (because they follow market trends) – just with more leverage and thus more risk and volatility.
But a third investment approach, known as “smart” (or “enhanced”) beta, has become more popular recently.
Suppose that you could follow quantitative rules that allowed you to weed out the bad apples, say, the countries likely to perform badly and thus have low stock returns over time.
If you weed out most of the bad and the ugly, you end up picking more of the good apples – and do better than average.
To keep costs low, smart beta strategies need to be passive.
Thus, adherence to specific rules replaces an expensive manager in choosing the good apples and avoiding the bad and ugly ones.
For example, my economic research firm has a quantitative model, updated every three months, that ranks 174 countries on more than 200 economic, financial, political, and other factors to derive a measure or score of these countries’ medium-term attractiveness to investors.
This approach provides strong signals concerning which countries will perform poorly or experience crises and which will achieve superior economic and financial results.
Weeding out the bad and the ugly based on these scores, and thus picking more of the good apples, has been shown to provide higher returns with lower risk than actively managed alpha or passive beta funds.
And, as the rankings change over time to reflect countries’ improving or worsening fundamentals, the equity markets that “smart beta” investors choose change accordingly.
With better returns than passive beta funds at a lower cost than actively managed funds, smart beta vehicles are increasingly available and becoming more popular.
(Full disclosure: my firm, together with a large global financial institution, is launching a series of tradable equity indices for stock markets of advanced economies and emerging markets, using a smart beta approach).
Given that this strategy can be applied to stocks, bonds, currencies, and many other asset classes, smart beta could be the future of asset management.
Whether one is investing in normal or abnormal times, applying a scientific, low-cost approach to get a basket with a higher-than-average share of good apples does seem like a sensible approach.
When Inequality Kills
NEW YORK – This week, Angus Deaton will receive the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics “for his analysis of consumption, poverty, and welfare.”
Deservedly so.
Indeed, soon after the award was announced in October, Deaton published some startling work with Anne Case in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences – research that is at least as newsworthy as the Nobel ceremony.
Analyzing a vast amount of data about health and deaths among Americans, Case and Deaton showed declining life expectancy and health for middle-aged white Americans, especially those with a high school education or less.
Among the causes were suicide, drugs, and alcoholism.
America prides itself on being one of the world’s most prosperous countries, and can boast that in every recent year except one (2009) per capita GDP has increased.
And a sign of prosperity is supposed to be good health and longevity.
But, while the US spends more money per capita on medical care than almost any other country (and more as a percentage of GDP), it is far from topping the world in life expectancy.
France, for example, spends less than 12% of its GDP on medical care, compared to 17% in the US. Yet Americans can expect to live three full years less than the French.
For years, many Americans explained away this gap.
The US is a more heterogeneous society, they argued, and the gap supposedly reflected the huge difference in average life expectancy between African Americans and white Americans.
The racial gap in health is, of course, all too real.
According to a study published in 2014, life expectancy for African Americans is some four years lower for women and more than five years lower for men, relative to whites.
This disparity, however, is hardly just an innocuous result of a more heterogeneous society.
It is a symptom of America’s disgrace: pervasive discrimination against African Americans, reflected in median household income that is less than 60% that of white households.
The effects of lower income are exacerbated by the fact that the US is the only advanced country not to recognize access to health care as a basic right.
Some white Americans, however, have attempted to shift the blame for dying younger to African Americans themselves, citing their “lifestyles.”
It is perhaps true that unhealthy habits are more concentrated among poor Americans, a disproportionate number of whom are black.
But these habits themselves are a consequence of economic conditions, not to mention the stresses of racism.
The Case-Deaton results show that such theories will no longer do.
America is becoming a more divided society – divided not only between whites and African Americans, but also between the 1% and the rest, and between the highly educated and the less educated, regardless of race.
And the gap can now be measured not just in wages, but also in early deaths.
White Americans, too, are dying earlier as their incomes decline.
This evidence is hardly a shock to those of us studying inequality in America.
The median income of a full-time male employee is lower than it was 40 years ago.
Wages of male high school graduates have plummeted by some 19% in the period studied by Case and Deaton.
To stay above water, many Americans borrowed from banks at usurious interest rates.
In 2005, President George W. Bush’s administration made it far more difficult for households to declare bankruptcy and write off debt.
Then came the financial crisis, which cost millions of Americans their jobs and homes.
When unemployment insurance, designed for short-term bouts of joblessness in a full-employment world, ran out, they were left to fend for themselves, with no safety net (beyond food stamps), while the government bailed out the banks that had caused the crisis.
The basic perquisites of a middle-class life were increasingly beyond the reach of a growing share of Americans.
The Great Recession had shown their vulnerability.
Those who had invested in the stock market saw much of their wealth wiped out; those who had put their money in safe government bonds saw retirement income diminish to near zero, as the Fed relentlessly drove down both short- and long-term interest rates.
With college tuition soaring, the only way their children could get the education that would provide a modicum of hope was to borrow; but, with education loans virtually never dischargeable, student debt seemed even worse than other forms of debt.
There was no way that this mounting financial pressure could not have placed middle-class Americans and their families under greater stress.
And it is not surprising that this has been reflected in higher rates of drug abuse, alcoholism, and suicide.
I was chief economist of the World Bank in the late 1990s, when we began to receive similarly depressing news from Russia.
Our data showed that GDP had fallen some 30% since the collapse of the Soviet Union. But we weren’t confident in our measurements.
Data showing that male life expectancy was declining, even as it was increasing in the rest of the world, confirmed the impression that things were not going very well in Russia, especially outside of the major cities.
The international Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, which I co-chaired and on which Deaton served, had earlier emphasized that GDP often is not a good measure of a society’s wellbeing.
These new data on white Americans’ declining health status confirms this conclusion.
The world’s quintessential middle-class society is on the way to becoming its first former middle-class society.
Oil’s New Normal
LAGUNA BEACH – Oil prices have been heading south again, with a barrel of US crude recently falling below $42 – the lowest level since March 2009, the nadir of the global financial crisis.
And, while last year’s sharp price drop was heavily influenced by two large supply shocks, the current decline also has an important demand dimension.
At the same time, oil markets are discovering what it is like to operate under the regime of a new swing producer: the United States.
As a result, the price formation process is much clumsier nowadays, with considerably longer adjustment lags.
The dynamics of the energy markets changed notably as shale-oil production came onstream at a market-moving scale in 2013-2014.
With this new source meeting more of world energy demand, particularly in the US, energy users were no longer as dependent on OPEC and other oil producers.
In the process, they also became less vulnerable to geopolitical concerns.
Adding to the supply-side changes was Saudi Arabia’s subsequent historic announcement that it would no longer lead OPEC in playing the role of swing producer.
It would no longer lower production when prices fell sharply, and increase output in response to large price surges.
That decision was both understandable and rational.
Playing the role of swing producer was coming at a growing cost to both current and future generations of Saudi citizens.
Non-traditional suppliers had increased their market influence, non-OPEC producers continued to plan high output, and some OPEC members failed to adhere to their production ceilings.
Given all this, Saudi Arabia could no longer be expected to incur the growing short- and long-term cost of being the stabilizing market force that it had been for decades.
Such fundamental changes in the supply side of the market naturally drove oil prices lower – a lot lower.
Prices plummeted by more than half in a period of just a few months last year, catching many oil traders and analysts by surprise.
Oil prices stabilized after a somewhat temporary overshoot, trading increasingly robustly for a while on the back of two conventional market reactions.
First, the large price drop caused massive supply destruction, as some energy producers, from both the traditional and non-traditional sectors, became unprofitable.
Second, as consumers reacted to lower energy costs, demand adjusted only gradually.
But a new factor soon disturbed this relative stability, pushing oil prices even lower: Evidence that the global economy was weakening, and that much of the weakening was occurring in relatively energy-intensive countries such as China and Brazil, as well as Russia (itself an energy producer).
Today, indicators of this global slowdown are to be found everywhere – from underwhelming retail and trade data to unanticipated policy responses, including China’s surprise currency devaluation (which coincides with its leaders’ commitment to a long-term shift toward a more market-based exchange-rate regime).
The impact is not limited to economic performance and financial-market movements.
Slower global growth is also amplifying political pressures and, in some countries, adding to social strains – both of which tend to constrain policy responses.
It is hard to see the global oil market’s current configuration of supply and demand rapidly changing any time soon.
As for the new swing producer, the US has a much slower (and leakier) reaction function relative to that of Saudi Arabia and OPEC.
Over the next few months, the US will indeed alter its supply and demand conditions in a way that puts a floor under oil prices and enables a gradual recovery in the market.
But, unlike the previous swing producer, this will result from traditional market forces, not policy decisions.
Indeed, we should expect an even sharper reduction in US energy output as persistently low prices increase the pressure on domestic producers.
From the shutdown of additional rigs to the curtailment of new investment in exploiting shale resources, the US will likely experience a fall in its absolute energy production, as well as in its share of world output.
But, while demand will increase, this will not have much of an immediate effect on oil prices.
Yes, US consumers will be tempted to buy more trucks and bigger cars, drive more miles, and fly to more places.
But the creation of this demand will be very gradual, especially given all the leakages in the transmission of lower energy-input costs to consumer fuel prices.
At the end of the day, no swing producer controls the fate of today’s oil prices.
A sustained price recovery requires a healthier global economy that combines faster inclusive growth and greater financial stability.
And this will not occur quickly, especially given the policy shortcomings in both advanced and emerging countries.
The Inflation Puzzle
CAMBRIDGE – The low rate of inflation in the United States is a puzzle, especially to economists who focus on the relationship between inflation and changes in the monetary base.
After all, in the past, increases and decreases in the growth rate of the monetary base (currency in circulation plus commercial banks’ reserves held at the central bank) produced – or at least were accompanied by – rises and falls in the inflation rate.
And, because the monetary base is controlled directly by the central bank, and is not created by commercial banks, many believe that it is the best measure of the impact of monetary policy.
For example, the US monetary base rose at an annual rate of 9% from 1985 to 1995, and then slowed to 6% in the next decade.
To explain this abrupt and radical change requires examining more closely the relationship between the monetary base and inflation, and understanding the changing role of the reserves that commercial banks hold at the Federal Reserve.
When banks make loans, they create deposits for borrowers, who draw on these funds to make purchases.
That generally transfers the deposits from the lending bank to another bank.
Banks are required by law to maintain reserves at the Fed in proportion to the checkable deposits on their books.
So an increase in reserves allows commercial banks to create more of such deposits.
That means they can make more loans, giving borrowers more funds to spend.
The increased spending leads to higher employment, an increase in capacity utilization, and, eventually, upward pressure on wages and prices.
To increase commercial banks’ reserves, the Fed historically used open-market operations, buying Treasury bills from them.
The banks exchanged an interest-paying Treasury bill for a reserve deposit at the Fed that historically did not earn any interest.
That made sense only if the bank used the reserves to back up expanded lending and deposits.
A bank that that did not need the additional reserves could of course lend them to another bank that did, earning interest at the federal funds rate on that interbank loan.
Essentially all of the increased reserves ended up being “used” to support increased commercial lending.
All of this changed in 2008, when a legislative reform allowed the Fed to pay interest on excess reserves.
The commercial banks could sell Treasury bills and longer-term bonds to the Fed, receive reserves in exchange, and earn a small but very safe return on those reserves.
That gave the Fed the ability in 2010 to begin its massive monthly purchases of long-term bonds and mortgage-backed securities.
This quantitative easing (QE) allowed the Fed to drive down long-term interest rates directly, leading to a rise in the stock market and to a recovery in prices of owner-occupied homes.
The resulting rise in household wealth boosted consumer spending and revived residential construction.
And businesses responded to this by stepping up the pace of investment.
Although a link between the Fed’s creation of reserves and the subsequent increase in spending remained, its magnitude changed dramatically.
The Fed increased its securities holdings from less than $1 trillion in 2007 to more than $4 trillion today.
But, rather than being used to facilitate increased commercial bank lending and deposits, the additional reserves created in this process were held at the Fed – simply the by-product of the effort, via QE, to drive down long-term interest rates and increase household wealth.
That brings us back to the apparent puzzle of low inflation.
The overall CPI is actually slightly lower now than it was a year ago, implying a negative inflation rate.
A major reason is the decline in gasoline and other energy prices.
The energy component of the CPI fell over the last 12 months by 19%.
The so-called “core” CPI, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, rose (though only by 1.8%).
Moreover, the dollar’s appreciation relative to other currencies has reduced import costs, putting competitive pressure on domestic firms to reduce prices.
That is clearly reflected in the difference between the -0.2% annual inflation rate for goods and the 2.5% rate for services (over the past 12 months).
Nonetheless, inflation will head higher in the year ahead.
Labor markets have tightened significantly, with the overall unemployment rate down to 5.4%.
The unemployment rate among those who have been unemployed for less than six months – a key indicator of inflation pressure – is down to 3.8%.
Indeed, the inflation risk is on the upside, especially if the Fed sticks to its plan to keep its real short-term interest rate negative until the end of 2016 and to raise it to one percentage point only by the end of 2017.
If inflation does rise faster than the Fed expects, it may be forced to increase interest rates rapidly, with adverse effects on financial markets and potentially on the broader economy.
The Oil Price Opportunity
WASHINGTON, DC – The sharp drop in the price of crude oil since late June has been grabbing headlines worldwide – and producing a lot of contradictory explanations.
Some attribute the fall largely to declining global growth expectations.
Others focus on the expansion of America’s oil and gas production.
Still others suspect a tacit agreement between Saudi Arabia and the United States aimed at, among other things, weakening political rivals like Russia and Iran.
Regardless of the reason for the price drop – probably to be found in some combination of these factors – the consequences are the same.
Though, as International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde has noted, lower oil prices may boost overall global growth, with the oil-importing advanced economies gaining the most, the impact on efforts to combat climate change could be devastating.
Indeed, a sustained decline in oil prices would not only make renewable energy sources less competitive now; it would impede their future competitiveness by discouraging research and investment.
More generally, it would reduce the incentive for consumers, companies, and governments to pursue more energy-efficient practices.
Even if we remained on our current trajectory, keeping temperatures from rising more than 2º Celsius above pre-industrial levels – the threshold beyond which the most disruptive consequences of climate change would be triggered – would be next to impossible to achieve.
As the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s most recent report reinforced, we cannot afford a slowdown in progress.
Of course, climate science is not precise; instead, it works in terms of probability ranges.
But uncertain estimates do not mean that the risk is any less acute.
World leaders increasingly seem to recognize this in theory, including at the just-concluded climate-change meeting in Lima, Peru.
But they continue to depend on non-binding commitments – leaving the world on a dangerous climate trajectory.
A sharp decline in oil prices does, however, provide a rare political opportunity to introduce more carbon pricing.
After all, one of the major arguments against a “carbon tax” has been that it would make energy more expensive.
Even assurances that the revenue from such a tax would be refunded to taxpayers were inadequate to overcome political resistance, particularly in the US.
But, with declining oil prices now exerting downward pressure on oil substitutes, a carbon tax could be introduced without raising the price of energy for consumers.
Policymakers must simply be willing to forego some of the short-term stimulus effects of cheaper energy.
In fact, with low enough prices, consumers could still benefit from lower energy costs – just not quite as much as they are now.
The structure of a carbon-pricing scheme remains up for discussion.
One option would be to introduce flexible pricing, tied to the price of oil.
For example, for every $5 decline in the price per barrel, the carbon tax could be raised by a specified amount; for every $5 increase, the tax could be lowered by, say, two-thirds of that amount.
The carbon price would thus increase over time – the optimal outcome, according to growth models that account for climate constraints.
At the same time, it would buffer consumers from oil-price volatility, thereby stabilizing their energy spending.
Finally, and perhaps most important, such an approach would be more politically attractive than a fixed carbon tax, especially if it is introduced at a time of sharply declining oil prices.
In short, world leaders must take advantage of falling oil prices to move beyond indirect carbon pricing – achieved through the prices of carbon-emitting substances – to an explicit carbon tax that can help steer the world onto a more sustainable growth path.
Crucially, in order to make a real impact, carbon-pricing schemes would have to be introduced in all major economies.
Of course, given the multitude of existing taxes, fees, and subsidies on energy products in various countries, the goal of aligning the effective cost of carbon with its most economically efficient level would take time to achieve.
But introducing a modest, flexible carbon tax in major economies would be an important first step.
Today’s environment of falling oil prices enables the world to take that step.
It should be modest, so that it is politically feasible; flexible, so that it helps stabilize user prices; and it should increase over time, to place the global economy on a more sustainable path.
Most important, it should be implemented quickly.
After all, this window of opportunity will not remain open for very long.
America’s Saving Perils