In Ukraine, by contrast, under-five child mortality rates have fallen only slightly, from 25 per 10,000 live births to 24, while life expectancy has declined from 70 years to 68.
The same stagnation applies to Russia.
The post-communist record shows that the countries that reformed most successfully are also the most democratic – indeed, as democratic as any in the West.
The worst economic outcomes in the region are found in countries that have diverged from democracy.
Democracy is not a panacea, but non-democratic regimes usually pursue worse economic polices than democratic governments do.
The former engage in predatory and unpredictable regulation, which produces a bad business environment.
Another danger is heavy taxation.
Official taxes are high when spending is high.
When spending is high, it is usually social spending that is badly targeted, which means that only a small share of poor people really benefit.
Moreover, corruption payments should be added to official taxation.
It may turn out that most businesses are hit by heavy taxation of both varieties – so heavy that the economy cannot grow, as appears to be the case in Ukraine.
Furthermore, uneven protection of property rights – crony capitalism – means that a small number of businessmen are politically favored.
They may pay lower taxes, or their competitors may be subject to raids by the authorities.
Because the state uses its apparatus to deter competition – both informally, through arbitrary enforcement of property rights, and formally, through trade restrictions – crony capitalism is not only unjust, but also inefficient.
Individual businessmen may succeed, but the economy will not.
Without competition, capitalism works only a little better than socialism did.
A key ingredient of Poland’s success in the last 20 years was a clear separation, from the very beginning of the post-communist transition, between politics and business.
There were uniform rules and equal protection for everyone.
Poland introduced massive competition by dismantling monopolies and opening its economy to the world.
Moreover, Poland avoided extreme booms and the deep recessions that follow.
Most booms are produced by bad monetary and fiscal policies.
This is true of the recent boom-bust sequence in Spain, Ireland, the United States, the United Kingdom, Bulgaria, and the Baltics, among others.
In Ukraine, too, a huge boom in 2004-2007 was followed by a contraction amounting to almost 15% GDP in 2009 – a direct result of domestic policies.
Ukraine’s record over the past 20 years demonstrates that it is not enough to abolish socialism.
The real challenge is to build free-market, rule-based capitalism.
And, to do that, an energetic civil society must demand an end to crony capitalism.
Ukraine’s citizens can become more like their Central European neighbors, or they can allow the economy’s many distortions from past bad policies to persist, in which case they will fall further behind.
Ukraine’s Struggle for Law
One year after our Orange Revolution, many Ukrainians see its ideals as betrayed.
Belief in a government answerable to the people and in a transparent market purged of insider dealing no longer guides government policy.
Instead, the ideals for which we struggled appear as slogans invoked by those who want to protect their vested interests.
Cynics explain this by saying that our AOrange” ideals were never anything but the rationalizations of one set of oligarchs struggling to overthrow another.
Once masters of the situation, it is said, the zeal of those who promised reform mutated into a zeal to preserve their private wealth and that of their friends.
How did Ukraine reach this state of cynicism?
A year ago, everyone gathered in the streets of Kyiv knew what we were standing up against: a corrupt government that sought to command life and labor, and to dispose of state property, at its will.
In so far as formal legal rights existed, no court could be relied upon to enforce those rights when our rulers saw their interests as challenged.
In evicting that regime, we believed that this form of absolutism was ended.
Instead, those who benefited from the regime=s corruptions insisted that their rights to the property they had stolen were inviolate.
These crony capitalists argue that, if they are left alone to develop their assets, they will make the country prosperous.
Tamper with property, no matter how ill-gotten, and no investor will have confidence, they claim.
That is the oldest excuse to justify wrongdoing: the end justifies the means.
But power - be it political or economic - without legitimate origins is arbitrary.
An economy that appears arbitrary and illegitimate in the eyes of the majority of people may, for a time, run on the false confidence of easy profits.
Corruption, however, is inevitable because the rule of law, which is the market=s ultimate guarantor, depends on the consent of all its participants and their belief in its core fairness.
A radical lawlessness was at the heart of Ukraine’s privatization process.
So we must not be tricked by the fact that those who gained economic power by looting state assets now employ lawyers, invoke free market nostrums, and claim to follow the letter of the law.
For there is such a thing as a lawless legality.
It is found when governments deny that in making or interpreting laws they are bound by the spirit of law.
In this respect, the oligarchs and their political placemen who insist that their right to stolen property is sacred make the same crude claim as the regime that we overthrew: that they have an indefeasible right to the exercise of power.
They reject the principle that there is a law which is superior to presidents, magnates, majorities, or mobs.
If their claim is upheld, then the cynics are right: our revolution was merely about whether one class or another, one person or another, would obtain the power to work his or her will.
Endorsing the claim to arbitrary power is the cardinal heresy of those who say we should certify property stolen from the state as rightfully owned.
I call this a heresy because it rejects the supremacy of equality under law and proclaims the supremacy of particular men. This is alien to any and all concepts of liberty.
It is the legalism of the barbarian, and the nihilist philosophy everyone in reaction against the coming of political and economic liberty to Ukraine.
Legal primitives are not alone in embracing this stance.
Many economists also believe that ownership of stolen goods must be recognized.
They liken the transition from communism to the state of nature described by John Locke. So they imagine the property rights acquired through cronyism, nepotism, and backroom dealing as somehow emerging from a Lockean realm of freedom.
When my government questioned this assumption, they cried out that this was interference by the state with legitimate property rights.
Another group also succumbed to this delusion.
Some who a year ago displayed great public spirit came to feel, when in government, that they could not vindicate the supremacy of law without curtailing economic growth.
Because the grind of government can obscure enduring principle, people inspired by the best motives now find themselves on the same side as their criminal adversaries.
They have, I believe, lost their way and taken a path that can only lead back to the supremacy of arbitrary power.
Indeed, the denial that men may be arbitrary is the higher law by which we must govern.
Without this conviction the letter of the law is nothing but a mask for bureaucratic caprice and authoritarian will.
For when people do not believe that their government adheres to this higher spirit of law, no constitution is worth the paper it is written on; no business transaction is safe.
For maintaining a constitutional order and viable free market requires an intuitive dislike of arbitrariness, a sensitivity to its manifestations, and spontaneous resistance.
This was why my government sought to recover stolen state property.
By doing so, and then auctioning that property in a transparent manner, Ukrainians saw that arbitrary action could be redressed, that the rule of law applied to the powerful as well as the weak.
Indeed, this did happen with the one property recovery that my government was able to secure, the giant Kryvorizhstal steel works that our former president’s son-in-law gained through a rigged sale at a bargain price.
On its re-auction, Ukraine received more than five times the amount that had been paid through that insider deal.
Ukraine must continue in this way if our people are to trust the law and their institutions.
The lesson in the open Kryvorizhstal auction is clear: if a president may not act willfully, arbitrarily, by personal prerogative, then no one may. Ministers may not.
Parliament may not. Majorities may not.
Individuals may not. Crowds may not.
Only by adhering to this higher law will Ukraine develop the consciousness of law that true liberty demands.
By identifying the law with their vested rights, the oligarchs who have (for now!) derailed the ideals of the Orange Revolution sought to shield their own interests from challenge.
But because men pervert a truth there is no reason to abandon it.
If, as we were taught by Marx, belief in a higher law is a mixture of sentimentality, superstition, and unconscious rationalizations, then the predations that incited the Orange Revolution are in reality the only possible conditions in which we can live.
We must give up the hope of liberty within an ordered society and market and resign ourselves to that interminable war of all against all of which Hobbes spoke.
Indeed, the policies now being offered seem hostile to the ideals of our Orange Revolution.
We are asked to choose between social solidarity and economic growth.
To escape from want we are told we must embrace illegality.
To promote the truth, we are told that old crimes - even the beheading of a journalist and the poisoning of our president - must not be closely examined.
These choices are as false as they are intolerable.
Yet these are the choices offered by our influential doctrinaires.
But to see these as Ukraine’s only options is to mistake weariness for wisdom, and to be discouraged rather than to understand.
For the search for law has an irresistible energy. No human obstruction can long withstand it.
Though we may take a step back now and then, as we have recently, only by adhering to this higher law can Ukraine achieve freedom and prosperity for all.
Achieve it we will.
Ukraine’s Watershed Election
Ukraine’s politics are not those of the steppe.
Our voters cannot stroll in one direction during one poll, and in the opposite direction the next time they vote, without worrying about falling over the edge.
Ukrainians are people of the watershed: we live on either one side or the other of a great divide.
A year ago, Ukrainians dared to risk the unfamiliar territory over the hill, and found democracy and the promise of a more open and honest economy.
But democracy is messy; with some of our Orange Revolution’s promises postponed or disavowed by President Viktor Yushchenko, there is a chance that on March 26, when Ukrainians vote for a new parliament, they may in their disappointment choose to return to the realm of corrupt and autocratic rule.
The alternatives – for my country, for Russia, and for Europe – are clear.
Of the three leading electoral coalitions that are challenging each other, the forces that supported the Orange Revolution seek a modern and democratic future for our country.
The other bloc offers the near-certainty of a return to a surly and squalid isolation ­ -- perhaps the beginning of the end of our hard-won independence.
Of course, our Orange forces are not perfect, and Viktor Yanukovych – who again opposes Ukraine’s democrats – is not Stalin reincarnated.
But the records of both alternatives suggest that Ukraine under those who backed the Orange Revolution will remain a member of the club of democracies and open economies, whereas under Yanukovich, Ukraine would turn its back on reform, and may re-embrace the grimmest aspects of our Soviet past.
Yanukovych’s “Party of the Regions” has been leading in opinion polls for months, and the world should remember that Yushchenko’s ultimate triumph over him in 2004 was by a whisker, not a landslide.
Moreover, Yushchenko used his year in power mostly to disappoint those whose votes he now needs.
The case against a Yanukovych counter-revolution is that it would be just that: a ruthless effort to undo Ukraine’s democratic and legal reforms.
Moreover, he would not be left to himself to govern, but would be a marionette of the oligarchs who bankroll his party, and perhaps of Russia, which yearns ­– albeit more discretely than a year ago – for his triumph.
Yanukovych’s party contains the largest core of unreconstructed apparatchiks of any party.
Many of its candidates seek office not to work for Ukraine’s betterment, but to gain parliamentary immunity from prosecution.
Some say we should not worry, that democracy and the market are now too well established in Ukraine to be replaced; that reform is irreversible; and that the country’s ruling oligarchic clans, like those of Eastern Europe, will in time become law-abiding capitalists.
Alas, this view is based more on wishful-thinking than on reality.
A year after the Orange Revolution demonstrated ordinary Ukrainians’ fidelity to liberty, Yanukovych still evinces no faith in democracy, and the “single economic space” with Russia that he backs will strengthen the abusive oligarchic system and rule out liberalization.
Yanukovych’s foreign policy might not be openly subservient to Russia, but it won’t also be a clearly pro-western one either.
A Yanukovych government promises the semi-neutrality of semi-paralysis.
Many who support Yanukovych do not necessarily wish to go back to the old days but are confused by the buffeting they have received in the past decade.
Yanukovych panders to xenophobes and anti-Semites, and his strongest appeal is to the core of angry diehards who detest the collapse of Soviet power.
He remains unrepentant about the obscene levels of corruption during his tenure as prime minister.
I do not claim that the Orange Revolution’s protagonists are paragons, and that the split between Yushchenko and me has not disheartened many of those who stood with us in the streets of Kyiv in the winter of 2004-2005.
But no one can question that we brought more honest government, and the beginnings of a more open economy, to Ukraine.
We began the battle against entrenched corruption, imposed the rule of law on Ukraine’s robber barons, and encouraged the birth of a vital civil society.
Most Ukrainians feel more secure because of these changes.
This is why our people should know precisely what they are voting for this Sunday.
I have pledged that, under no circumstances will I form a coalition government with Viktor Yanukovych.
President Yushchenko should do the same.
Only by restoring our partnership can we hope to keep our Orange Revolution’s promises.
Criminal and civil codes will be enforced; our courts will be allowed to find their feet and their freedom.
Above all, the new Rada (parliament) will settle down to the business of enacting laws and monitoring the government, not carving up the budget among corrupt clans.
We will fight for essential reforms to bring the country in line with European norms.
Relations with Vladimir Putin’s Russia will be repaired.
Elections are seldom make-or-break affairs. This one is.
For the battle for Ukraine’s liberty and independence was not decided last winter.
A Yanukovych restoration would be a disaster for Ukraine, for Russia, and for Europe, because it would put Ukraine’s independence in question and tempt Russia with dreams of renewed empire.
Only a second victory over Yanukovych can secure a future of freedom and hope for Ukraine’s people.
Ukraine: The Next Crisis?
The Russian invasion of Georgia has sent shock waves throughout the West and the former Soviet space - especially Ukraine.
Indeed, Ukraine could be the next potential crisis.
Georgia's increasingly pro-Western course, including growing ties to NATO, has been a thorn in Moscow's side.
But it did not pose a serious threat to Russian security.
Georgia's army is small, ill-equipped and no match for Russia's, as was amply demonstrated this month.
Ukraine's integration into NATO, by contrast, would have far-reaching strategic consequences, ending any residual Russian hopes of forming a ampquot;Slavic Unionampquot; composed of Russia, Belarus and Ukraine - a dream that still beats in the breast of many Russians.
It would also have important implications for the Russian defense industry, notably air defense and missile production.
In short, the real source of Moscow's anxiety and strategic angst is Ukraine's future political and security orientation.
Georgia has largely been a side show.
Russia has a number of means of pressuring Ukraine short of using military force.
One is energy. Ukraine is heavily dependent on Russian energy, particularly gas.
Russia has used the gas issue as a foreign policy instrument.
Ukraine currently pays $179 per 1,000 cubic meters for gas from Russia - more than three times what it paid in 2004 - and there have been reports that Moscow is considering a further doubling of the price.
Russia's long-term strategy is to try to gain control of Ukraine's pipelines by transferring them to a joint venture, as it has done in Belarus, thus enabling it to control both supply and distribution of gas to Ukraine.
The Black Sea Fleet is another potential source of tension.
Under an agreement signed in 1997, Ukraine granted Russia basing rights for the fleet at Sevastopol in Crimea until 2017.
Ukraine has been pressing Russia to begin discussions on the fleet's withdrawal. But Russia has dragged its feet, suggesting that Moscow may seek to use the presence of the fleet as a means of pressuring Ukraine.
Crimea itself represents a third potential flash point.
Crimea is the only region in Ukraine where ethnic Russians constitute an overwhelming majority of the population (58 per cent).
Khrushchev transferred the peninsula to Ukraine in 1954 as a gift to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the unification of Ukraine and Russia.
At the time, the gesture was largely symbolic, as Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union and few could envisage an independent Ukraine.
Separatist pressures emerged in Crimea immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
They subsided after 1995 largely because the Russian separatists were divided, and Moscow, facing separatist pressures in Chechnya, showed little inclination to support them.
However, separatist pressures, while diminished, continue to exist in Crimea.
Given Crimea's historic ties to Russia and its majority ethnic Russian population, many Ukrainian officials fear that Russia could try to foment separatist movements in Crimea as a means of putting pressure on Ukraine to curb its ties to the West.
Moscow's tactics in Abkhazia and South Ossetia provide cause for concern in this regard.
Russia encouraged and supported separatist movements in both entities, then used the separatist tensions to justify sending ampquot;Russian peacekeepersampquot; into the regions.
Moreover, it granted Russian citizenship to Abkhaz and South Ossetian residents, and then justified its recent invasion of Georgia on the grounds that it had an obligation to protect Russian citizens.
Western allies have a strong strategic interest in supporting Ukrainian democracy and Ukraine's Euro-Atlantic integration.
But this course must be pursued prudently and with great care.
As the Georgian crisis has underscored, there are limits to the ability to influence developments in a region where Russia has strong strategic interests and a preponderance of military power.
Thus Europe and the United States need to be very careful about making security commitments they are unwilling or unable to carry out.
This does not mean that Moscow should be given a veto over Ukraine's security orientation or that Ukraine can never become a member of NATO.
The door for Ukraine to join NATO should remain open.
But with Russia in a defiant mood and refusing to fully withdraw its troops from Georgia, now is not the time to accelerate efforts to bring Ukraine into the Alliance.
Poking an angry bear is not a wise policy.
Ask Mikheil Saakashvili.
Ukraine’s Vote, Russia’s Fate
STOCKHOLM – When Ukraine’s voters go to the polls on October 26, not only the fate of their country will be at stake; so will the future of a significant part of Europe.
To put it simply: the future of Ukraine will decide the future of Russia, and the future of Russia will have a substantial impact on the future of Europe.
When the Soviet Union collapsed more than two decades ago, and Ukraine opted for independence, many expected the country to do better than Russia in the years to come.
But events turned out differently.
During the first decade of the new century, Russia benefited from the combined effect of an old hydrocarbon industry that privatization in the 1990s had made more efficient and high oil prices.
The reversal of sought-after economic diversification, and the reduction of “modernization” to little more than a slogan, caused no immediate concern.
By contrast, Ukraine became the worst managed of all the post-Soviet states, with cronyism and corruption thwarting productive capacity, and causing the country to fall further and further behind other post-communist countries in transition.
Most notable is the comparison with Poland: at independence, the two countries had roughly the same GDP per capita; today, Poland’s is more than three times higher.
The Orange Revolution in 2004 was a failure for most Ukrainians.
The hoped-for break with the past did not occur, as political infighting among the country’s new leaders blocked the implementation of any serious reform agenda.
But 2004 was also a bitter failure for Russian President Vladimir Putin, who tried to bring his favored presidential candidate, Viktor Yanukovych, to power in Kyiv by supporting massive vote manipulation.
The failure was a bitter blow to the Kremlin, one that was neither forgiven nor forgotten.
Then, in 2010, the Orange Revolution’s failure brought Yanukovych to power in a free and fair election, and in 2012 Putin selected himself for a third presidential term in Russia.
The creation of a new Eurasia Union was a key part of his platform.
In the meantime, Ukraine had been negotiating with the European Union for a free-trade and association agreement since 2007, and these talks were completed in early 2012.
Though entirely compatible with the existing free-trade agreement between Ukraine and Russia, the proposed pact with the EU certainly was not compatible with Putin’s Eurasia project.
A little more than a year ago, the Kremlin began its offensive to turn Ukraine away from an EU agreement that was supported even by Yanukovych and his Party of Regions.
The rest – Yanukovych’s renunciation of the EU agreement, the popular uprising that ousted him in response, two invasions by Russia, and thousands of people killed in the country’s eastern Donbas region – is history.
The Kremlin is seeking more than the annexation of Crimea and control over the Donbas rust belt; its aim is to prevent Ukraine from going West, force it to turn East, and quash any risk within Russia’s wider orbit of further revolutions like the one that brought down Yanukovych.
Western sanctions against Russia have certainly highlighted the seriousness with which the EU and the United States view Putin’s efforts to challenge and undermine the core principles of European security and international law.
But even a weakened Russia will still be a strong power in its immediate neighborhood.
At the end of the day, it is only the strength and determination of Ukraine that can block Russia’s revisionist ambitions.
But to strengthen a Ukraine plagued by corruption and cronyism, and heavily burdened by Russian aggression and destabilization, is no easy task.
The election on Sunday must give rise to a government that is truly determined to bring radical reform to the country.
Such a government must be able to count on the strong and determined support of the wider international community.
A revised and reinforced International Monetary Fund package is imperative if the necessary reforms are to be enacted.
The country’s irrational energy policy, based on immensely wasteful subsidies to consumers, must be fundamentally altered.
And the agreement with the EU must be used to drive the reform process forward.
If this agenda succeeds, the Kremlin’s revisionist bid will be blocked; as this becomes apparent, there might even be an opening for a new and urgently needed wave of reform in Russia itself.
But if reform fails, there is little doubt that the Kremlin will continue its policies until it reaches its aims in Kyiv.
Putin is in no hurry, but he clearly knows what he wants.
Then, set on a course of continued confrontation with the West, Russia might hunker down into a siege mentality, with the risk that the Kremlin might seek to compensate for economic failure with further revisionist behavior.
Anyone familiar with the aggressively nationalist posturing of Russian state-controlled media nowadays knows the danger of this.
It is in these circumstances that the real danger for Europe could arise.
The ambitions of such a Russia will not stop at the Dnieper River.
Revisionism might turn into outright revanchism as the Kremlin seeks to counter-balance internal weakness with demonstrations of external strength.
By that time, it might be too late to stop a slide toward a wider confrontation.
That is why the emergence of a strong and democratic Ukraine from decades of failure is needed now.
The election this Sunday is crucial for Ukraine, but it also holds the key to encouraging the transformation of Russia into a true member of the democratic European family.
Encouraging Work
SANTIAGO – Some policies are economically illiterate, for they cause avoidable inefficiency.
Others are heartless, for they cause avoidable human suffering.
Few policies manage to be economically illiterate and heartless all at once.
But Britain’s Conservative government has achieved just that, by cutting tax credits for low-income workers.
The system, introduced in 2003 by a Labour government, is modeled after the United States’ Earned Income Tax Credit.
Both work in practice like a wage subsidy for those with low incomes, cutting poverty – particularly among women with young children – while strengthening incentives to work.
Success has attracted emulators.
Turkey adopted regionally targeted employment subsidies in 2004-2005.
When I was Chile’s finance minister, our center-left government adopted a wage subsidy in 2008, focused on young workers.
South Africa’s government did much the same in 2014.
Other middle-income countries have discussed adopting similar policies.
The Tory move in the United Kingdom is based on shortsighted fiscal calculations (appearing to shave additional pounds from the budget deficit) and shortsighted political calculations (displaying “toughness” to right-wing voters who believe that the poor are undeserving).
But the move is also interesting in terms of what it reveals about the coming debate on the role of work (and of labor-market policies) in both advanced and emerging economies.
Two forces are shaping this debate.
The first is technological change.
After globalization made it easier to move manufacturing and service jobs from rich to poor countries, growing automation now threatens to move jobs from humans to robots.
A recent paper by two Oxford University economists estimates that up to 47% of all jobs in the US are at risk.
Techno-optimists like venture capitalist Peter Thiel point out that machines consume little (beyond electricity) while allowing us to produce vastly more, so their effects on human welfare must be unambiguously positive.
Techno-pessimists like Robert Skidelsky fear that machines will wipe out so many jobs that governments will be forced to provide an income to all citizens.
Neither is right.
Fears about job losses arising from technological progress are not new.
The nineteenth-century Luddites fretted over that.
Inventions like the steam engine and the power loom destroyed some jobs but eventually created many more.
But there are caveats.
One is that adjustment is lengthy, because old jobs go quickly but new ones can take a long time to replace them.
Public policies are needed both to accelerate the process and to alleviate human suffering.
Another caveat is that technological change may worsen the income distribution if the jobs that are destroyed are those filled by unskilled workers.
Less demand for their services will cause their relative (and perhaps absolute) wages to drop, causing income inequality to rise.
Again, activist policy is called for, and here schemes like wage subsidies can play a key role.
Unfortunately, the acrimonious politics surrounding today’s jobs debate makes crafting the right policy response difficult.
In rich countries, the stagnation of middle-class wages has caused understandable anxiety.
Politicians like Hillary Clinton in the United States are promising that they can cajole large corporations into paying higher wages.
They have the backing of luminaries like the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman, who, building on the pioneering work of economists David Card and Alan Krueger, argues that raising the minimum wage need not destroy a lot of jobs (as conservative opponents insist) – and may even create some.
(Paradoxically, British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne seems to agree with these left-leaning American Democrats: He offered a minimum-wage increase as partial compensation for cutting wage subsidies.)
Politics is heating up in middle-income countries as well, and unions are pressing politicians to take action.
Consider Chile, where the current leftist government has sent a bill to Congress that promises to improve income distribution simply by giving unions more power in collective bargaining.
The aims are lofty, but the proposed policies alone will not solve the problem.
Limited minimum-wage increases in a growing economy need not cost jobs; but sizeable increases in a context of slumping growth (the norm nearly everywhere today) surely will.
And automation will make it easier to substitute machines for workers, likely undermining the low elasticity of labor demand with respect to the cost of hiring (adjusted to include turnover and training costs) that underlies the Card-Krueger-Krugman view.
Similarly, the potential for union-led bargaining to redistribute income presupposes non-competitive corporate practices, which in turn generate abnormal profits that can be bargained away by unions.
But globalization and technological progress, by making it easier to match supply and demand, will make such monopolistic behavior harder to maintain in the future.
Moreover, traditional redistribution policies presuppose traditional, contract-bound workers.
That, too, can no longer be taken for granted.
Are Uber drivers Uber employees?
The debate is raging in cities from Paris to San Francisco, and one can be sure that similar controversies will erupt in many more cities and countries – and not just over Uber.
We are accustomed to the idea that owners of capital hire laborers and set the rules.
In the future, technology may enable laborers to hire the capital they need and work with an unprecedented degree of autonomy.
Distributional struggles will look very different in that kind of world.
Last month, I attended a conference in France entitled “What if work were the key?”
The attendees – France’s best and brightest – resoundingly concluded that work does seem to be the key to enhancing social cohesion, and to more fulfilling lives.
The attendees also agreed that the best way to improve income distribution is to provide work to those who have no job (and therefore no income).
One figure mentioned at the conference stuck out: Out of today’s five billion working-age people, only three billion have jobs.
Solving that problem will require fresher thinking than experts and politicians have provided so far.
Osborne and the British Tories got it completely wrong.
Others should ignore their example.
Is 70 Too Old for the UN?
NEW YORK – As world leaders prepare to gather next week at the United Nations in New York to ratify the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and commemorate the UN’s 70th anniversary, for many a fundamental question has become inescapable.
In the face of growing global disorder – including turmoil in the Middle East, waves of migrants flooding into Europe, and China’s unilateral moves to enforce its territorial claims – does the UN have a future?
Grounds for pessimism are undeniable.
Conflicts rage on, seemingly unaffected by upholders of world order.
Despite more than two decades of talk, the Security Council’s permanent membership (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States) still reflects the geopolitical realities of 1945, not 2015.
Denied accommodation in the Bretton Woods institutions (the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund) commensurate with its economic clout, China has established its own alternatives, which other countries have flocked to join.
The G-20 seems more representative than the Security Council – and more imbued with common purpose.
Yet the UN should not be written off.
It continues to serve a vital purpose, and its history suggests that it can be revitalized to meet the needs of the twenty-first century.
The UN began, in 1945, as a vision shared by the leaders of the victorious Allies, who were determined to ensure that the second half of the twentieth century did not play out like the first half.
After two world wars, countless civil wars, brutal dictatorships, mass expulsions of populations, and the horrors of the Holocaust and Hiroshima, “never again” was not just a slogan: the alternative was too apocalyptic to contemplate.
To this end, the Allies sought an alternative to the balance-of-power politics that had wreaked such havoc in the preceding five decades.
Their idea – now called “global governance” – was to create an institutional architecture that could foster international cooperation, elaborate consensual global norms, and establish predictable, universally applicable rules, to the benefit of all.
The hope that many placed in the UN Charter was soon dashed by the onset of the Cold War.
And yet global statesmen made good use of the new organization as a forum to contain superpower tensions.
Peacekeeping missions, not even mentioned in the Charter, were devised to contain conflicts around the world, and to prevent them from igniting a superpower conflagration.
Thanks to the UN, World War III never happened.
Moreover, the UN’s contribution to peace during the Cold War is not the whole story.
Its decolonization efforts freed millions from the yoke of imperialist oppression.
Economic and social development rose to the top of its agenda.
As global governance has evolved, the UN system has become the port of call for innumerable “problems without passports”: the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the degradation of our common environment, epidemics, war crimes, and mass migration.
Such problems require solutions without passports, because no country or group of countries can solve them alone.
With universality comes legitimacy.
Because all countries are members, the UN enjoys a global standing that gives its decisions and actions a degree of authority that no individual government enjoys beyond its own borders.
The binary international order of the Cold War is long gone.
Instead, the metaphor for today’s globalized world is that of the World Wide Web, in which we increasingly function through multiple networks.
Sometimes those networks overlap, with common participants, and sometimes they are distinct; they all serve our interests in different ways and for different purposes.
Many countries once felt insulated – by wealth, strength, or distance – from external dangers.
But now they realize that local security forces are not enough to protect their citizens, and that the safety of people everywhere depends on internationally coordinated efforts to combat terrorism, pollution, infectious diseases, illegal drugs, and weapons of mass destruction, and to promote human rights, democracy, and development.
The UN has not fully succeeded in turning recognition into reality.
But at its best and its worst, the UN is a mirror of the world.
As the legendary Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld famously put it, “The United Nations was not created to take mankind to heaven, but to save humanity from hell.”
I believe strongly that the UN needs reform, not because it has failed, but because it has succeeded enough to be worth investing in.
As the agreement on the SDGs demonstrates, there is much that can be accomplished with the UN as the lynchpin of our system of global governance.
Moreover, the UN has proved a remarkably adaptable organization; it would not have survived so long if it was not.
While it must be reformed to accommodate today’s world, all that is needed is a smidgen of the statesmanship shown seven decades ago, when world leaders subordinated their immediate short-term interests to a long-term vision of the kind of world they wanted their children to inhabit.
The UN remains the source of laws and norms that countries negotiate together and agree to uphold as the “rules of the road.”
And it remains the pre-eminent forum where sovereign states can come together to share burdens, address shared problems, and seize common opportunities.
In other words, the UN’s foundations, laid down in 1945, remain strong.
But they must be buttressed if they are to withstand the ongoing shifts in countries’ strategic weight.
As the UN turns 70, it is time to reaffirm its founders’ guiding vision – a vision born of devastation that remains a source of universal hope for a better world.
The Unavoidable Costs of Helicopter Money
MUNICH – The long-running debate about the advisability of so-called helicopter money has changed shape, as new ideas emerge about the form it could take – and questions arise about whether it is already being dropped on some economies.
What hasn’t changed is that embracing helicopter money would be a very bad idea.
According to the conventional view, helicopter money is newly printed cash that the central bank doles out, without booking corresponding assets or claims on its balance sheet.
It can come in the form of cash transfers to the public or as the monetization of government debt; in both cases, it is a permanent loss for the central bank.
In practice, helicopter money can look a lot like quantitative easing – purchases by central banks of government securities on secondary markets to inject liquidity into the banking system.
The helicopter-money version would be the purchase of zero-interest-rate government bonds that will not be repaid, either because they are perpetual bonds or because they are rolled over every time they mature.
That is arguably what the Bank of Japan is now doing.
BOJ Governor Haruhiko Kuroda has said that directly underwriting the budget deficit is not an option.
Nonetheless, he has initiated a policy of replacing the government bonds on the BOJ’s balance sheet once they mature, while constantly increasing the volume of government debt on the central bank’s books.
This comes after years of declarations by prominent economists, including Berkeley’s Brad DeLong and former US Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke, that helicopter money offers a way to overcome deflation (with which Japan has struggled for decades).
The idea is that, by monetizing the fiscal deficit, the central bank helps the government to finance growth-enhancing investments in, say, infrastructure, while providing the liquidity needed to counter deflationary forces.
If it sounds too good to be true, that’s because it is.
As Milton Friedman often said, in economics, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
In fact, there are major downsides to helicopter money.
Most important, by enabling the monetization of unlimited amounts of government debt, the policy would undermine the credibility of the authorities’ targets for price stability and a stable financial system.
This is not a risk, but a certainty, as historical experience with war finance – including, incidentally, in Japan – demonstrates only too clearly.
In the early 1930s, under Finance Minister Takahashi Korekiyo, Japan implemented money-financed deficit spending, in order to lift the economy out of deflation.
But it worked a little too well, generating a powerful wave of inflation.
Korekiyo’s subsequent attempts to rein in public deficits by slashing military spending failed.
The military rebelled, and Korekiyo was assassinated in 1936.
Germany’s monetary breakdown after World War I also stemmed from the issuance of war bonds to the German public.
In the United States, the excessive printing of dollars to finance the Civil War contributed to high inflation.
The list goes on.
Some proponents of helicopter money, such as Adair Turner, former head of the United Kingdom’s Financial Services Authority, argue that this danger can be neutralized with clear rules to limit the use of monetary and fiscal stimulus.
And, theoretically, they are right.
But are such limitations politically realistic?
The truth is that the central bank would struggle to defend its independence once the taboo of monetary financing of government debt was violated.
Policymakers would pressure it to continue serving up growth for free, particularly in the run-up to elections.
Even if central banks did retain their independence, it is doubtful that they would be able to steer inflation gradually to, say, 2%, and then keep it there.
Dispensing liquidity to spur inflation is much easier than draining it to prevent price growth from spinning out of control.
The problem, which Friedman identified in 1969, is that while helicopter money generates more demand in an economy, it does not create more supply.
So the continued provision of helicopter money after an economy has returned to normal capacity utilization – the point at which demand and supply are in equilibrium – will cause inflation to take off.
Developed economies have not reached that point today, because the consequences of the 2008 global financial crisis are still dampening demand.
But once deleveraging is complete and the credit cycle turns, inflationary pressure is likely to reappear.
And central banks’ efforts to suppress it will carry large costs, in terms of employment and growth, as occurred in the 1980s and 1990s.
But even if supply-side growth were maintained, say, by China, thereby holding down prices of tradable goods, helicopter money would carry major costs, because debt would still be growing faster than nominal GDP.
In the long run, that would jeopardize confidence in the central bank, saddled with claims against an over-indebted government, and put the fiat money system at risk.
Once investors began to move their assets into more stable currencies, the local currency would depreciate and bond prices would collapse.
All forms of monetary stimulus – from quantitative easing to negative interest rates – carry risks.
But helicopter money is particularly dangerous; indeed, there is no realistic scenario in which such a policy would not go awry.
It is time to recognize, once and for all, that governments, not central banks, are responsible for generating long-term employment and growth, by ensuring favorable investment conditions, a high-quality education system, and open, competitive markets.
Monetary policymakers should defend this red line – which means keeping the helicopters on the ground.
What Are We Betting On?
LAGUNA BEACH – When I consider the prospects for the global economy and markets, I am taken aback by the extent to which the world has collectively placed a huge bet on three fundamental outcomes: a shift toward materially higher and more inclusive global growth, the avoidance of policy mistakes, and the prevention of market accidents.
Though all three outcomes are undoubtedly desirable, the unfortunate reality is that they are far from certain – and bets on them without some hedging could prove exceedingly risky for current and future generations.
The first component of the bet – more inclusive global growth – anticipates continued economic recovery in the United States, with a 3% growth rate this year bolstered by robust wage growth.
It also assumes China’s annual growth rate will stabilize at 6.5-7%, thereby enabling the risks posed by pockets of excessive leverage in the shadow-banking system to be gradually defused, even as the economy’s growth engines continue to shift from exports and public capital spending toward domestic consumption and private investment.
Another, more uncertain assumption underpinning the bet on more inclusive growth is that the eurozone and Japan will be able to escape the mire of low growth and avoid deflation, which, by impelling households and businesses to postpone purchasing decisions, would undermine already weak economic performance.
Finally, the bet assumes that oil-exporting countries like Nigeria, Venezuela, and especially Russia will fend off economic implosion, even as global oil prices plummet.
These are bold assumptions – not least because achieving these outcomes would require considerable economic reinvention, extending far beyond rebalancing aggregate demand and eliminating pockets of excessive indebtedness.
While the US and China are significantly better placed than others, most of these economies – in particular, the struggling eurozone countries, Japan, and some emerging markets – would have to nurture entirely new growth engines.
The eurozone would also have to deepen integration.
That adds up to a tough reform agenda – made all the more challenging by adjustment fatigue, increasingly fragmented domestic politics, and rising geopolitical tensions.
In this context, a determined shift toward markedly higher and more inclusive global growth is far from guaranteed.
The second component of the collective bet – the avoidance of policy mistakes – is similarly tenuous.
The fundamental assumption here is that the untested, unconventional policies adopted by central banks, particularly in advanced countries, to repress financial volatility and maintain economic stability will buy enough time for governments to design and deliver a more suitable and comprehensive policy response.
This experimental approach by central banks has involved the conscious decoupling of financial-asset prices from their fundamentals.
The hope has been that more buoyant market valuations would boost consumption (via the “wealth effect,” whereby asset-owning households feel wealthier and thus more inclined to spend) and investment (via “animal spirits,” which bolster entrepreneurs’ willingness to invest in new plant, equipment, and hiring).
The problem is that the current economic and policy configuration in the developed world entails an unusual amount of “divergence.”
With policy adjustments failing to keep pace with shifts on the ground, an appreciating dollar has assumed the role of shock absorber.
But history has shown that such sharp currency moves can, by themselves, cause economic and financial instability.
The final element of the world’s collective bet is rooted in the belief that excessive market risk-taking has been tamed.
But a protracted period of policy-induced volatility repression has convinced investors that, with central banks on their side, they are safe – a belief that has led to considerable risk-positioning in some segments of finance.
With intermediaries becoming reluctant to take on securities that are undesirable to hold during periods of financial instability, market corrections can compound sudden and dramatic price shifts, disrupting the orderly functioning of financial systems.
So far, central banks have been willing and able to ensure that these periods are temporary and reversible.
But their capacity to continue to do so is limited – especially as excessive faith in monetary policy fuels leveraged market positioning.
The fact is that central banks do not have the tools to deliver rapid, sustainable, and inclusive growth on their own.
The best they can do is extend the bridge; it is up to other economic policymakers to provide an anchoring destination.
A bridge to nowhere can go only so far before it collapses.
The nature of financial risks has morphed and migrated in recent years; problems caused by irresponsible banks and threats to the payment and settlement systems have been supplanted by those caused by risk-taking among non-bank institutions.
With the regulatory system failing to evolve accordingly, the potential effectiveness of some macro-prudential policies has been undermined.
None of this is to say that the outlook for markets and the global economy is necessarily dire; on the contrary, there are notable upside risks that could translate into considerable and durable gains.
But understanding the world’s collective bet does underscore the need for more responsive and comprehensive policymaking.
Otherwise, economic outcomes will remain, as former US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke put it in 2010, “unusually uncertain.”
China’s Volatile Growth
MILAN – Uncertainty about China’s economic prospects is roiling global markets – not least because so many questions are so difficult to answer.
In fact, China’s trajectory has become almost impossible to anticipate, owing to the confusing – if not conflicting – signals being sent by policymakers.
In the real economy, the export-driven tradable sector is contracting, owing to weak foreign demand.
Faced with slow growth in Europe and Japan, moderate growth in the United States, and serious challenges in developing countries (with the exception of India), the Chinese trade engine has lost much of its steam.
At the same time, however, rising domestic demand has kept China’s growth rate relatively high – a feat that has been achieved without a substantial increase in household indebtedness.
As private consumption has expanded, services have proliferated, generating employment for many.
This is clear evidence of a healthy economic rebalancing.
The situation in the corporate sector is mixed.
On one hand, highly innovative and dynamic private firms are driving growth.
Indeed, as a forthcoming book by George S. Yip and Bruce McKern documents, these innovations are occurring in a wide range of areas, from biotechnology to renewable energy.
The most visible progress has come in the information technology sector, thanks to firms like Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu, Lenovo, Huawei, and Xiaomi.
On the other hand, the corporate sector remains subject to serious vulnerabilities.
The rapid expansion of credit in 2009 led to huge over-investment and excess capacity in commodity sectors, basic industries like steel, and especially real estate.
The now-struggling pillars of China’s old economic-growth model bear considerable responsibility for the current growth slowdown.
Despite these challenges, the reality is that China’s transition to a more innovative, consumer-driven economy is well underway.
This suggests that the economy is experiencing a bumpy deceleration, not a meltdown, and that moderate growth can reasonably be expected in the medium term – that is, unless the financial system’s problems intensify.
As it stands, non-performing loans are on the rise, owing largely to the weaknesses in heavy industry and real estate.
While official sources report that NPLs account for 1.67% of loans held by commercial banks, the Chinese investment bank CICC estimates the figure to be closer to 8%.
If so, the banking sector – and the wider economy – could suffer considerably.
Whether it does depends on the decisiveness of the policy response.
As in the late 1990s, after the Asian financial crisis, China may need to rely on the large state balance sheet for loan consolidation, debt write-offs, and bank recapitalization.
But the concerns do not end there.
Net private capital outflows remain substantial, and show no signs of slowing.
As a result, the reserves held by the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) have declined by roughly $500 billion over the last year, with particularly large declines of some $100 billion in each of the last two months.
These outflows, together with volatility in the stock and currency markets, have left investors and policymakers increasingly worried.
Unfortunately, a clear explanation for this behavior has yet to emerge.
Some blame it on the combination of progress toward opening the capital market and an overvalued exchange rate, anticipating that net inflows will resume once the currency resets closer to market level.
Others suspect the influence of inside information: The capital exodus is a signal that economic conditions and growth prospects are much worse than official figures imply.
Still others cite the impact of President Xi Jinping’s intensive anti-corruption campaign and, more generally, declining official tolerance for heterodox views.
Those who feel directly threatened by the anti-graft campaign might be inclined to take their money out of China.
But many others may be doing so for fear that, far from giving the markets a more “decisive role” in the economy, the government may be moving to assert greater control.
Capital tends to flow to places where rules are clear and stable.
Given China’s systemic importance in the global economy, uncertainty about its plans and prospects is bound to send tremors through global capital markets.
That is why it is so important that the Chinese government increase the transparency of its decision-making, including by communicating its policy decisions more effectively.
Consider the soothing impact of PBOC Governor Zhou Xiaochuan’s recent statement (following a long and baffling official silence on exchange-rate policy) that the central bank would keep the renminbi “basically stable” against a basket of currencies and the dollar.
But the principal unaddressed problem affecting China’s financial system is the pervasiveness of state control and ownership, and the implicit guarantees that pervade asset markets.
This leads to misallocation of capital (with small and medium-size private enterprises struggling the most) and the mispricing of risk, while contributing to a lax credit culture.
The absence of credit discipline is particularly problematic when combined with highly accommodative monetary policy, because it can artificially keep zombie companies afloat.
To resolve this problem, China’s leaders must segregate the state balance sheet from the credit allocation system; but there is no clear roadmap for doing so.
Moreover, they should build on efforts taken to open up the capital account, thereby improving the efficiency of capital allocation over time, though this process is undoubtedly complicated by the capriciousness of cross-border capital flows.
China’s current bout of economic volatility is likely to persist, though increased transparency could do much to blunt it.
Add to that the smart use of state resources, together with sure-footed reforms, and China should be able to achieve moderate yet sustainable long-term growth.
The Brexit Muddle
LAGUNA BEACH – During a recent visit to the United Kingdom, I was struck by the extent to which the question of whether the country should remain in the European Union is dominating the media, boardroom discussions, and dinner conversations.
While slogans and sound bites capture most of the attention, deeper issues in play leave the outcome of the June 23 referendum subject to a high degree of uncertainty – so much so that a single event could end up hijacking the decision.
Of course, the most cited arguments on both sides tend to be the most reductive.
On one side are those who caution that departure from the EU would cause trade to collapse, discourage investment, push the UK into recession, and trigger the demise of the City of London as a global financial center.
They point to the pound’s recent depreciation as a leading indicator of the financial instability that would accompany a British exit (or “Brexit”).
On the other side are those who argue that Brexit would unshackle the UK from the grip of EU bureaucracy and stop the flow of British taxpayer funds to other countries.
The pro-Brexit camp also positions itself as fighting to protect Britain from an uncontrollable influx of immigrants, from imported terrorism, and from laws formulated by foreigners who lack sufficient understanding and appreciation of British culture.
In a noisy and rough campaign – one that has already divided the Conservatives and contributed to the unease within Labour over the party’s leadership – the appeal of such simplistic arguments is obvious.
But Brexit is far more complex than the sound bites suggest.
And, in fact, many of the underlying issues that should shape the referendum’s outcome are still subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
Not only does that explain the inability of the British intellegentsia to reach consensus about the issue; it also leaves the Brexit question at the mercy of last-minute developments.
At the most fundamental level, Britain’s interest in the EU has centered on its status as a kind of supercharged free-trade area and an enabler of a “common passport” for financial services.
But while Britons support the free movement of goods and services, they are not particularly keen on the free movement of labor.
And they have little interest in “ever-closer union,” characterized by comprehensive political and economic integration.
This contrasts sharply with the vision upheld by many other EU members, including core countries like France and Germany, which view the EU’s single market as a stepping stone toward deeper integration, not an end in itself.
Traumatized by past wars and supportive of regionalization as a way to succeed in a fluid global economy, ever-closer union seems like the key to ensuring continued peace and prosperity.
But the situation is far more complicated than just reconciling two clear but competing visions.
Given widespread disagreement – including, as the referendum makes plain, within the UK itself – over what the “right” arrangement should look like, finding a solution that works for everyone seems all but impossible.
While British Prime Minister David Cameron has managed, in tricky negotiations, to secure concessions from his fellow European leaders regarding what would happen if the UK stayed in the EU, nobody really knows what would happen if British citizens vote to leave.
Without knowing what specific regional arrangements would follow Brexit, the pro-EU camp cannot make a decisive economic and financial case for remaining.
After all, following what admittedly would be a period of dislocation, the UK could end up with some type of association arrangement that preserves some of its current privileges, thereby limiting longer-term disruption.
The anti-EU camp is no better off.
It is difficult to prove that membership in the EU – which opponents portray as meddlesome and disruptive – has made Britain materially worse off.
And the ever-closer union that Brexit advocates so adamantly oppose is far from a sure thing.
In fact, the EU has been struggling to tackle collectively the challenges it faces – in particular, the refugee crisis, which has already strained passport-free travel within the Schengen Area (one of the most visible, celebrated, and appreciated achievements of European integration).
In the face of so much uncertainty, British voters would ultimately have to make their decision on the basis of pragmatic, not strategic, considerations.
And perhaps the most pragmatic choice would be to remain in the EU, at least for now, thereby preserving the option of changing their collective mind later, should new information warrant it.
Some are inclined to push harder.
They believe that a better version of this de facto “muddled middle” can be achieved through a game of “chicken.”
The UK votes to leave now, in the hopes that a panicked EU would not only grant further concessions, but also alter its own vision of ever-closer union.
With this high-risk strategy, the UK could end up decisively reshaping the EU according to its preferences.
But, given the other challenges currently facing the EU, this is not a likely outcome.
That is why remaining in the EU would be Britain’s best bet.
Such an approach would enable the UK to avoid the near-certainty of short-term disruptions, bank the concessions that Cameron has already secured, and keep their future options open, particularly as the EU itself evolves.
But that does not mean it is not a gamble.
After all, pragmatism does not always bring about the desired outcome.
Without a solid strategic vision, British citizens could end up ignoring analytical pragmatism, and instead decide how to vote in the referendum in response to a sudden event.
Given the horrific terrorist attacks in Paris in November and in Brussels last week, one must not ignore the possibility that the deplorable actions of disruptive non-state actors could become the pivotal factor determining the outcome of a referendum on the historic interactions of nation-states.
Should this awful possibility materialize, it would be a tragedy in more ways than one.
Uncertainty Shifts to China
Now that the dollar has dropped 43% from its high against the euro, the process of global financial rebalancing is seriously underway.
The United States’ trade and current account deficits have begun to shrink relative to American and world GDP.
Asian current account surpluses are about to start to shrink as well, especially if growth slows markedly in America in the aftermath of the end of its housing boom.
At the moment, Europe is feeling most of the pain, as the euro’s value has risen furthest and fastest against the dollar.
But Latin America and Asia will start to feel distress as well, as the decade-long US role as the global economy’s importer of last resort comes to an end.
As long as imbalances of world trade and capital flows unwind slowly and smoothly, the magnitude of any global economic distress should be relatively small.
Of course, it will not seem small to exporters and their workers who lose their American markets, or to Americans who lose access to cheap capital provided by foreigners.
But the next few years are certain to bring up a more threatening and more serious political-economic problem than the unwinding of global imbalances.
Yes, the US might enter a small recession – the odds are roughly 50-50 of that happening.
Yes, an American recession might spill over to the rest of the world and cause a worldwide recession.
And yes, global economic growth over the next five years is unlikely to be as rapid as growth in the last five years.
A formal recession, however, is not an overwhelming probability, and is likely to be small. The prospect of a truly hard landing – that global investors wake up one morning, suddenly recognize the US current account’s cannot be sustained, dump dollars, and bring about a crash of the global economy – is becoming less likely with each passing day.
Under two plausible scenarios – both concerning China – the unwinding of global imbalances could cause regional if not global depression.
In the first scenario, China continues to attempt to maintain full employment in Shanghai, Guangzhou, and elsewhere not by stimulating domestic demand but by trying to boost exports further by keeping the renminbi stable against the dollar and falling in value against the euro.
The effort to maintain the dollar-renminbi exchange rate at a level approved by China’s State Council has already led to an enormous increase in the Chinese economy’s financial liquidity.
The consequences of this are now manifested in property and stock market inflation, but not yet in rampant and uncontrolled consumer price inflation – at least for now.
But if China does not accelerate the renminbi’s revaluation, the world might see a large burst of consumer inflation in China in the next two or three years.
If so, the consequences will be a choice between the destructive runaway inflation familiar from much of post-WWII Latin America and stagflation.
The fall-out from this scenario, however, would be largely confined to Asia.
The second scenario is more dangerous for the entire world.
In this scenario, once again China continues to attempt to maintain full employment by keeping the renminbi undervalued.
But this time, the Chinese government manages to restrain domestic inflation, so America’s trade deficit with Asia stops falling and starts rising again, as does Europe’s, while Latin America finds itself priced out of its export markets.
Five or six years hence, the world economy faces the danger that it faced two years ago, although the fear this time is not of a sudden crash in the dollar’s value, but of a sudden crash in the value of the dollar and the euro against Asian currencies.
Four years ago, I would have said that the principal source of international economic disorder was made in America.
That has passed as a result of the dollar’s decline and the ebbing political strength of right-wing populist factions in the US that seek ever-greater redistribution to the rich fueled by ever-increasing tax cuts and ever-rising long-term deficits.
Today, the principal source of international economic disorder is made in China, owing to factions inside its government that hope to avoid a more-rapid appreciation of the renminbi’s value.
I cannot judge the strength of these factions, or whether they know that the falling US current account deficit and dollar may lessen the urgency of adjustment in the rest of the world, but not in China.
Richard Nixon’s treasury secretary, John Connally, once told a group of European leaders that while the dollar was America’s currency, its misalignment was Europe’s problem.
Today, the misalignment of the dollar – and the euro – against the renminbi and other Asian currencies is increasingly becoming Asia’s problem.
Pertunjukan di Paris mengenai Perubahan Iklim
OTTAWA – Konferensi Perubahan Iklim PBB diselenggarakan di Paris bulan Desember nanti akan menampilkan pertunjukan yang digubah secara ketat menyerupai blockbuster di Hollywood.
Aktor-aktornya pun ternama: sejumlah presiden dan perdana menteri akan tampil di panggung utama, dibantu oleh ribuan pemain pendukung, termasuk demonstran, pasukan anti huru-hara, dan wartawan.
Skenarionya masih dirahasiakan namun alur ceritanya sudah bocor: kali ini, berbeda dengan perundingan di Copenhagen tahun 2009 yang gagal, planet bumi akan menang.
Alur ceritanya terdengar menarik, namun tidak sepenuhnya menyatu.
Seluruh dunia diberi pesan bahwa itikad baik dan hard bargaining akan terbayarkan.