Some regulators were irresponsible for not anticipating the rational profit-maximizing behavior of institutions with a limited liability charter and of executives effectively protected from failure.
After all, what should banks do when, instead of keeping sub-prime mortgages on their books, monitoring their performance, and incurring capital requirements, they can securitize them advantageously (because the rating agencies have a stake in the business), avoid capital requirements, and profit from investors’ inexperience with such products.
Indeed, even if things turned ugly and banks’ equity suffered, executives knew that their own generous bonuses and pension packages most likely would not.
Given this, regulators should have thought twice before permitting off-balance sheet operations without any further provision.
The fundamental question today is who monitors opaque loans, whether of the sub-prime or any other variety.
Traditionally, the answer was banks; in the securitized world, it remains a question.
So, is there an alternative to the old-fashioned monitoring of loans by banks?
Perhaps if those securitized packages had been properly rated, the originating institution would be obliged to retain a share to signal to the market that risk was being controlled.
And, clearly, the idea that capital requirements were not needed for banks’ off-balance sheet activities (because the banks were not bearing the risk), was simply wrong.
Appropriate regulation – including regulation of rating agencies – would most likely make traditional banks popular again.
A reconsideration of banks’ limited liability charter would go even further in restoring credibility.
The principle is simple: when your own money is at stake, you tend to be careful.
But when you can play with others’ money and expect a very high reward for success and no punishment for failure, the incentives for irresponsible risk-taking become enormous.
The End of History Comes to Tunisia
PARIS – Tunisia’s “Jasmine Revolution” is still unfolding, but we can already read into it lessons about democracy and democratization that extend far beyond the Maghreb.
To set the Jasmine Revolution in historical perspective, we must recall June 4, 1989 – that pivotal Sunday when the Poles voted the communists out of power and, at the other end of Eurasia, the Communist Party of China crushed a burgeoning democratic movement on Tiananmen Square.
In retrospect, that day looks like a fork in the road of human history.
One path led to the demise of communism and a new birth of freedom and democracy – at times bloody and painful – in Europe.
The other path traced an alternative course, with China remaining under the grip of its ruling party, but delivering prosperity to its impoverished masses through astounding and sustained growth.
As the revolutionary year of 1989 was unfolding, Francis Fukuyama, presciently yet controversially pondered whether the path chosen in Europe heralded the “end of history.”
Following Hegel, Fukuyama made the case that history is directional – that it is leading somewhere – for two reasons.
First, the ceaseless spread of technology and of the economic liberal order, which has a homogenizing effect.
Second, the Hegelian “struggle for recognition” has been a pervasive driving force of mankind, powerful enough to lead countless individuals to the ultimate sacrifice.
But, while a widespread consensus held that communism was nothing but a dead end, China’s economic success, and the authoritarian backlash in Russia following Boris Yeltsin’s departure from the Kremlin a decade ago, prompted a more pessimistic analysis.
Theories of “democratic rollback” and of a resurgence of “authoritarian great powers” surfaced to unveil the potential of systems that combined nationalism and state-led growth-yielding capitalism.
Some argued that authoritarian rule provided a much surer and safer path to welfare than democracy could offer, others extolled the virtues of “Asian values,” and still others argued that democracy in the Arab or Muslim world would only pave the way for Islamic fundamentalists to take power.
Not surprisingly, autocrats everywhere embraced such views.
But the message of Tunisia’s Jasmine Revolution rings loud and clear: democracy – and the liberal political order in which it is rooted – is not merely a Western concept (or a Western conspiracy), but holds universal attraction, powered by the craving for “recognition.”
Moreover, it can be accessed at an early stage of a country’s modernization.
To be sure, authoritarian rule can manage the early stages of industrialization.
But a “knowledge economy” cannot operate with muzzled minds.
Even the smartest authoritarian rulers are unable to manage complexity on this scale – not to mention the corruption that inevitably breeds in the protected shadows of autocracy.
Challenging the “myth of the autocratic revival,” the American political scientists Daniel Deudney and John Ikenberry have examined China and Russia, finding “little evidence for the emergence of a stable equilibrium between capitalism and autocracy such that this combination could be dignified as a new model of modernity.”
While neither country qualifies as a liberal democracy, both “are much more liberal and democratic than they have ever been, and many of the crucial foundations for sustainable liberal democracy are emerging” – one main hurdle being the centrifugal forces that democracy might unleash.
But most countries that are unburdened by such a threat have, quietly or spectacularly, rallied to the liberal order over the past decades.
Asian countries such as Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and Indonesia have done so without being hampered by their supposed “Asian values.”
Similarly, Latin America, once the playground of myriad juntas and golpes, is now largely anchored in political liberalism.
Turkey is ruled by a mildly Islamist party that plays by the rules of democracy.
And, in the spring of 2009, the presidential campaign in Iran evinced a formidable craving for freedom.
What is obvious from these cases is that development activates the two channels that Fukuyama identifies as shaping the direction of history: cumulative economic and technological change and the desire for recognition.
Both foster individual empowerment, which is the gateway to freedom and democracy.
The paths differ between countries, setbacks are not uncommon, and it can take decades, but the leap can occur when the circumstances are ripe – as in Tunisia.
Indeed, the Jasmine Revolution embodies all the tenets of the liberal political order that the West has been advocating since the Atlantic Charter of 1941: a yearning for freedom, opportunity, and the rule of law.
Moreover, Tunisia’s revolution was indigenous, not imported as part of some forcible regime change.
The Tunisian people, led by a frustrated middle class that refused to be cowed, thus provide a healthy reminder of the steady and compelling forces driving the behavior of individuals and nations nowadays.
They illustrate the catalytic effect of digital connectivity (clearly visible, too, among China’s “twittering classes”).
And they might embolden other Arab peoples, as may be happening in Egypt, to force accountability upon their rulers.
Whatever the outcome in Tunisia, those who believe that democracy, to paraphrase Woodrow Wilson, makes the world a safe place – and that more democracy makes it safer – have every reason to rejoice at such an auspicious development.
The End of Population Growth
NEW DELHI – According to the United Nations’ Population Division, the world’s human population hit seven billion on October 31.
As always happens whenever we approach such a milestone, this one has produced a spike in conferences, seminars, and learned articles, including the usual dire Malthusian predictions.
After all, the UN forecasts that world population will rise to 9.3 billion in 2050 and surpass 10 billion by the end of this century.
Such forecasts, however, misrepresent underlying demographic dynamics.
The future we face is not one of too much population growth, but too little.
Most countries conducted their national population census last year, and the data suggest that fertility rates are plunging in most of them.
Birth rates have been low in developed countries for some time, but now they are falling rapidly in the majority of developing countries.
Chinese, Russians, and Brazilians are no longer replacing themselves, while Indians are having far fewer children.
Indeed, global fertility will fall to the replacement rate in a little more than a decade.
Population may keep growing until mid-century, owing to rising longevity, but, reproductively speaking, our species should no longer be expanding.
An additional factor could depress future birth rates in China and India.
The Chinese census suggests that there are 118.6 boys being born for every 100 girls.
Similarly, India has a gender ratio at birth of around 110 boys for every 100 girls, with large regional variations.
Compare this to the natural ratio of 105 boys per 100 girls.
The deviation is usually attributed to a cultural preference for boys, which will take an additional toll on both populations, as the future scarcity of women implies that both countries’ effective reproductive capacity is below what is suggested by the unadjusted TFR.
Indeed, after adjusting for the gender imbalance, China’s Effective Fertility Rate (EFR) is around 1.5, and India’s is 2.45.
In other words, the Chinese are very far from replacing themselves, and the Indians are only slightly above the replacement rate.
The EFR stands at around 2.4 for the world as a whole, barely above the replacement rate.
Current trends suggest that the human race will no longer be replacing itself by the early 2020’s.
Population growth after this will be mostly caused by people living longer, a factor that will diminish in significance from mid-century.
These shifts have important implications for global labor supply.
China is aging very rapidly, and its working-age population will begin to shrink within a few years.
Relaxing the one-child policy might have some positive impact in the very long run, but China is already past the tipping point, pushed there by the combined effect of gender imbalance and a very skewed age structure.
The number of women of child-bearing age (15-49 years) in China will drop 8% between 2010 and 2020, another 10% in the 2020’s and, if not corrected, at an even faster pace thereafter.
Thus, China will have to withdraw an increasing proportion of its female workforce and deploy it for reproduction and childcare.
Even if China can engineer this, it implies an immediate outflow from the workforce, with the benefits lagging by 25 years.
Meanwhile, the labor force has peaked or is close to peaking in most major economies.
Germany, Japan, and Russia already have declining workforces.
The United States is one of a handful of advanced countries with a growing workforce, owing to its relative openness to immigration.
But this may change as the source countries become richer and undergo rapid declines in birth rates.
Thus, many developed countries will have to consider how to keep people working productively well into their seventies.
But, when demographic dynamics turn, the world will have to confront a different set of problems.
The End of Secularism?
When the end of ideology was celebrated – first in the 1950’s and then, more emphatically still, in the 1990’s – no one foresaw that religion, the bane of politics in the first half of the twentieth century, would return to that role with a vengeance.
Daniel Bell and Raymond Aron wrote about the end of fascist and communist ideology in the hope that we would enter an age of pragmatism in which politics would be a subject of argument and debate, not belief and total worldviews.
Karl Popper’s approach to politics, one of reason and critical discourse, had come to prevail.
And when, after the collapse of communism, the end of history seemed near, ideological politics was thought to have vanished forever.
But history does not end, and it is forever full of surprises.
Francis Fukuyama’s End of History and Samuel Huntington’s Clash of Civilisations appeared within a mere three years of each other in the 1990’s, and a decade later the return of religion to politics is visible for all to see – and for many to suffer.
Those books are not just academic discourse, but mirror real developments.
By the time the false religions of totalitarian ideologies were defeated, real religions – so it seemed – had long passed from the political scene.
In some countries, formal allegiance to religious faith was symbolized by gestures and rites.
Yet no one thought much about it when American presidents of different faiths swore their oath of office to God and country.
In Westminster, every parliamentary sitting begins with Christian prayers presided over by Speakers who could be Christians or Jews or non-believers.
Not all democracies were as strict as France in their formal secularism but all were secular: the law is made by the sovereign people and not by some superhuman being or agency.
Suddenly, however, this secular commitment is no longer so clear.
Religious fundamentalists claim that the law must be anchored in the belief in a supreme being, or even be based on revelation.
Christian fundamentalism in the United States has come to dominate large segments of the Republican Party.
In Europe, the Vatican lobbied for acknowledgement of God in the preamble to the proposed European Constitutional Treaty.
Israel has long avoided drafting a constitution, because its secular citizens fear that orthodox Jews would impose their values on them.
Likewise, the sharia , Islamic law, entered political life in its least enlightened version in hopeful democracies like Nigeria, to say nothing of Iran.
Islamic fundamentalism – Islamism – has spread to all countries in which there are significant numbers of Muslims.
Why has religion returned to secular and democratic politics?
The main reason is probably that the enlightened countries of the world have become unsure of their values, even of the Enlightenment itself.
A moral relativism has spread, leading many to accept the taboos of all religious groups in the name of tolerance and multiculturalism.
Cartoons of Mohammed are not published, and Mozart’s opera Idomeneo is not performed in order to avoid offending religious sensitivities; and when, in the end, the publication and the performance take place, they become a demonstration almost intended to offend.
One can understand that enlightened believers in Islam (of whom there are many) find it upsetting that the world in which they want to live is in fact frail and vulnerable.
The return of religion to politics – and to public life in general – is a serious challenge to the rule of democratically enacted law and the civil liberties that go with it.
The response by enlightened communities is therefore important.
Perhaps it is right that the use of religious symbols has become the subject of public debate, though I think that wearing headscarves and even veils is as much a part of individual freedom as is the wearing of Jewish skullcaps and Christian crosses.
But there are far more important issues – above all, freedom of speech, including the freedom to say and write things that annoy, even upset, many.
In the interest of enlightened discourse, the limits of free speech should be drawn as widely as possible.
In the free world, people are not forced to read a newspaper or listen to a speech that they do not like, and they can oppose without fear what is said by those in positions of authority.
Today’s counter-Enlightenment fashion can easily get out of hand.
Those who are committed to liberty must learn to appreciate and defend it now, lest they someday have to fight to get it back.
The End of the Age of Friedman
BERKELEY – Harvard professor Dani Rodrik – perhaps the finest political economist of my generation – recently reported on his blog that a colleague has been declaring the past three decades “the Age of Milton Friedman.”
According to this view, the coming to power of Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher, and Deng Xiaoping led to an enormous upward leap in human liberty and prosperity.
I say yes – and no – to this proposition.
Friedman adhered throughout his life to five basic principles:
1.
Strongly anti-inflationary monetary policy.
2.
A government that understood that it was the people’s agent and not a dispenser of favors and benefits.
3.
A government that kept its nose out of people’s economic business.
4.
A government that kept its nose out of people’s private lives.
5.
An enthusiastic and optimistic belief in what free discussion and political democracy could do to convince peoples to adopt principles (1) through (4).
Measured against these principles, Reagan failed on (2) and (4) and adopted (1) only by default – Paul Volcker’s anti-inflation policy in the 1980’s dismayed many of Reagan’s close aides.
Thatcher failed on (4).
And Deng – while a vast improvement over his predecessors Lenin, Stalin, Khrushchev, and Mao – failed on all five, with the possible exception of (3).
We do not know what Deng’s desired set of economic arrangements for a system of “socialism with Chinese characteristics” was, and, in all likelihood, he did not know, either.
But I say yes in part to the “Age of Friedman” proposition, because only Friedman’s set of principles self-confidently proposed both to explain the world and to tell us how to change it.
Still, I would build up a counterbalancing set of principles, because I believe that Friedman’s principles do not, ultimately, deliver what they promise.
My principles would start from the observation that market economies and free and democratic societies are built atop a very old foundation of human sociability, communication, and interdependence.
That foundation had a hard enough time functioning when human societies had 60 members – eight orders of magnitude less than our current global society’s six billion.
So my principles would then be developed from Karl Polanyi’s old observation that the logic of market exchange puts considerable pressure on that underlying foundation.
The market for labor compels people to move to where they can earn the most, at the price of potentially creating strangers in strange lands.
The market for consumer goods makes human status rankings the product of responsiveness to market forces rather than the result of social norms and views about justice.
This critique of the market is, of course, one-sided.
After all, other arrangements for allocating labor appear to involve more domination and alienation than the labor market, which offers people opportunities, not constraints.
Similarly, “social norms” and “views about distributive justice” usually turn out to favor whomever has the biggest spear or can convince others that obedience to the powerful is obedience to God.
Market arrangements have a larger meritocratic component than the alternatives, and they encourage positive-sum entrepreneurship, making it easier to do well by doing good.
Nevertheless, the distribution of economic welfare produced by the market economy does not fit anyone’s conception of the just or the best.
Rightly or wrongly, we have more confidence in the correctness and appropriateness of political decisions made by democratically-elected representatives than of decisions implicitly made as the unanticipated consequences of market processes.
We also believe that government should play a powerful role in managing the market to avoid large depressions, redistributing income to produce higher social welfare, and preventing pointless industrial structuring produced by the fads and fashions that sweep the minds of financiers.
Indeed, there is a conservative argument for social-democratic principles.
Post-WWII social democracy produced the wealthiest and most just societies the world has ever seen.
You can complain that redistribution and industrial policy were economically inefficient, but not that they were unpopular.
It seems a safe bet that the stable politics of the post-WWII era owe a great deal to the coexistence of rapidly growing, dynamic market economies and social democratic policies.
Friedman would respond that, given the state of the world in 1975, a move in the direction of his principles was a big improvement.
When I think of Jimmy Carter’s energy policy, Arthur Scargill at the head of the British mineworkers’ union, and Mao’s Cultural Revolution, I have a hard time disagreeing with Friedman about the world in the mid-1970’s.
But there I would draw the line: while movement in Friedman’s direction was by and large positive over the past generation, the gains to be had from further movement in that direction are far less certain.
The End of the Beginning of Ending Poverty
With President Bush at the table, the “spin masters” who put a victorious gloss on all his actions had little need to lower expectations concerning the outcome of the G-8 meeting in Scotland. Any agreement would be seen as a major achievement.
The write-off of multilateral debt for the world’s poorest countries – thanks to Britain’s leadership – is nonetheless especially welcome.
Agreement by the G-8 to debt relief is a major event, but we should not be fooled by the seeming magnanimity of the gesture: much of the debt would not have been repaid in any case.
More debt relief – encompassing more countries and more debt (including bilateral debt) – is needed.
But debt relief should be viewed as just a start.
As Britain itself has pointed out, developing countries need more assistance and a fairer international trade regime.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the IMF has tried to pour cold water on international enthusiasm for its generosity.
New studies, it warns, suggest that aid does not in general lead to faster growth.
This came as a relief for the Bush administration, which claims to have given as much as its “budgetary processes” allow.
The world’s richest country, which blithely gave its richest citizens a series of tax cuts worth hundreds of billions of dollars, now says that it simply can’t afford to spend much more on aid.
Even after the increases in annual assistance promised by Bush at the UN’s meeting in Monterey, Mexico, in 2002, the United States is still giving less than a quarter of its commitment of 0.7% of GDP.
Now, the IMF offers the following reassurance: ”You may be stingy, you may not be living up to your commitments, but the money probably wouldn’t have made much difference anyway.”
Of course, not all foreign-aid money is well spent.
But the same is true of money spent on, say, national defense.
Even if Americans have not been cheated by Defense Department suppliers like Halliburton, it is clear that the money spent in Iraq has not bought the promised peace and security in the Middle East. But no one argues that the US should cut off defense expenditures.
The objective should be to improve the efficiency of government, to make sure that we get the most value for what we spend.
In this, surprisingly, there have been marked improvements in recent years.
The World Bank, for example, has been allocating more of its money to countries with a proven track record in spending money well.
It has been exploring new ways of “delivering” aid, sometimes using state and local governments where that appears more effective.
Similarly, so-called “Social Funds,” whereby communities design projects and compete for money, have enhanced participation and “ownership” of development projects.
In one village, a bridge was built to connect two neighborhoods separated during the rainy season.
A simple project like this can make an enormous difference to the life of a community.
For instance, children who live on one side of the river can now attend school on the other side during the rainy season.
Likewise, micro-credit schemes throughout the developing world have provided finance for the poor to expand their economic enterprise, with repayment rates that are truly impressive.
The IMF warns about “Dutch disease” problems, when an influx of foreign exchange drives up the local currency’s exchange rate, making it difficult to create jobs in the export sector or to protect jobs against an onslaught of cheaper foreign imports.
On this, the IMF is partly right.
Countries need to rely on themselves and mobilize domestic resources (although the IMF frequent insistence on tight monetary and fiscal policies often makes this more difficult.)
But there continues to be an enormous need for imported goods – medicines to promote health, technology to reduce the knowledge gap between the developing countries and the rest of the world, and machines to enhance productivity.
In any case, not much weight, in my judgment, should be given to the IMF’s statistical studies of the impact of foreign aid on growth, partly because the results do not appear to be very robust.
Different studies, with slightly different data sets, different countries, different techniques, and different years yield markedly different results.
An earlier set of studies, for instance, showed that aid does make a difference in countries with good governance and sound macro-economic policies.
Equally important, historically much foreign aid was provided not to promote development, but to purchase friendship, especially during the Cold War.
When the West gave money to Mobutu, they knew that the funds were going to Swiss bank accounts rather than benefiting the people of Zaire (now Congo).
The money worked as intended – not to promote development, but to keep Zaire on the side of the West.
Of course, Mobutu’s boundless corruption challenges us to be thoughtful about foreign aid, both about how the money is spent and who is responsible for “delivering” assistance.
Some governments have demonstrated a better capacity than others for using funds well.
In countries where governments are deficient, there are often alternative ways of providing assistance, including NGO’s.
Global support for “making poverty history” shows how the issue of Third-World poverty has finally struck a responsive chord.
Debt relief is a good beginning.
But that is all it is.
After the Gold Rush
VENICE – The run-up in gold prices in recent years – from $800 per ounce in early 2009 to above $1,900 in the fall of 2011 – had all the features of a bubble.
And now, like all asset-price surges that are divorced from the fundamentals of supply and demand, the gold bubble is deflating.
At the peak, gold bugs – a combination of paranoid investors and others with a fear-based political agenda – were happily predicting gold prices going to $2,000, $3,000, and even to $5,000 in a matter of years.
But prices have moved mostly downward since then.
In April, gold was selling for close to $1,300 per ounce – and the price is still hovering below $1400, an almost 30% drop from the 2011 high.
There are many reasons why the bubble has burst, and why gold prices are likely to move much lower, toward $1,000 by 2015.
First, gold prices tend to spike when there are serious economic, financial, and geopolitical risks in the global economy.
During the global financial crisis, even the safety of bank deposits and government bonds was in doubt for some investors.
If you worry about financial Armageddon, it is indeed metaphorically the time to stock your bunker with guns, ammunition, canned food, and gold bars.
But, even in that dire scenario, gold might be a poor investment.
Indeed, at the peak of the global financial crisis in 2008 and 2009, gold prices fell sharply a few times.
In an extreme credit crunch, leveraged purchases of gold cause forced sales, because any price correction triggers margin calls.
As a result, gold can be very volatile – upward and downward – at the peak of a crisis.
Second, gold performs best when there is a risk of high inflation, as its popularity as a store of value increases.
But, despite very aggressive monetary policy by many central banks – successive rounds of “quantitative easing” have doubled, or even tripled, the money supply in most advanced economies – global inflation is actually low and falling further.
The reason is simple: while base money is soaring, the velocity of money has collapsed, with banks hoarding the liquidity in the form of excess reserves.
Ongoing private and public debt deleveraging has kept global demand growth below that of supply.
Thus, firms have little pricing power, owing to excess capacity, while workers’ bargaining power is low, owing to high unemployment.
Moreover, trade unions continue to weaken, while globalization has led to cheap production of labor-intensive goods in China and other emerging markets, depressing the wages and job prospects of unskilled workers in advanced economies.
With little wage inflation, high goods inflation is unlikely.
If anything, inflation is now falling further globally as commodity prices adjust downward in response to weak global growth.
And gold is following the fall in actual and expected inflation.
Third, unlike other assets, gold does not provide any income.
Whereas equities have dividends, bonds have coupons, and homes provide rents, gold is solely a play on capital appreciation.
Now that the global economy is recovering, other assets – equities or even revived real estate – thus provide higher returns.
Indeed, US and global equities have vastly outperformed gold since the sharp rise in gold prices in early 2009.
Fourth, gold prices rose sharply when real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates became increasingly negative after successive rounds of quantitative easing.
The time to buy gold is when the real returns on cash and bonds are negative and falling.
But the more positive outlook about the US and the global economy implies that over time the Federal Reserve and other central banks will exit from quantitative easing and zero policy rates, which means that real rates will rise, rather than fall.
Fifth, some argued that highly indebted sovereigns would push investors into gold as government bonds became more risky.
But the opposite is happening now.
Many of these highly indebted governments have large stocks of gold, which they may decide to dump to reduce their debts.
Indeed, a report that Cyprus might sell a small fraction – some €400 million ($520 million) – of its gold reserves triggered a 13% fall in gold prices in April.
Countries like Italy, which has massive gold reserves (above $130 billion), could be similarly tempted, driving down prices further.
Sixth, some extreme political conservatives, especially in the United States, hyped gold in ways that ended up being counterproductive.
For this far-right fringe, gold is the only hedge against the risk posed by the government’s conspiracy to expropriate private wealth.
These fanatics also believe that a return to the gold standard is inevitable as hyperinflation ensues from central banks’ “debasement” of paper money.
But, given the absence of any conspiracy, falling inflation, and the inability to use gold as a currency, such arguments cannot be sustained.
A currency serves three functions, providing a means of payment, a unit of account, and a store of value.
Gold may be a store of value for wealth, but it is not a means of payment; you cannot pay for your groceries with it.
Nor is it a unit of account; prices of goods and services, and of financial assets, are not denominated in gold terms.
So gold remains John Maynard Keynes’s “barbarous relic,” with no intrinsic value and used mainly as a hedge against mostly irrational fear and panic.
Yes, all investors should have a very modest share of gold in their portfolios as a hedge against extreme tail risks.
But other real assets can provide a similar hedge, and those tail risks – while not eliminated – are certainly lower today than at the peak of the global financial crisis.
While gold prices may temporarily move higher in the next few years, they will be very volatile and will trend lower over time as the global economy mends itself.
The gold rush is over.
The End of the New Normal?
WASHINGTON, DC – Just when the notion that Western economies are settling into a “new normal” of low growth gained mainstream acceptance, doubts about its continued relevance have begun to emerge.
Instead, the world may be headed toward an economic and financial crossroads, with the direction taken depending on key policy decisions.
In the early days of 2009, the “new normal” was on virtually no one’s radar.
Of course, the global financial crisis that had erupted a few months earlier threw the world economy into turmoil, causing output to contract, unemployment to surge, and trade to collapse.
Dysfunction was evident in even the most stable and sophisticated segments of financial markets.
Yet most people’s instinct was to characterize the shock as temporary and reversible – a V-shape disruption, featuring a sharp downturn and a rapid recovery.
After all, the crisis had originated in the advanced economies, which are accustomed to managing business cycles, rather than in the emerging-market countries, where structural and secular forces dominate.
But some observers already saw signs that this shock would prove more consequential, with the advanced economies finding themselves locked into a frustrating and unusual long-term low-growth trajectory.
In May 2009, my PIMCO colleagues and I went public with this hypothesis, calling it the “new normal.”
The concept received a rather frosty reception in academic and policy circles – an understandable response, given strong conditioning to think and act cyclically.
Few were ready to admit that the advanced economies had bet the farm on the wrong growth model, much less that they should look to the emerging economies for insight into structural impediments to growth, including debt overhangs and excessive inequalities.
But the economy was not bouncing back.
On the contrary, not only did slow growth and high unemployment persist for years, but the inequality trifecta (income, wealth, and opportunity) worsened as well.
The consequences extended beyond economics and finance, straining regional political arrangements, amplifying national political dysfunction, and fueling the rise of anti-establishment parties and movements.
With the expectation of a V-shape recovery increasingly difficult to justify, the “new normal” finally gained widespread acceptance.
In the process, it acquired some new labels.
International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde warned in October 2014 that the advanced economies were facing a “new mediocre.”
Former US Secretary of the Treasury Larry Summers foresaw an era of “secular stagnation.”
Today, it is no longer unusual to suggest that the West could linger in a low-level growth equilibrium for an unusually prolonged period.
Yet, as I explain in my new book The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability, and Avoiding the Next Collapse, growing internal tensions and contradictions, together with over-reliance on monetary policy, are destabilizing that equilibrium.
Indeed, with financial bubbles growing, the nature of financial risk morphing, inequality worsening, and non-traditional – and in some cases extreme – political forces continuing to gain traction, the calming influence of unconventional monetary policies is being stretched to its limits.
The prospect that such policies will be able to keep the economic engines humming, even at low levels, looks increasingly dim.
Instead, the world economy seems to be headed for another crossroads, which I expect it to reach within the next three years.
This may not be a bad thing.
If policymakers implement a more comprehensive response, they can put their economies on a more stable and prosperous path – one of high inclusive growth, declining inequality, and genuine financial stability.
Such a policy response would have to include pro-growth structural reforms (such as higher infrastructure investment, a tax overhaul, and labor retooling), more responsive fiscal policy, relief for pockets of excessive indebtedness, and improved global coordination.
This, together with technological innovations and the deployment of sidelined corporate cash, would unleash productive capacity, producing faster and more inclusive growth, while validating asset prices, which are now artificially elevated.
The alternate path, onto which continued political dysfunction would push the world, leads through a thicket of parochial and uncoordinated policies to economic recession, greater inequality, and severe financial instability.
Beyond harming the economic wellbeing of current and future generations, this outcome would undermine social and political cohesion.
There is nothing pre-destined about which of these two paths will be taken.
Indeed, as it stands, the choice is frustratingly impossible to predict.
But in the coming months, as policymakers face intensifying financial volatility, we will see some clues concerning how things will play out.
The hope is that they point to a more systematic – and thus effective – policy approach.
The fear is that policies will fail to pivot away from excessive reliance on central banks, and end up looking back to the new normal, with all of its limitations and frustrations, as a period of relative calm and wellbeing.
The End of the Russia-China Debate
Ten years ago, comparing the reform processes in China and Russia was an intellectual fashion.
Was it preferable to start with economics – try and get rich, quick, but don’t rock the boat politically – in the manner of the Chinese?
Or was it better to start with politics – recover liberty and prosperity may follow – which seemed to be Russia’s path under Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin?
Today, a new comparative debate has started.
This time the subject is no longer Russia versus China, because Russia has long ceased to be a point of comparison.
Instead, the new comparative debate involves Asia’s two new economic, demographic, and political giants, China and India.
China’s annual economic growth has been roughly 8-9% for the last 26 years; India has recorded similar rates for the last decade.
In the “flat world” of globalization – to borrow Thomas Friedman’s powerful metaphor – it seems that Russia no longer has a place.
Of course, Russia is still the second-largest nuclear power in the world, and, as one of the world’s leading exporters of oil and gas, it benefits from today’s high energy prices.
But Russia’s population is disappearing before our eyes.
With average male life expectancy just 57 years, the country is losing close to 800,000 people annually.
Indeed, Russia is more a fragile oil-producing state than a modernizing economic giant.
To put it bluntly, Russia is no longer in the same category as China.
Whereas the “Middle Kingdom” is proudly regaining its former global status after centuries of decline, Russia is defiantly trying to resurrect its former imperial status, but in a manner that appears doomed to fail.
Russia has clearly taken giant steps in the wrong direction, at a time when China has taken steps, however small, in the right direction.
When you meet today’s “new Russian Nomenklatura,” you experience a sudden feeling of being 20 years younger, awash as they are in nostalgia for Cold War posturing.
By contrast, seen from afar, in their new suits, you might think that Chinese economic elites are Japanese.
Where Russia represents a return to the past, one sees in China an opening, however ambiguous, to the future.
Of course, some bias is involved here.
As a European, I and people like me almost instinctively expect more from Russia.
It is, after all, a European nation in cultural, if not political terms, whereas progress in China will not be measured by the introduction of Western-style democracy, but eventually, one hopes, by Singapore-style rule of law.
The diverse paths followed by Russia and China may be explained in part by how the two peoples perceive themselves.
The Chinese are comforted in their self-image by the world’s combination of admiration for their dynamism, greed for the market they constitute, and apprehension for the competition they represent.
Russians, by contrast, seem to be animated by a dark form of narcissism.
They do not find anything to be proud of in the eyes of others.
They are respected for what they control – the Soviet legacy of nuclear arms and “Christian energy resources,” to quote Vladimir Putin’s bizarre remark on his first official trip to Paris – but not for their economic performance or their essence.
China and Russia tend to relate to their respective pasts and futures in very different ways – with self-confidence in China’s case, with self-diffidence in the case of Russia.
Chinese elites are convinced that time is working in their favor, and that it is only natural that China should regain its rank amongst the world leading powers, perhaps even emerging on top one day.
Indeed, their serene patience stands in stark contrast to the anxious reticence of Russian leaders, who have yet to surmount the humiliation that Russia suffered as a result of the Soviet Union’s disintegration at the end of the Cold War.
Russia may be experiencing a global “restoration” phase, but in politics and economics, and also with respect to its empire, restoration is headed in the wrong direction.
With Putin’s current clampdown on civil society, re-nationalization of key segments of the economy, failure to develop any political approach to resolving the conflict in Chechnya, and cultivation of imperial nostalgia, Russia is killing its only chance to matter in the future.
Yet there is no reason for China to declare victory.
The gap between the respective qualities of China’s economic and scientific elites, on the one hand, and its ruling political elites, on the other, is simply too monumental – and still growing – for stability to be taken for granted.
One senses in China the birth pangs of civil society, making the introduction of the rule of law increasingly urgent.
Without political reforms, China’s confidence in herself will quickly turn into disillusion, or even delusion.
If that happens, the Russia-China debate might be revived, this time as a comparison of competitive decadence.
The End of the Special Relationship?
TEL AVIV – Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s recent visit to Washington highlighted fundamental disagreements between Israel’s current government and President Barack Obama’s administration.
Netanyahu persists in questioning Obama’s infatuation with the two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and he refuses to see the link that Obama believes exists between an Israeli-Palestinian peace and his capacity to curtail Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Nor is Netanyahu especially happy with Obama’s reluctance to set a firm deadline for talks with Iran.
Israelis believe that Iran is galloping into the nuclear club, and will shrewdly use the prospect of talks with the US to pre-empt tougher sanctions or a military strike.
Crises and profound disagreements are not new in the relations between these two unequal allies.
But, however fundamental the current differences might be, it is the underlying suspicion that Obama is poised to shift America away from its unique relationship with the Jewish state that most worries Israelis.
A convergence of interests and a profoundly emotional attitude to Israel’s story and to the Jewish narrative since the Holocaust have been the motive forces behind what is perhaps one of the most intriguing alliances in international relations.
In fact, there is no single, exclusive explanation for America’s persistent vindication of its commitment to Israel, and for the uniquely vigorous resonance that Israel’s cause has had in the United States.
American presidents since Harry Truman, the first world leader to recognize Israel in 1948 (against the advice of then Secretary of State General George C. Marshall), have embodied in varying degrees either the emotional or the realpolitik aspect – some represented both – of the relationship.
The suspicion today is that Barack Obama is committed to neither.
Obama is a revolutionary phenomenon in American history; he certainly does not fit the traditional pattern of American presidents after World War II.
He was far less shaped by religious and biblical teachings than all of them, and the narrative of Jewish history and of Israel’s heroic emergence out of the ashes of the Holocaust is not the primordial sentiment in his attitude toward the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The narrative of the Palestinian tragedy is certainly no less central in defining his view of the Middle East.
But even when US administrations have not embodied an emotional attachment to Israel, they have still backed Israel’s cause, provided that doing so can be sustained by considerations of realpolitik.
That was clearly the case with Richard Nixon, who never suffered from an excess of love for Jews, but was nonetheless one of the staunchest allies that Israel ever had in the White House.
Devoid of sentimental attachment to Israel’s cause and deeply disturbed by its policies in the occupied territories, Obama represents the specter of a White House where neither love nor interests are shared with the Jewish state.
The thrust of Obama’s Middle East policy – reconciling America with the Arab and Muslim world – clashes with Netanyahu’s strategy. For Obama’s emerging policy assumes that the best way to address the challenge of Islamic terrorism and stop the region’s decline into uncontrolled nuclear proliferation is to force Israel to stop building new settlements, withdraw from the occupied territories in order to allow the creation of a Palestinian state with East Jerusalem as its capital, and make peace with Syria by giving back the Golan Heights.
But this does not necessarily mean that we are witnessing the end of the US-Israel “special relationship.”
Even a revolutionary president will not depart from America’s core commitments to an Israel that fights for reasonable and morally defensible positions.
So far, Obama has been careful not to depart from any of the traditional American positions pertaining to Israel’s security.
He has accepted the logic of Israel’s special nuclear status and its position as a major recipient of American military aid.
Moreover, the watchdog of Israel’s interests, the US Congress, remains vigilant.
Netanyahu knows that the daunting task of maintaining Israel’s relationship with the US is as much a vital strategic necessity as it is a compelling domestic requirement.
There is bound to be more convergence down the road, when he decides to define Israel’s real, not ideological, red lines.
It is because Netanyahu is driven by an almost Messianic determination to prevent Iran from acquiring the means to destroy Israel, that he might be amenable to a fundamental change in his position on Palestine, provided Obama makes visible headway in his drive to stop Iran’s nuclear program.
In Netanyahu’s view, solving the Palestinian problem would not remove the Iranian challenge; rather, it is the neutralization of that existential threat that would pave the way to the creation of a Palestinian state.
Netanyahu also knows that the Arab side’s failures have nurtured radical Zionism.
As John Kerry, the Chairman of the US Senate’s Foreign Affairs Committee, put it, “this peace process is not a one way street” in which the onus is put exclusively on Israel. It remains to be seen if the abysmally dysfunctional Arab world and the powerful non-state agents in its midst, such as Hamas and Hezbollah, will respond the way Obama expects.
More importantly, the Palestinian leadership must reshape and reunite its polity to face the challenge of statehood.
So far, the task of reconciling Hamas and Fatah seems to be no less daunting than that of striking a peace deal with Israel.
The End of the World as We Know It
CAMBRIDGE – Consider the following scenario.
After a victory by the left-wing Syriza party, Greece’s new government announces that it wants to renegotiate the terms of its agreement with the International Monetary Fund and the European Union.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel sticks to her guns and says that Greece must abide by the existing conditions.
Fearing that a financial collapse is imminent, Greek depositors rush for the exit.
This time, the European Central Bank refuses to come to the rescue and Greek banks are starved of cash.
The Greek government institutes capital controls and is ultimately forced to issue drachmas in order to supply domestic liquidity.
With Greece out of the eurozone, all eyes turn to Spain.
Germany and others are at first adamant that they will do whatever it takes to prevent a similar bank run there.
The Spanish government announces additional fiscal cuts and structural reforms.
Bolstered by funds from the European Stability Mechanism, Spain remains financially afloat for several months.
But the Spanish economy continues to deteriorate and unemployment heads towards 30%.&nbsp; Violent protests against Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy’s austerity measures lead him to call for a referendum.
His government fails to get the necessary support from voters and resigns, throwing the country into full-blown political chaos.
Merkel cuts off further support for Spain, saying that hard-working German taxpayers have already done enough.
A Spanish bank run, financial crash, and euro exit follow in short order.
In a hastily arranged mini-summit, Germany, Finland, Austria, and the Netherlands announce that they will not renounce the euro as their joint currency.
This only increases financial pressure on France, Italy, and the other members.
As the reality of the partial dissolution of the eurozone sinks in, the financial meltdown spreads from Europe to the United States and Asia.
Our scenario continues in China, where the leadership faces a crisis of its own.
The economy’s slowdown has already exacerbated social conflict, and recent developments in Europe have added fuel to the fire.
With European export orders canceled en masse, Chinese factories are faced with the prospect of massive layoffs.
Demonstrations begin in major cities, calling for an end to corruption among party officials.
China’s government decides that it cannot risk further strife and announces a package of measures to boost economic growth and prevent layoffs, including direct financial support for exporters and intervention in the currency markets to weaken the renminbi.
In the US, President Mitt Romney has just taken office, following a hard-fought campaign in which he derided Barack Obama for being too soft on China’s economic policies.
The combination of financial contagion from Europe, which has already led to a severe credit crunch, and a sudden flood of low-priced imports from China leaves the Romney administration in a bind.
Against the advice of his economic advisers, he announces across-the-board import duties on Chinese exports.
His Tea Party backers, who were critical in mobilizing electoral support for him, urge him to go further and withdraw from the World Trade Organization.
Over the next few years, the world economy slumps into what future historians will call the Second Great Depression.
Unemployment rises to record-high levels. Governments without fiscal resources are left with little option but to respond in ways that will only exacerbate problems for other countries: trade protection and competitive exchange-rate depreciation.
As countries sink into economic autarky, repeated global economic summits yield few results beyond empty promises of cooperation.
Few countries are spared the economic carnage. Those that do relatively well share three characteristics: low levels of public debt, limited dependence on exports or capital flows, and robust democratic institutions.
So Brazil and India are relative havens, even though their growth prospects are severely diminished as well.
As in the Great Depression, the political consequences are more serious and hold longer-term significance.
The eurozone’s collapse (and, for all practical purposes, that of the EU itself) forces a major realignment of European politics.
France and Germany compete openly as alternative centers of influence vis-à-vis the smaller European states.
Centrist parties pay the price for their support of the European integration project, and are repudiated in the polls by parties of the extreme right or extreme left.
Nativist governments begin to kick out immigrants.
For nearby countries, Europe no longer shines as a beacon of democracy.
The Arab Middle East takes a decisive turn towards authoritarian Islamic states.
In Asia, economic strife between the US and China spills over into military conflict, with increasingly frequent naval clashes in the South China Sea threatening to erupt into a full-scale war.
Many years later, Merkel, who has withdrawn from politics and become a recluse, is asked whether she thinks that she should have done anything differently during the euro crisis.&nbsp; Unfortunately, her answer comes too late to change the course of history.
A remote scenario?
Perhaps, but not remote enough.
The End of Want?
Quarter after quarter the macroeconomic news from the United States teaches the same lesson: real GDP growth at a sustained rate of 3% per year is not enough to increase America's employment level.
Not even real GDP growth at a sustained annual rate of 4% is sufficient to increase the share of American adults who have jobs.
The underlying rate of labor productivity growth in the US, which we pegged at 1.2% per year at the start of the Clinton administration and at 2% to 2.5% per year at the end of the 1990's boom, now seems even higher: it is getting harder and harder to keep the estimated labor productivity growth trend below 3% per year.
How long this boom in productivity growth will continue is anyone's guess: optimists point to the fact that waiting behind the information technology revolution, ready for takeoff, is the biotechnology revolution, and behind that is a looming nanotechnology revolution.
If such improvements in productivity do last, the vistas this will open are amazing: an America 50 years from now in which the average full-time worker earns not $40,000 a year, but the equivalent of today's $160,000 a year.
The US is at one pole of the world economy. China - even with its economic miracle since Deng Xiaoping went on his Southern Expedition - is at the other.
But China's labor productivity is now growing at roughly 6% per year.
If that rate can be sustained - and if the Chinese economy becomes and remains integrated enough for us to be able to speak of it as a single entity - China's labor productivity will be comparable to today's America sometime before 2050.
And India?
If the growth rates of the past 15 years continue, and if India remains united, its labor productivity in 2050 will be comparable to that of Spain today.
Now the world of 2050 will not be a paradise.
There will still be some regions where failed states do not protect property, enforce the law, encourage commerce, educate their citizens, or construct the physical, social, and organizational infrastructure necessary for people to make use of the magical technologies we have developed since the start of the Industrial Revolution.
Similarly, there will still be wars, fought with ever more brutal and destructive weapons.
But we have good reason to hope that there will be fewer of them.
Next winter, it will be sixty years since an army crossed the Rhine River bringing death and destruction- the longest such period since at least the late second century B.C., when the Cimbri and Teutones challenged the army of the Roman Consul Gaius Marius in the Rhone Valley.
The world of 2050 will not have "solved the economic problem."
The economy is the realm of things that have value. Things have value when they are both desirable and scarce.
We humans are very good at figuring out ways to make scarce things desirable.
But we do have an opportunity - and hence a duty - shared by no previous human generation: to make a world by 2050 in which nearly everyone has enough food to avoid hunger, enough clothing to keep warm, and enough shelter to remain dry - plus a super-broadband Internet connection.
The stakes in this round of humanity's poker game are huge.
The first step toward winning the jackpot is to shape global public opinion in support of creating a world without want - to make progress towards this goal is the touchstone of international relations today.
We no longer have large states driven by powerful, aggressive ideologies to remake the world in their own image by any means necessary. The major sources and uses of power in the world today are softer, although not weaker.
As long as we can keep it this way, we humans have a good chance of achieving our most important collective task.
The Energy Deficit
MILAN – I have been surprised by the recent coverage in the American press of gasoline prices and politics.
Political pundits agree that presidential approval ratings are highly correlated with gas prices: when prices go up, a president’s poll ratings go down.
But, in view of America’s long history of neglect of energy security and resilience, the notion that Barack Obama’s administration is responsible for rising gas prices makes little sense.
Four decades have passed since the oil-price shocks of the 1970’s.
We learned a lot from that experience.
The short-run impact – as always occurs when oil prices rise quickly – was to reduce growth by reducing consumption of other goods, because oil consumption does not adjust as quickly as that of other goods and services.
But, given time, people can and do respond by lowering their consumption of oil.
They buy more fuel-efficient cars and appliances, insulate their homes, and sometimes even use public transportation.
The longer-run impact is thus different and much less negative.
The more energy-efficient one is, the lower one’s vulnerability to price volatility.
On the supply side, there is a similar difference between short-term and longer-run effects.
In the short term, supply may be able to respond to the extent that there is reserve capacity (there isn’t much now).
But the much larger, longer-run effect comes from increased oil exploration and extraction, owing to the incentive of higher prices.
All of this takes time, but, as it occurs, it mitigates the negative impact: the demand and supply curves shift in response to higher prices (or to anticipation of higher prices).
In terms of policy, there was a promising effort in the late 1970’s.
Fuel-efficiency standards for automobiles were legislated, and car producers implemented them.
In a more fragmented fashion, states established incentives for energy efficiency in residential and commercial buildings.
But then oil and gas prices (adjusted for inflation) entered a multi-decade period of decline.
Policies targeting energy efficiency and security largely lapsed.
Two generations came to think of declining oil prices as normal, which accounts for the current sense of entitlement, the outrage at rising prices, and the search for villains: politicians, oil-producing countries, and oil companies are all targets of scorn in public-opinion surveys.
A substantial failure of education about non-renewable natural resources lies in the background of current public sentiment.
And now, having underinvested in energy efficiency and security when the costs of doing so were lower, America is poorly positioned to face the prospect of rising real prices.
Energy policy has been “pro-cyclical” – the opposite of saving for a rainy day.
Given the upward pressure on prices implied by rising emerging-market demand and the global economy’s rapid increase in size, that day has arrived.
Counter-cyclicality is a useful mindset for individuals and governments.
Recent history, particularly the excessive accumulation of private and public debt, suggests that we have not acquired it.
Energy policy or its absence seems another clear example.
Rather than anticipating and preparing for change, the United States has waited for change to be forced upon it.
Energy-policy myopia has not been confined to the US.
Developing countries, for example, have operated for many years with fossil-fuel subsidies, which have come to be widely recognized as a bad way for governments to spend their limited resources.
Now these policies have to be reversed, which implies similar political challenges and costs.
Western Europe and Japan, both of which are almost entirely dependent on external supplies of oil and gas, have done somewhat better.
For security and environmental reasons, their energy efficiency increased via a combination of taxes, higher consumer prices, and public education.
The Obama administration is now working to initiate a sensible long-term approach to energy, with new fuel-efficiency standards for motor vehicles, investments in technology, energy-efficiency programs for dwellings, and environmentally sound exploration for additional resources.
Doing this in the midst of an arduous post-crisis deleveraging process, a stubbornly slow recovery, the process of building a new, more sustainable growth pattern, is harder – politically and economically – than it might otherwise have been, had the US started earlier.ampnbsp;
Still, better late than never.
Obama is correctly attempting to explain that effective energy policy, by its very nature, requires long-term goals and steady progress toward achieving them.
One frequently hears the assertion that democracies’ electoral cycles are poorly suited to implementing long-term, forward-looking policies.
The countervailing force is leadership that explains the benefits and costs of different options, and unites people around common goals and sensible approaches.
The Obama administration’s effort to put long-term growth and security above political advantage thus deserves admiration and respect.
If criticism of democratic governance on the grounds of its “inevitable short time horizon” were correct, it would be hard to explain how India, a populous, complex, and still-poor democracy, could sustain long-term investments and policies required to support rapid growth and development.
There, too, vision, leadership, and consensus-building have played a critical role.
The good news for US energy security is that in 2011, the country became a new net exporter of petroleum products.
The price of fossil fuels, however, is likely to continue to trend upward.
Declining dependence on external sources, properly pursued, is an important development.
But it is not a substitute for higher energy efficiency, which is essential to making the switch to a new and resilient path for economic growth and employment.
A side benefit would be to unlock a huge international agenda for energy, the environment, and sustainability, where American leadership is required.
This effort requires persistence and a long official attention span, which in turn presupposes bipartisan support.
Is that possible in America today?
The US political system’s persistently low approval ratings stem in part from the fact that it seems to reward obstructionism rather than constructive bipartisan action.
At some point, voters will react against a system that amplifies differences and suppresses shared goals, and policy formation will revert to its more effective pragmatic mode.
The question is when.
The Environmental Bullying of New Europe
RIGA &#45;&#45; Instead of helping all EU member states to meet their own Kyoto goals, the European Commission is shifting what should be a shared burden onto its newest members, which are already the most environmentally efficient in the European Union.
In doing so, the Commission is rewarding inefficiency and reducing the effectiveness of its commitments to clean up the environment.
The Commission’s decision on Latvia’s National Allocation Plan (NAP) for 2008-2012 left only 55% of the CO2 emissions that Latvia requested.
Similarly, Estonia and Lithuania received only 52-53% of their requested quotas.
Serious cuts were also made to other new EU members’ quotas, prompting Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia, as well as Latvia, to launch legal challenges.
Yet almost all of the old EU members received more than 90% of the requested quotas.
What is going on here?
The Commission’s approach is misguided.
According to its own information, the aim of the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU-ETS) is to help countries meet their 2010 Kyoto targets by using market instruments to encourage companies to reduce their CO2 emissions.
Logically, quotas should be linked to each member’s progress in complying with the Kyoto Protocol.
New EU member states are meeting their individual Kyoto commitments.
Most are committed to reducing emissions by 8% by 2010.
Latvia is already projected to lower its emissions by 46% by that date, even without implementing any additional CO2 reduction policies.
Indeed, the new EU members are projected to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by at least 21% by 2010.
Old EU members also have a collective Kyoto target of lowering their CO2 emissions by 8% by 2010, but they are projected to achieve a mere 4.6% reduction.
Despite this, countries such as Belgium and the Netherlands, which are not expected to meet their Kyoto commitments, are being allowed to increase their emissions.
It is imperative that the European Commission distributes all burdens evenly and fairly among the EU’s 27 members.
Most new members have met or are approaching their Kyoto targets, and they need rapid economic growth to catch up with the rest of the EU.
But their ability to grow is being impaired because they lack the resources to confront the massive business lobbies of the EU’s most developed and richest countries.
Making the Union’s newest members carry a disproportionate share of the burden of reducing the EU’s total amount of pollution is both unjust and foolish.
Latvia’s example is the most acute.
After regaining its independence from the Soviet Union, only remnants of the industrial behemoths of the communist era remained.
As trade links with the former Soviet world collapsed, most of these giant firms collapsed.
Starting almost from an economic “point zero,” Latvian entrepreneurs have built a new and modern economy, based on new and efficient technologies.
As a result, Latvia has the lowest per capita greenhouse gas emissions in the EU.
But, despite being the EU’s third poorest country, the European Commission’s rulings mean that it must purchase emission quotas from richer and more polluting EU members that have done little to meet their Kyoto commitments.
This unbalanced approach is jeopardizing the economic development of Latvia and other vulnerable new member states, while old members enjoy a free ride.
In small economies such as Latvia and many of the other new member states, even one large project is important for the whole country’s progress.
The Commission’s decision to cut their CO2 emissions quotas may lead investors in desperately needed development projects to move outside of the EU, to countries with weaker environmental regulations, where their activities would contribute to higher global emissions.
Additional emissions would occur when the goods are transported back to the EU.
As if this weren’t bad enough, the Commission is preparing an emission-trading scheme for EU airlines, with 2004 as the base year for setting quotas.
This is a clear disadvantage for airlines from the new EU members, as the number of passengers they carry increased sharply only after 2004, when these countries joined the EU.
A recent decision to increase the share of energy from renewable sources to 20% by 2020 will also cause problems.
Latvia, for example, already generates 37% of its energy from renewable sources, but will now likely be slapped with a target of around 50%, while some other members will have targets below 10%.