If trade data were re-calculated to reflect the country of origin of various components of value-added, the general picture would not change, but the relative magnitudes would: higher US deficits with Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan, and a dramatically lower deficit with China.
The second fact is that Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan – all relatively high-income economies – have a large trade surplus with China.
Germany has relatively balanced trade with China, even recording a modest bilateral surplus in the post-crisis period.
The US has a persistent overall trade deficit that fluctuates in the range of 3-6% of GDP.
But, while the total reflects bilateral deficits with just about everyone, the US Congress is obsessed with China, and appears convinced that the primary cause of the problem lies in Chinese manipulation of the renminbi’s exchange rate.
One problem with this view is that it cannot account for the stark differences between the US and Japan, Germany, and South Korea.
Moreover, the real (inflation-adjusted) value of the renminbi is now rising quickly, owing to inflation differentials and Chinese wage growth, particularly in the country’s export sectors.
That will shift the Chinese economy’s structure and trade patterns quite dramatically over time.
The final-assembly links of global-value added chains will leave China for countries at earlier stages of economic development, such as Bangladesh, where incomes are lower (though without producing much change in the balance with the US).
A somewhat more sensible concern might be that the dollar’s reserve-currency status causes it to be “over-valued” with respect to every currency, not just the renminbi.
That could create additional pressure on the tradable part of the US economy, and thus might help to explain why the US tradable sector has not generated net employment for two decades.
But, in order to explain performance relative to Japan and Germany, one would have to argue that the euro and the yen have been undervalued, which makes no sense.
In fact, the employment generated by the tradable sector has been in services at the upper end of the distributions of value-added per person, education, and income.
As a result, growth and employment in the tradable sector have gone separate ways, with healthy growth and stagnant employment.
In Germany, by contrast, the tradable sector is an employment engine.
The same is true of Japan.
The US economy’s distinctive features for at least a decade prior to the crisis that began in 2008 were an unsustainably high level of consumption, owing to an illusory wealth effect, under-investment (including in the public sector), and savings that fell short of the investment deficiency.
That excess household and government consumption fueled the domestic economy – and much of the global economy as well.
In several European countries that now confront fiscal and growth challenges, the pattern was somewhat different: most of the excess consumption and employment was on the government side.
But the effect was similar: an unsustainable pattern of income and employment generation, and lower productivity and competitiveness in these economies’ tradable sectors, leading to trade deficits, stunted GDP, and weak job creation.
One could argue that the euro has been and still is overvalued, and that this has hindered many eurozone economies’ productivity relative to non-eurozone countries.
But the relative productivity deficiencies within the eurozone are more important for growth, and have nothing to do with the exchange rate.
The focus on currencies as a cause of the West’s economic woes, while not entirely misplaced, has been excessive.
Developing countries have learned over time that real income growth and employment expansion are driven by productivity gains, not exchange-rate movements.
This, in turn, requires public and private investment in tangible assets, physical and telecommunications infrastructure, human capital and skills, and the knowledge and technology base of the economy.
Of course, it is possible for a country’s terms of trade to get out of line with income and productivity levels, requiring a rebalancing.
But resetting the terms of trade is no substitute for tackling the structural underpinnings of productivity.
None of this is peculiar to developing countries.
Underinvestment has long-term costs and consequences everywhere.
Excess consumption merely hides these costs temporarily.
In the US, productivity deficiencies have led to a pattern of disconnection from global supply chains.
So the challenge for America is not only to restore productivity, but also to restore its links to the main currents of world trade.
China’s growth – and, more generally, that of the major emerging economies – provides a substantial potential tailwind.
That is certainly true nowadays for Germany, Japan, and South Korea.
The US and others can take advantage of it as well, but only if productivity relative to income levels in specific areas of potential competitiveness begin to rise.&nbsp;
As long as America economic policy remains focused primarily on deficits, domestic demand, exchange rates, and backsliding on trade openness, its investment deficiencies will remain unaddressed.
That means that its employment and income-distribution problems will remain unaddressed as well.
The good news is that, at a deep level, incentives across advanced and developing countries are aligned.
The emerging economies would like nothing more than the restoration of sustainable patterns of growth in the advanced economies, and are prepared to be cooperative players in that process.
But focusing on these countries’ exchange rates is not the right way to go about it.
Europe’s Crisis of Values
NEW YORK – Xenophobia and extremism are symptoms of societies in profound crisis.
In 2012, the far-right Golden Dawn won 21 seats in Greece’s parliamentary election, the right-wing Jobbik gained ground in my native Hungary, and the National Front’s Marine Le Pen received strong backing in France’s presidential election.
Growing support for similar forces across Europe points to an inescapable conclusion: the continent’s prolonged financial crisis is creating a crisis of values that is now threatening the European Union itself.
When it was only an aspiration, the European Union was an immensely attractive idea that fired many people’s imagination, including mine.
I regarded it as the embodiment of an open society – a voluntary association of sovereign states that were willing to give up part of their sovereignty for the common good.
They shared a common history, in which the French Revolution, with its slogan of liberty, equality, and fraternity, left a lasting legacy.
Building on that tradition, member states formed a union based on equality and not dominated by any state or nationality.
The euro crisis has now turned the EU into something radically different.
Far from being a voluntary association, the eurozone is now held together by harsh discipline; far from being an association of equals it has become a hierarchical arrangement in which the center dictates policy while the periphery is increasingly subordinated; instead of fraternity and solidarity, hostile stereotypes proliferate.
The integration process was spearheaded by a small group of farsighted statesmen who subscribed to open-society principles and practiced what Karl Popper called “piecemeal social engineering.”
They recognized that perfection is unattainable; so they set limited objectives and firm timelines – and then mobilized the political will for a small step forward, knowing full well that when they achieved it, its inadequacy would become apparent, requiring further steps.
That is how the European Coal and Steel Community was gradually transformed into the EU.
France and Germany used to be in the forefront of the effort.
As the Soviet empire disintegrated, Germany’s leaders recognized that German reunification was possible only in the context of a more united Europe, and they were prepared to make considerable sacrifices to achieve it.
When it came to bargaining, the Germans were willing to contribute a little more and take a little less than others, thereby facilitating agreement.
At the time, German statesmen would assert that Germany had no independent foreign policy, only a European one.
This stance led to a dramatic acceleration in European integration, culminating in the adoption of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 and the introduction of the euro in 1999.
A period of consolidation (which included the introduction of euro banknotes and coins in 2002) followed.
Then came the crash of 2008, which originated in the United States but caused greater problems in Europe than anywhere else.
Policymakers responded to the collapse of Lehman Brothers by announcing that no other systemically important financial institution would be allowed to fail, which required substituting state credit for frozen markets.
Shortly thereafter, however, German Chancellor Angela Merkel asserted that such guarantees had to be provided by each state individually, not by Europe collectively.
That marked the beginning of the euro crisis, because it exposed a flaw in the single currency of which neither the authorities nor financial markets were aware – and which is still not fully recognized today.
By creating the European Central Bank, the member states exposed their own government bonds to the risk of default.
Developed countries that issue bonds in their own currency never default, because they can always print money.
Their currency may depreciate, but the risk of default is absent.
By contrast, less developed countries that borrow in foreign currencies may run out of currency reserves.
When a fiscal crisis hit Greece, the financial world suddenly discovered that eurozone members had put themselves in the position of developing countries.
There is a close parallel between the euro crisis and the Latin American debt crisis of 1982, when the International Monetary Fund saved the international financial system by lending just enough money to the heavily indebted countries to enable them to avoid default.
But the IMF imposed strict austerity on these countries, pushing them into a prolonged depression.
Latin America suffered a lost decade.
Today, Germany is playing the same role as the IMF did then.
The setting differs, but the effect is the same.
The euro crisis pushed the financial system to the verge of bankruptcy, which has been avoided by imposing strict austerity and lending countries like Greece just enough money to avoid default.
As a result, the eurozone has become divided into creditors and debtors, with the creditors in charge of economic policy.
There is a center, led by Germany, and a periphery, consisting of the heavily indebted countries.
The creditors’ imposition of strict austerity on the periphery is perpetuating the eurozone’s division between center and periphery.
Economic conditions are continuing to deteriorate, causing immense human suffering.
The innocent, frustrated, and angry victims of austerity provide fertile ground for hate speech, xenophobia, and all forms of extremism.
Thus, policies designed to preserve the financial system and the euro are transforming the EU into the opposite of an open society.
There is an apparent contradiction between the euro’s financial requirements and the EU’s political objectives.
The financial requirements could be met by replicating the arrangements that prevailed in the global economy in the 1980’s and dividing the eurozone into a center and periphery; but that could not be reconciled with the principles of an open society.
There are ways in which the policies pursued to preserve the euro could be modified to meet the EU’s political objectives.
For example, individual countries’ government bonds could be replaced by Eurobonds.
But, insofar as the contradiction remains, the political objectives ought to take precedence.
Unfortunately, that is not the case.
The financial problems are pressing – and monopolizing politicians’ attention.
Europe’s leaders are so preoccupied with the crisis of the day that they have no time to ponder the long-term consequences of their actions.
As a result, they continue on a course that perpetuates the division between center and periphery.
This is such a dismal prospect that it must not be allowed to happen.
Originally, the EU was conceived as an instrument of solidarity and cooperation.
Today, it is held together by grim necessity.
That is not the Europe we want or need.
We must reverse this intolerable transformation.
We must find a way to recapture the spirit of solidarity and shared values that once inspired the European imagination.
The Endangered Arab Christian
BRUSSELS – The recent abductions of Syriac Orthodox Archbishop Yohanna Ibrahim and his Greek Orthodox counterpart, Paul Yazigi, reflect not only the increasing brutality of Syria’s civil war, but also the escalating crisis for Christians across the Arab world – one that could end up driving them away altogether.
According to the International Society for Human Rights, 80% of all acts of religious persecution worldwide in 2012 were directed at Christians.
This surge in discrimination against Christian communities in countries where they have lived for many centuries can be explained largely by increasing Islamist militancy and the rise of political Islam in the wake of the Arab Spring.
As Islamist parties have taken power in the region, a wave of intimidation and discrimination has been unleashed on Christian minority populations.
For example, on February 26, at a garment market in Benghazi, Libya, members of a powerful Islamist militia rounded up dozens of Egyptian Coptic Christians – identified by crosses tattooed on their right wrists – whom they then detained, tortured, and threatened with execution.
Among the victims was a Coptic priest, whom the captors beat severely before shaving his head and moustache.
Priests have also been assaulted in Tripoli, and churches have been torched.
All of this sends a clear message: non-Muslims are not safe in Libya.
While Libya has no significant religious minority, hundreds of thousands of Egyptians live and work in the country, where Christian proselytizing is illegal – and where one can be accused of proselytizing simply for possessing a Bible.
But Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood-controlled government does not seem particularly eager to protect its Christian citizens in Libya; it offered only a half-hearted call for the release of its detained citizens.
This reflects the similarly deteriorating situation for Christians in Egypt, where they account for roughly 15% of the population.
In early April, a funeral at St. Mark’s Cathedral (the seat of the Coptic Church in Cairo) for four Christians killed in sectarian riots days earlier descended into chaos, with thousands of mourners attacked as they tried to leave after the service.
Police fired tear gas into the compound, standing by as those outside the cathedral launched petrol bombs, hurled rocks, and shot at those inside.
At least two died and 80 were injured in the five-hour clash.
Christians blame the Muslim Brotherhood not only for allowing Muslim Egyptians to attack them with impunity, but also for permitting – and delivering – incendiary anti-Christian rhetoric.
For example, at an open rally for President Mohamed Morsi last year, the cleric Safwat Hegazy warned that Egyptian Muslims would “splash blood” on Christians who “splash water” on Morsi’s legitimacy.
In February, Egypt’s Coptic patriarch, Pope Tawadros II, sharply criticized the country’s leadership in a televised interview, calling the new constitution discriminatory and dismissing Morsi’s “national dialogues” as an empty gesture.
This unusually assertive stance reflects rising frustration among Christians, as well as the secular and liberal opposition, with the Muslim Brotherhood’s power monopoly.
Syria, which once welcomed thousands of Christians fleeing war-torn Iraq, is experiencing an analogous change, as the country’s increasingly sectarian civil war generates fear and mistrust throughout the population.
Although Christians have largely sought to remain neutral in the conflict, they have become involved gradually, some by taking up arms and others as victims of kidnapping and violence.
Melkite Greek Catholic Patriarch Gregorios III recently stated that, since 2011, over 1,000 Christians have been killed and more than 40 churches and other Christian institutions (schools, orphanages, and care homes) have been damaged or destroyed.
Some estimate that 300,000 Christians have fled Syria.
Furthermore, fallout from relentless regional conflict is destabilizing Lebanon, a country that offers Christians a constitutional guarantee of political representation.
Some 400,000 refugees – many of them Sunni Muslims, including fugitive rebels – have poured over the border from Syria, exacerbating sectarian tensions and threatening to disrupt Lebanon’s delicate social and political balance.
Given that, as Göttingen University’s Martin Tamcke points out, there is no remaining alternative for Christian refugees in the Middle East, they are increasingly heading to Europe and North America.
If this trend is allowed to continue, the Middle East will gradually lose its Christian congregations.
In order to prevent such a tragic outcome, Western leaders must take a more active role in advocating the protection of Christian minorities throughout the Arab world.
Ultimately, Christians and Muslims in the Arab world have the same desires: freedom, dignity, and equal rights.
Those who are persecuting Christians should recognize that the Arab Spring should benefit all Arabs.
The Extremists Unbound
JERUSALEM – The pattern of policymaking in the Middle East, as it was defined since President Bush’s “axis if evil” speech of January 2002, is undergoing a momentous change of direction.
Bush’s foreign-policy paradigm of an alliance of “moderates” to defeat the “extremists” – a model too enthusiastically seconded by an unimaginative Israeli leadership and by those Arabs (led by Egypt and Saudi Arabia) who dread the forces of radical change – has collapsed.
The “extremists,” whom Bush expected to be defeated through economic sanctions, diplomatic isolation, and military action, have prevailed.
It is the “moderates” who must now adapt their policies.
Israel and the United States failed resoundingly in their attempt to dislodge Hamas from Gaza, or in forcing it to accept conditions for an end to the international boycott.
Fearing the costs of an invasion of Gaza’s urban alleys, Israel handed a strategic victory to Hamas.
It accepted a truce, brokered by an Egyptian government fearful of Iran’s influence in neighboring Gaza, that not only gave Hamas political legitimacy and undermined the international community’s policy of not negotiating with this fundamentalist group, but that also allowed it to continue rearming.
Indeed, Hamas now poses a strategic threat to Israel’s urban centers and military facilities.
Israel’s war in 2006 in Lebanon against Hezbollah, supported by the US and the entire Arab “moderate” camp, was no more successful.
In fact, Hezbollah is now not only militarily stronger than ever – Security Council Resolution 1701, which called for its disarmament, has proven to be an utter failure – but also more politically robust than before the war.
Admirably adept at weaving together all of Lebanon’s political, religious, and nationalists threads, Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nazrallah, is today the undisputed master of Lebanon.
The Syrian patron of Hezbollah, President Bashar al-Assad, another member of the “axis of evil,” is also doing well, thank you.
Not only Israel and the US, but also Egypt and Saudi Arabia have hoped for the political demise of this friend of every radical regional cause – from Hamas and Iran to the anti-Western forces in Lebanon – that they oppose.
But Assad managed to emerge from Syria’s forced withdrawal from Lebanon in 2005 to become the broker without whom a Lebanese government could not be created and a president could not be elected.
This, and the indirect negotiations with Israel that are now underway in Turkey – which Assad knows cannot produce major results, given Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s political weakness and Bush’s lame-duck status – have helped to open for Syria the gates of Europe, where he had also once been a pariah.
Moreover, desperate to recover its relevance in Middle East politics, the US has now radically changed its attitude and agreed to a meeting between US Undersecretary of State for Near East Affairs David Welch and Riad Daoudi, Syria’s chief negotiator with Israel.
America’s drive to force Iran to stop its nuclear program through an ineffective sanctions regime has been no more successful than any of its other schemes to isolate the region’s extremists.
Indeed, the US has now completely reversed its position of not negotiating with Iran until it stops uranium enrichment.
The participation of Under Secretary of State William Burns in the European dialogue with Iran, together with plans to station American diplomats in Teheran for the first time since the 1979 Islamic Revolution, represents a momentous shift in America’s policy, and also an indication to Israel to refrain from a military strike.
Bogged down in Iraq and Afghanistan, America is in no mood to open a third front against the Islamic world.
The consequences of an Israeli attack on Iran “would be extremely stressful for us,” warned Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Michael Mullen.
With the defeat of his ideologically inspired foreign policy, Bush has finally decided not to remain blind to the benefits of engaging Syria and Iran.
However isolated within the Arab family the Syrians may be, and however embattled their Iranian allies are, the two countries hold the keys to Middle East stability.
They are crucial players in Lebanon, they have a role to play in pacifying Iraq, they can influence a change of attitude of powerful and extremely destabilizing non-state actors like Hamas and Hezbollah, and their leverage on Hamas is vital for the stability of the Palestinian front.
Engaging Iran is also the only way to stave off a nuclear apocalypse in the region.
Of course, the overall cooling of political tensions reflects the collapse of another misconception of the Bush administration – that the “axis of evil” is an irrational coalition interested only in spreading evil.
Pursuing radical goals does not necessarily mean that a country will act irrationally.
Neither Syria nor Iran – in fact, not even North Korea – has an interest in being the pariahs of the world community, and they fully understand the economic consequences of isolation.
Their policies are about more than spreading terror and revolution; they are about promoting negotiable interests.
They are both mindful of the limits of the politics of destabilization, and they are clearly looking forward to a more dialogue-oriented American administration willing to address their political and strategic concerns.
The Failure of China Bashing
With China's rapid growth increasingly affecting a wide range of issues worldwide, it has become expedient for US presidential candidates to blame China for some of America's domestic problems.
But in this year's US presidential election campaign, China bashing has been virtually non-existent.
There are good reasons for this welcome change.
Recent US elections rarely spared China, which found itself a frequent target of populist demagoguery.
Its exchange-rate regime, which pegs the Renminbi to the US dollar, was blamed for the mounting US trade deficit.
Never mind that America's bilateral trade deficit with China, even including Hong Kong, accounts for less than one-fifth of the total US deficit: growing imports from China and more direct investment by US companies supposedly fueled US unemployment.
Similarly, the unfinished reforms in China's banking sector and state-owned enterprises have been used as evidence of state subsidies for dumping activities.
Although the majority of China's exports now come from private companies that receive virtually no loans from state banks , American candidates in previous elections routinely sought to curry favor with working class voters by vowing to protect US jobs against China's supposedly unfair business practices.
The jobs issue could be exploited further by citing poor working conditions, low wages, child labor, and other problems commonly found in developing countries.
Attacking a communist country has always seemed to offer American politicians a convenient way to appeal to the average voter.
After all, most US voters can be trusted not to learn how other countries, let alone countries in the Far East, really work.
But this time, George W. Bush and John Kerry both know that it would be unwise to bash China too hard.
American companies and the entire US economy have a huge stake in China now, so both candidates have no interest in rocking the boat.
A candidate may promise more anti-dumping actions against Chinese goods, vow to press harder on China to change its exchange rate regime, or sharpen criticism of China's weak enforcement of intellectual property rights; but over-protectionism may make a candidate look irresponsible in 2004.
Indeed, protectionism can do nothing to reduce America's trade deficit and stanch domestic unemployment.
No matter how much politicians blame others, growing US imports mean greater reliance on international markets, and some China factor in America's investment portfolio is needed to compete against European and Japanese firms.
There is no hiding these facts from American voters anymore.
George W. Bush failed to honor his anti-Chinese protectionist campaign promises of 2000, as did Bill Clinton throughout his presidency.
Any China-bashing and protectionist pleas this time around will most likely ring just as hollow.
Moreover, China's geopolitical importance to the US has grown immensely since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington D.C. of September 11, 2001.
At least for now, engaging China in the global fight against terrorism is in America's interest.
China does have some common interests in fighting Islamic extremist terrorism, and it did not try to block America's path to the Iraqi war in the UN Security Council.
China has also been cooperating constructively with the US and its allies in dealing with North Korea's nuclear capabilities.
Of course, America still wants to contain China and prevent it from becoming a major regional and world power.
But that remains a long-term strategic goal, not the stuff of presidential campaigns, especially when China seems too weak to pose any immediate threat to the US on any front in the foreseeable future.
China has never been a positive factor in American politics; so, from its perspective, the less it is mentioned in this US election season, the better.
The relative silence about China in the US these days may be due merely to the news dominance of the Iraq War.
Yet it may also indicate that America's political elites are in the process of facing up to new realities and adjusting their view of China accordingly.
The Failure of Inflation Targeting
New York – The World’s central bankers are a close-knit club, given to fads and fashions.
One hopes that most countries will have the good sense not to implement inflation targeting; my sympathies go to the unfortunate citizens of those that do.  (Among the list of those who have officially adopted inflation targeting in one form or another are: Israel, the Czech Republic, Poland, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, South Africa, Thailand, Korea, Mexico, Hungary, Peru, the Philippines, Slovakia, Indonesia, Romania, New Zealand, Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Australia, Iceland, and Norway.)
Today, inflation targeting is being put to the test – and it will almost certainly fail.
Developing countries currently face higher rates of inflation not because of poorer macro-management, but because oil and food prices are soaring, and these items represent a much larger share of the average household budget than in rich countries.
In China, for example, inflation is approaching 8% or more.
In Vietnam, it is even higher and is expected to approach 18.2% this year, and in India it is 5.8% .
By contrast, US inflation stands at 3%.
Does that mean that these developing countries should raise their interest rates far more than the US?
Inflation in these countries is, for the most part, imported .
Raising interest rates won’t have much impact on the international price of grains or fuel.
Indeed, given the size of the US economy, a slowdown there might conceivably have a far bigger effect on global prices than a slowdown in any developing country, which suggests that, from a global perspective, US interest rates, not those in developing countries, should be raised.
So long as developing countries remain integrated into the global economy – and do not take measures to restrain the impact of international prices on domestic prices – domestic prices of rice and other grains are bound to rise markedly when international prices do.
For many developing countries, high oil and food prices represent a triple threat: not only do importing countries have to pay more for grain, they have to pay more to bring it to their countries and still more to deliver it to consumers who may live a long distance from ports.
Raising interest rates can reduce aggregate demand, which can slow the economy and tame increases in prices of some goods and services, especially non-traded goods and services.
But, unless taken to an intolerable level, these measures by themselves cannot bring inflation down to the targeted levels.
For example, even if global energy and food prices increase at a more moderate rate than now – for example, 20% per year – and get reflected in domestic prices, bringing the overall inflation rate to, say, 3% would require markedly falling prices elsewhere.  That would almost surely entail a marked economic slowdown and high unemployment.
The cure would be worse than the disease.
So, what should be done?
First, politicians, or central bankers, should not be blamed for imported inflation, just as we should not give them credit for low inflation when the global environment is benign.
Former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, it is now recognized, deserves much blame for America’s current economic mess.
He is also sometimes given credit for America’s low inflation during his tenure.
But the truth is that America in the Greenspan years benefited from a period of declining commodity prices, and from deflation in China, which helped keep prices of manufactured goods in check.
Second, we must recognize that high prices can cause enormous stress, especially for lower-income individuals.
Riots and protests in some developing countries are just the worst manifestation of this.
Advocates of trade liberalization touted its advantages; but they were never fully honest about its risks, against which markets typically fail to provide adequate insurance.
Over a quarter-century ago, I showed that, under plausible conditions, trade liberalization could make everyone worse off.
I was not arguing for protectionism, but rather sounding a cautionary note that we must be aware of the downside risks and be prepared to deal with them. 
When it comes to agriculture, developed countries, such as the US and European Union members, insulate both consumers and farmers from these risks.
But most developing countries do not have the institutional structures, or the resources, to do likewise.
Many are imposing emergency measures like export taxes or bans, which help their own citizens, but at the expense of those elsewhere.  
If we are to avoid an even stronger backlash against globalization, the West must respond quickly and strongly.
Bio-fuel subsidies, which have encouraged the shift of land from producing food into energy, must be repealed.
In addition, some of the billions spent to subsidize Western farmers should now be spent to help poorer developing countries meet their basic food and energy needs. 
Most importantly, both developing and developed countries need to abandon inflation targeting.
The struggle to meet rising food and energy prices is hard enough.
The weaker economy and higher unemployment that inflation targeting brings won’t have much impact on inflation; it will only make the task of surviving in these conditions more difficult. 
Everybody knows that there are immense unrealized losses in financial assets, but no one is sure that they know where those losses are.
To buy – or even to hold – risky assets in such a situation is a recipe for financial disaster.
So is buying or holding equity in firms that may be holding risky assets, regardless of how “safe” a firm’s stock was previously thought to be.
This crash in prices of risky financial assets would not overly concern the rest of us were it not for the havoc that it has wrought on the price system, which is sending a peculiar message to the real economy.
The price system is saying: shut down risky production activities and don’t undertake any new activities that might be risky.
A policy that leaves owners of risky financial assets impoverished is a policy that shuts down dynamism in the real economy.
The political problem can be finessed: as Don Kohn, a vice-chairman of the Federal Reserve, recently observed, teaching a few thousand feckless financiers not to over-speculate is much less important than securing the jobs of millions of Americans and tens of millions around the globe.
Financial rescue operations that benefit even the unworthy can be accepted if they are seen as benefiting all – even if the unworthy gain more than their share of the benefits.
What cannot be accepted are financial rescue operations that benefit the unworthy and cause losses to other important groups – like taxpayers and wage earners.
And that, unfortunately, is the perception held by many nowadays, particularly in the United States.
It is easy to see why.
When Vice Presidential candidate Jack Kemp attacked Vice President Al Gore in 1996 for the Clinton administration’s decision to bail out Mexico’s feckless government during the 1994-1995 financial crisis, Gore responded that America made $1.5 billion on the deal.
Similarly, Clinton’s treasury secretary, Robert Rubin, and IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus were attacked for committing public money to bail out New York banks that had loaned to feckless East Asians in 1997-1998.
They responded that they had not rescued the truly bad speculative actor, Russia; that they had “bailed in,” not bailed out, the New York banks, by requiring them to cough up additional money to support South Korea’s economy; and that everyone had benefited massively, because a global recession was avoided.
Now, however, the US government can say none of these things. Officials cannot say that a global recession has been avoided; that they “bailed in” the banks; that – with the exception of Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns – they forced the bad speculative actors into bankruptcy; or that the government made money on the deal.
It is still true that the banking-sector policies that were undertaken were good – or at least better than doing nothing.
But the certainty that matters would have been much worse under a hands-off approach to the financial sector, à la Republican Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon in 1930-1931, is not concrete enough to alter public perceptions.
What is concrete enough are soaring bankers’ bonuses and a real economy that continues to shed jobs.
The Fallen Heroes of the Financial Crisis
PARIS – Oscar Wilde said that experience is the name we give to our mistakes.
Last year, we tried to analyze the errors that led the world into economic crisis. Now it is time to analyze the mistakes we made when trying to get out of it.
When the scale of the crisis became clear last year, many were certain that it would be managed badly. But perhaps we should be grateful that it was managed at all.
Unlike in the 1930’s, decision-makers acted quickly, ignoring dogmas that warned against rapid intervention.
Moreover, they knew that, in contrast to the inter-war period, close international coordination would be needed.
In 2008-2009, the influence of the G-20 grew, at the expense of the G-8.
People became aware of the need for truly global governance. And, at long last, a number of proposals emerged aimed at making such governance a reality.
Experience, it turns out, is not just the name we give to our mistakes.
As the financial crisis has shown, it is also the process that enables us to increase our understanding and ultimately to envisage a new world.
Unfortunately, however, this process has not gone far enough, enabling many banks, governments, and international institutions to return to “business as usual.”
Indeed, today the global economy’s arsonists have become prosecutors, and accuse the fire fighters of having provoked flooding.
At the peak of the crisis, governments had an opportunity to create a new global financial infrastructure. But they let it slip through their fingers.
The fact that many Western economies got out of recession last year should not fool us into thinking that the crisis was only a brief interlude, and that the post-crisis world can return to the pre-crisis status quo.
There is pressure to re-write the history of this crisis by depicting effects as if they were causes, and to blame the governments that managed the crisis for starting it.
A low point – perhaps one should say the height of ridiculousness – was reached last year when rating agencies intensified their surveillance of government debt, and markets that had been victimized by the agencies’ incompetence and bad faith became fixated on their evaluations.
Lehman Brothers had been awarded a high rating on the very eve of its collapse, yet now the rating agencies criticize governments that pulled the global economy back from the abyss for violating accounting principles.
Are rating agencies and the markets really so ill-informed about public spending?
According to the International Monetary Fund, G-20 countries earmarked 17.6% of their GDP on average to supporting their banking systems, although they spent much less.
By doling out vast sums of money to rescue the financial system, without asking for genuine guarantees in return, they showed a lack of foresight.
Acknowledging that rating agencies were incompetent without doing anything to regulate them was inexcusable.
As a result, taxpayers may need to pay twice, once for the bailout and again for the low-quality debt they have incurred during the bailout, as the austerity programs unveiled in Europe attest.
Paradoxically, the growing sense that a catastrophe has been averted has given rise to a growing demand for governments to cut public and social spending, and to refrain from proposing investment programs.
People are racing back to the policies that caused the crisis in the first place.
But governments are not guilty of deceiving the public; if anything, they acted naïvely and are now paying the price.
Governments really have no choice: they must take responsibility and exercise power, even if it requires swimming against the tide of public opinion – and especially if it can help alleviate the social suffering brought on by the crisis.
Indeed, we should remember that economic growth was sustainable only in countries with highly developed social welfare systems, like France.
Yes, these countries will recover at a slower pace than elsewhere, but countries that have fallen into a deep hole must work harder than those that have fallen into a shallow one.
Perhaps most importantly, the drive for greater competitiveness, regardless of the cost, will only aggravate the crisis.
After all, export-led growth policies can succeed only if other countries are willing to run deficits.
Given that the global imbalances that led to the crisis remain unaddressed, increased competitiveness will be a Pyrrhic victory – and one that will exact a severe toll on domestic living standards and consumption.
The Fallen Pharaoh
Egypt’s Kifaya Movement has raised the ante in its opposition to President Hosni Mubarak’s regime by issuing a massive report that dares to name names and detail corruption among the country’s leaders.
Nothing in Egypt’s long history has ever equaled this airing of the country’s dirtiest laundry.
Kifaya’s action is especially bold in the midst of a government crackdown to prepare the way for the succession of Mubarak’s son, Gamal.
For example, a recent law mandates punishment for anyone who spreads rumors that Gamal is to be the next president.
Corruption in Egypt, as in other Arab states, is so extensive as to undermine the possibility of economic advancement, higher living standards, a free media, independent courts, and democracy.
Egypt’s political elite, fearful of critical media coverage, defeat in fair elections, and even imprisonment, prefer the existing regime and oppose any significant reform.
This is a key theme of the report, entitled Corruption in Egypt: A Black Cloud That Never Passes.
As long as the system is corrupted from above, and as long as the only way common people can deal with the government is through bribery, says the report, inefficiency will reign and people will cheat each other.
The only way to break this vicious circle is to replace the regime.
At the same time, as was seen in Yasir Arafat’s Palestine Authority, a corrupt regime encourages people to turn to radical Islamists, who work hard to present themselves as honest.
If the Muslim Brotherhood comes to power in Egypt one day, Kifaya’s report will explain a lot about how it happened.
The report begins by joking that Egypt’s name should be changed to “Fasadistan,” the land of corruption.
It documents cases relating to housing, business, health, transportation, trade, banks, drugs, agriculture, politics, culture, and the media.
One chapter covers how the security forces control appointments to all key jobs, including in schools and universities.
But the most dramatic part of the book concerns Mubarak himself.
An anecdote in the report, which rings true, has Mubarak meeting with officers of the Third Army two years ago.
Some of the younger officers complained about corruption.
Mubarak apparently surprised them by saying that he knew that many leading people in the country were thieves, but that he believed they had stolen enough to keep them happy.
He was afraid, he explained, that if he appointed new people they would start over in their depredations, putting a much heavier burden on Egypt.
According to the report, however, Mubarak; his wife, Susan; and his two sons, Gamal and Alaa, are far from being mere bystanders.
When Mubarak became president in 1981, parliament granted him the right to control all military contracts without legislative oversight.
In effect, the report states, he has a monopoly on military spending and imports, apparently a rich source of kickbacks each time he approves a deal.
Similarly, Susan Mubarak is the head of as many as 100 charities that often exist only on paper.
The report charges that as much as $5 million might go to one of these institutions in a year, but that a large portion is then siphoned off to her secret foreign bank accounts.
Ironically, Susan Mubarak, says the report, urged the passage of a 1992 law that permitted Egyptian non-governmental organizations to receive foreign funds – a provision used by some opposition groups – in order to provide channels for the NGO’s she runs.
The president’s son Gamal also has his own charities that provide him with money, claims Kifaya, including the famous al-Mustaqbal organization.
Mubarak’s two sons are said by the report to receive profit-making partnerships – without making any investment – in a large number of companies, including Phillip Morris, Skoda Auto, Movenpick, Vodafone, McDonalds, and many others.
They can also, it adds, obtain unsecured bank loans for themselves and their friends.
The report maintains that these funds are often used to participate in illegal financial transactions, arms’ dealing, and money laundering.
The sons’ interests allegedly also include forays into drug smuggling and illegal exports of archaeological treasures – Egypt’s cultural heritage – in partnership with Culture Minister Faruq Husni, who is supposed to safeguard them.
Anyone who stands in their way, according to the report, can be thrown into prison on false charges of drug dealing.
Other cabinet ministers are no better, Kifaya claims.
Boutros Ghali, nephew of the former UN Secretary-General, Interior Minister Habib Aladli, and such powerful figures as Ibrahim Suleiman and Safwat Sharif are engaged in similar deals, sometimes in partnership with Mubarak’s sons.
In short, the report says, officials can do what they like, unbound by law or transparency.
By using the “emergency law,” which has restricted freedom since 1981, together with censorship and rigged elections, Egypt’s government treats its citizens like serfs.
Meanwhile, massive corruption is devastating Egypt’s economy, with growth falling by half in the last two years, accompanied by rising unemployment, higher inflation, and currency depreciation.
Foreign investment is also declining, and local production is paralyzed, necessitating expensive imports.
The discontent fueled by these failures is a major potential cause of unrest.
By issuing such a detailed report and daring to name Mubarak and his family as the prime culprits, Kifaya is challenging the regime head-on.
The need for reform, it argues, is not based merely on a desire for better government or abstract rights, but is necessary to save a country that is being strangled.
The regime may respond by trying to tighten the noose.
The Decline of Renewable Energy
PRAGUE – Many today believe that renewable energy will let us get off fossil fuels soon.
Unfortunately, the facts say otherwise.
According to International Energy Agency data, 13.12% of the world’s energy came from renewables in 1971, the first year that the IEA reported global statistics.
In 2011, renewables’ share was actually lower, at 12.99%.
Yet a new survey shows that Americans believe that the share of renewables in 2035 will be 30.2%.
In reality, it will likely be 14.5%.
Solar and wind energy account for a trivial proportion of current renewables – about one-third of one percentage point.
The vast majority comes from biomass, or wood and plant material – humanity’s oldest energy source.
While biomass is renewable, it is often neither good nor sustainable.
Burning wood in pre-industrial Western Europe caused massive deforestation, as is occurring in much of the developing world today. The indoor air pollution that biomass produces kills more than three million people annually.
Likewise, modern energy crops increase deforestation, displace agriculture, and push up food prices.
The most renewables-intensive places in the world are also the poorest.
Africa gets almost 50% of its energy from renewables, compared to just 8% for the OECD.
Even the European OECD countries, at 11.8%, are below the global average.
The reality is that humanity has spent recent centuries getting away from renewables.
In 1800, the world obtained 94% of its energy from renewable sources.
That figure has been declining ever since.
The momentous move toward fossil fuels has done a lot of good.
Compared to 250 years ago, the average person in the United Kingdom today has access to 50 times more power, travels 250 times farther, and has 37,500 times more light.
Incomes have increased 20-fold.
The switch to fossil fuels has also had tremendous environmental benefits.
Kerosene saved the whales (which had been hunted almost to extinction to provide supposedly “renewable” whale oil for lighting).
Coal saved Europe’s forests.
With electrification, indoor air pollution, which is much more dangerous than outdoor air pollution, disappeared in most of the developed world.
And there is one environmental benefit that is often overlooked: in 1910, more than 30% of farmland in the United States was used to produce fodder for horses and mules.
Tractors and cars eradicated this huge demand on farmland (while ridding cities of manure pollution).
Of course, fossil fuels brought their own environmental problems.
And, while technological innovations like scrubbers on smokestacks and catalytic converters on cars have reduced local air pollution substantially, the problem of CO₂ emissions remains.
Indeed, it is the main reason for the world’s clamor for a return to renewables.
To be sure, wind and solar have increased dramatically.
Since 1990, wind-generated power has grown 26% per year and solar a phenomenal 48%.
But the growth has been from almost nothing to slightly more than almost nothing.
In 1990, wind produced 0.0038% of the world’s energy; it is now producing 0.29%.
Solar-electric power has gone from essentially zero to 0.04%.
Yes, Denmark gets a record 34% of its electricity from wind.
But electricity accounts for only 18% of its final energy use.
Europe now gets 1% of its energy from wind – less than before industrialization, when cozy windmills contributed about 2% (and ships’ sails provided another 1%).
The UK set its record for wind power in 1804, when its share reached 2.5% – almost three times its level today.
Under unrealistically optimistic assumptions, the share could increase five percentage points, to 17.9%.
So we are nowhere near switching back to renewables anytime soon.
In the US, renewables accounted for 9.3% of energy production in 1949.
President Barack Obama’s administration expects that number, almost a century later, to increase slightly, to 10.8% by 2040.
In China, renewables’ share in energy production dropped from 40% in 1971 to 11% today; in 2035, it will likely be just 9%.
Yet we are paying through the nose for these renewables.
In the last 12 years, the world has invested $1.6 trillion in clean energy.
By 2020, the effort to increase reliance on renewables will cost the European Union alone $250 billion annually.
Spain now pays almost 1% of its GDP in subsidies for renewables, which is more than it spends on higher education.
At the end of the century, Spain’s massive investment will have postponed global warming by 62 hours.
Current green energy policies are failing for a simple reason: renewables are far too expensive.
Sometimes people claim that renewables are actually cheaper.
But if renewables were cheaper, they wouldn’t need subsidies, and we wouldn’t need climate policies.
Former US Vice President Al Gore’s climate adviser, Jim Hansen, put it bluntly: “Suggesting that renewables will let us phase rapidly off fossil fuels in the United States, China, India, or the world as a whole is almost the equivalent of believing in the Easter Bunny and [the] Tooth Fairy.”
The solution is to innovate the price of renewables downward.
We need a dramatic increase in funding for research and development to make the next generations of wind, solar, and biomass energy cheaper and more effective.
Consider China.
Despite the country’s massive investment in solar and wind, it mostly sells solar panels to Western countries at subsidized prices.
Wind makes up just 0.2% of China’s energy, and solar accounts for 0.01%.
Meanwhile, China has 68% of the world’s solar water heaters on rooftops, because it is a smart and cheap technology.
It needs no subsidies, and it produces 50 times more energy than all of China’s solar panels.
When green renewables are cheaper than fossil fuels, they will take over the world.
Instead of believing in the Tooth Fairy, we should start investing in green R&D.
The Fall of the House of Murdoch
NEW YORK – During the four decades since the Watergate affair engulfed US President Richard Nixon, politicians have repeatedly ignored the scandal’s main lesson: the cover-up is worse than the crime.
Like Nixon, they have paid a higher price for concealing their misdeeds than they would have for the misdeeds alone.
Now, for once, comes a scandal that breaks that rule: the United Kingdom’s phone-hacking affair, which has shaken British politics to its foundations.
Over the past decade, the tabloid newspaper The News of the World, owned by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation, targeted 4,000 people’s voicemail.
The list includes not only royalty, celebrities, and other VIPs, but also the families of servicemen killed in Afghanistan and Iraq, and those of victims of the July 2005 terrorist attack in London.
It all unraveled when The Guardian reported that the tabloid had hacked into the voicemail of missing 13-year-old Milly Dowler, apparently in the hope of obtaining some private expressions of family members’ grief or desperation that it could splash on its front page.
When the girl’s murdered body was found six months later, the family and the police thought she might still be alive, because The News of the World’s operatives were deleting messages when her phone’s mailbox became full.
(According to Scotland Yard, Murdoch hacks reportedly bribed mid-level police officers to supply information as well.)
In the extensive annals of eavesdropping, all of this is something new.
Not even Stalin wiretapped the dead.
A cover-up ensued.
James Murdoch, Rupert’s son and Chairman and Chief Executive of News Corporation’s European and Asian operations, authorized a secret payment of £1 million ($1.6 million) to buy the silence of hacking victims.
Millions of in-house emails reportedly have been destroyed.
Still, it seems safe to say that the peculiarly repellant inhumanity of the original deeds will remain more shocking than the details of this or any other cover-up.
Even so, the political consequences of the phone-hacking scandal will depend on far more than the outcome of the official investigations now underway in Britain. Above all, the scandal’s impact will depend on how governments and citizens assess what News Corporation really is.
The Murdochs call News Corporation a journalistic enterprise.
In fact, it is, first, an entertainment company, with the bulk of its revenue coming from its film and television holdings.
Second, and more importantly, it is a propaganda machine for right-wing causes and political figures.
This is News Corporation’s main face in the US, in the form of Fox News, whose hallmark has been relentless propagation of right-wing ideology.
Whereas political propaganda had once been the domain of governments and political parties, Fox News is formally independent of both – though itoverwhelmingly serves the interests of America’s Republican Party.
In Britain, News Corporation has been creating a sort of state unto itself by corrupting the police, assuming police powers of surveillance, and intimidating politicians into looking the other way.
In the US, it has behaved similarly, using corporate media power to breathe life into a stand-alone political organization, the Tea Party.
All of this is far removed from what a journalistic organization is supposed to do.
Journalism’s essential role in a democracy is to enable people to fulfill their roles as citizens by providing information about government, other powerful institutions, civil movements, international events, and so on.
But News Corporation replaces such journalism with titillation and gossip, as it did when it took over the 168-year-old News of the World and turned it into a tabloid in 1984, and with partisan campaigns, as it did when it created Fox News in 1996.
Not surprisingly, at Fox News, as at many other News Corporation outlets, editorial independence is sacrificed to iron-fisted centralized control.
News and commentary are mingled in an uninterrupted stream of political campaigning.
Ideology trumps factuality.
And major Republican figures, including possible contenders for the party’s presidential nomination, are hired as “commentators.”
Indeed, its specific genius has been to turn propaganda into a popular and financial success.
Given The News of the World’s profitability, no one should be surprised if the Murdochs have been replicating their sunken British flagship’s reprehensible behavior elsewhere.
But, whatever else is revealed, the UK phone-hacking scandal is of a piece with the Murdochs’ transformation of news into propaganda: both reflect an assault on democracy’s essential walls of separation between media, the state, and political parties.
The Murdochs are fusing these entities into a single unaccountable power that, as we see in Britain today, lacks any restraint or scruple.
That effort should compel us to confront an uncomfortable reality underlying both the British phone-hacking scandal, with its penumbra of appalling cruelty and wanton corruption, and Fox News, America’s most popular news channel: too many people want what the News Corporation has been offering.
And what too many people want can be dangerous to a civilized, law-based society.
To glimpse just how dangerous, consider Italy, where Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s MediaSet conglomerate has seduced broad swathes of the electorate since the 1980’s with a Murdoch-like combination of insipid variety shows and partisan political theater.
When Italy’s postwar party system collapsed in the early 1990’s, Berlusconi was able to establish his own political party, win power, and, over the course of three governments, bend laws and government institutions to serve his business and personal interests.
The News Corporation seems determined to take Britain and the US down a similar path.
But now, at least in Britain, the political class is in revolt.
Prime Minister David Cameron – who previously cultivated close ties with News Corporation leaders, even employing as his press secretary The News of the World’s former editor, who was recently arrested for his role in the scandal – called the phone hacking “disgusting.”
Meanwhile, Labour leaders, who had also sought the Murdochs’ favor, have vowed to block News Corporation’s bid for full ownership of Britain’s largest pay-television broadcaster.
Whether the rebellion will jump across the Atlantic remains to be seen.
The Fall of the Hyper Power
Listen carefully these days to Israelis and South Koreans.
What they are hinting at is no less than a tectonic shift in the international system: the shift from a unipolar to a multipolar world.
Israelis are rediscovering Europe.
They intuitively sense that they can no longer rely only on the absolute security guarantee represented by the United States’ combination of active and passive support.
The war in Lebanon, so frustrating for Israel, accelerated that subtle change.
Now Europe and its various contingents are playing a leading role in picking up the pieces there.
America, of course, remains Israel’s life insurance policy, but enlargement and diversification of diplomatic alliances is starting to be seen as crucial by Israeli diplomats, if not by Israeli society.
The Quartet (the US, Russia, the European Union, and the United Nations) used to be regarded as “One plus Three,” but that is no longer the case.
Europe and Russia no longer see themselves as secondary players, because the US, not to mention Israel, needs them.
As for the South Koreans, they are counting on China to deal with the North Korean nuclear crisis.
They, too, see the world through a prism that makes America continue to appear essential, but no longer preeminent.
Recently, a high South Korean official listed in hierarchical order the countries that mattered most in the North Korean nuclear crisis.
China came first, followed by the US, Russia, Japan, and South Korea, whereas Europe was absent.
These are only a few signs among many others.
One could also mention the recent Sino-African summit in Beijing, or the intensification of Venezuelan-Iranian relations.
All these developments subtly indicate a deep trend that can be formalized in one sentence: America’s unipolar moment, which began in 1991 with the collapse of the Soviet Empire, is over.
Of course, one should not “bury” the US too soon.
America is much more resilient than its critics believe.
It has a unique capacity to rebound, and it controls unparalleled military, intellectual, economic, and even political resources.
The Republicans’ defeat in this month’s mid-term Congressional elections is a sign that Americans want to sanction their leaders for their strategic and ethical shortcomings, and they did so with gusto.
But this resilience should not hide a deeper evolution.
The US is no longer alone.
America no longer qualifies, if it ever did, as a “hyper power,” to use former French foreign minister Hubert Vedrine’s term, though it is still far from being a “normal” power.
America’s inadvertent “passivity” in the Clinton years and the wrong directions of the Bush years coincided with the rise of China and India, as well as Russia’s renewed international clout as a result of high oil prices.
These developments ushered in the slow, imperfect return of an unbalanced multi-polar system.
The world in which we live may be moving toward the multi-polarity wished for by French President Jacques Chirac, but not necessarily in a successful and stable way.
If, contrary to the traditional “Gaullist” vision, multi-polarity is not bringing stability, but instead generating chaos, there are two reasons for this outcome.
First, key emerging actors – China, Russia, and India – are not ready, willing, or even capable of performing a stabilizing international role.
They are either too cynical or timid in their vision of the world, or they have others priorities, or both.
They probably contemplate with barely disguised pleasure the difficulties currently encountered by the US in Iraq and elsewhere, but they do not feel any sense of a “compensating responsibility” for global stability.
The common good is not their cup of tea.
They have too much to catch up with, in terms of national ego and national interest, to care for others.
Second, the EU is the only natural American ally in terms of values.
It is the EU that can make multi-polarity work if it plays its role positively.
If the EU appears more concerned with the best ways to avoid the responsibilities that may befall it as a result of America’s new and enforced modesty, then multi-polarity will result – by default, not by design – in a more chaotic world, rather than leading to greater stability.
Europe has a unique chance to demonstrate that it can make a difference in America’s post-unipolar moment.
It starts right now in the Middle-East.
The world that Europe has called for is coming closer, and it can fail abysmally without the EU or improve at the margin thanks to it.
In some ways, the end of a unipolar world could truly be the “Hour of Europe.”
But that can happen only if the EU regains its confidence and steps into a positive role – one that it must play with, not against, the US.
The Rupee’s Wake-Up Call
PRINCETON – The Indian rupee has weakened rapidly in recent months, with the exchange rate against the US dollar dropping by 11%, to around 60 rupees, since early May.
As a symbol of India’s economic strength, the rupee’s fall has provoked more than the usual hand-wringing and angst at home and abroad.
There is indeed reason to be worried, but not because the rupee’s value has declined.
In fact, the slide has been long in coming, and recent market uncertainty has merely been a wake-up call.
The real reason to worry is that India has lost international competitiveness and has been buying time by borrowing from fickle lenders.
Growth momentum has fizzled and, with inflation persistently high, Indian producers are struggling to compete in world markets.
The current-account deficit is increasing relentlessly, owing to a widening trade deficit (now at 13% of GDP), raising the danger of a balance-of-payments crisis.
Indian GDP grew at heady rates of 8-10% per year between 2004 and 2007, a period that seemed to herald a decisive break from the anemic “Hindu rate of growth.”
Reforms had unleashed new entrepreneurial energies and the prospect of a brighter future lifted people’s aspirations.
With foreign manufacturers piling in to satisfy a new hunger for consumer durables, India turned its gaze outward.
The global economy – in a phase of buoyant expansion – welcomed India’s information technology services.
Bangalore (the information-technology hub), Bollywood, and yoga became symbols of India’s soft power.
That was the moment to invest in the future.
But the opportunity was wasted.
Infrastructure did not keep pace with the economy’s needs.
And, more deplorably, educational standards lagged.
For a country positioning itself as a leader in the global knowledge economy, neglecting investment in education was a grave error, with other countries now staking a claim to the role to which India aspired.
And, even when times were good, India never gained a foothold in the global manufactured-goods trade.
Today, domestic investment has plummeted, exports are languishing, and GDP growth is down to around 4.5% per year.
Moreover, India has developed a tendency for chronic inflation, owing to an unhappy combination of supply bottlenecks (caused by poor infrastructure) and excessive demand (thanks to persistent public deficits).
Budget deficits offered what appeared to be a free lunch, as the resulting inflation eroded the real value of public debt, while the government had privileged access to private savings at near-zero real interest rates.
With so much largesse to spread around, the government became a source of contracts with annuity-like earnings, which offered robust returns for those with political access.
That weakened the incentives for entrepreneurship.
And, as India’s external position deteriorated, the rupee became significantly overvalued between early 2009 and late 2012, trading in a narrow range while domestic inflation galloped ahead in a global environment of relative price stability.
Amid weakening competitiveness, the rupee was propped up by increasingly unstable foreign sources of funds.
Traditionally, nearly half of India’s trade deficit has been financed by remittances from Indian expatriates.
Part of this flow is steady, because it supports families at home; but much of it is opportunistic investment seeking real returns.
According to recent data, remittances have slowed or even fallen slightly.
Similarly, long-term foreign investors have had reason to pause.
This is not surprising, given the slowdown in consumption growth (car sales, for example, are suffering a prolonged decline).
India has been left to finance its external deficit increasingly through short-term borrowing, the most capricious form of international capital.
As Rudi Dornbusch, the late MIT economics professor, once warned, a crisis takes longer than expected to arrive but moves faster than anticipated when it does.
India may be particularly vulnerable, because all players there have been complicit in a silent conspiracy of denial.
An overvalued exchange rate strengthens repayment capacity, so international bankers cheer it on – until they cut and run.
And the Indian government played a large part in fueling rupee appreciation by easing companies’ ability to borrow abroad.
Indeed, at a time when restricting access to short-term international funds has acquired intellectual respectability, the government’s reluctance to enforce curbs has been puzzling.
The International Monetary Fund, which now supports selective imposition of capital controls, seems unconcerned: the rupee, its annual review concludes, is fairly valued.
This benign assessment is consistent with the IMF’s record of overlooking gathering crises.
With an overvalued rupee, there are no good policy choices.
To avert a disorderly fall, short-term macroeconomic management requires officially engineered depreciation through administrative methods and restraints on external borrowing.