The costs are mounting.
Deutsche Bank Securities estimates that the recent US drought, which affected nearly two-thirds of the country’s lower 48 states, will reduce GDP growth by approximately one percentage point.
Climate change, population growth, and other factors are driving up the risks.
Twenty percent of global GDP already is produced in water-scarce areas.
According to the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), in the absence of more sustainable water management, the share could rise to 45% by 2050, placing a significant portion of global economic output at risk.
Companies know that sound risk-management strategies depend on solid data.
When it comes to financial risks, data crunchers have access to vast amounts of information.
But that has not been the case with water – until now.
The World Resources Institute has joined with companies like Goldman Sachs, General Electric, and Shell to develop an online platform, called Aqueduct, to help measure and map water risks.
Aqueduct uses the latest data and state-of-the-art modeling techniques to offer a rich, granular picture of water risks worldwide.
Empowered with this data, companies can make better and more informed decisions.
For example, CERES, a non-profit organization, has combined Aqueduct’s water-stress maps with hydraulic fracturing data (from FracFocus.org) to find that nearly one-half of shale oil and gas wells in the US are located in areas with high water stress.
Early next year, Aqueduct will offer future projections of water stress based on the latest scientific analysis, including predicted effects of climate change.
Major companies are already seizing on water-risk data.
McDonald’s, for example, has asked more than 350 of its top supply-chain facilities to report on their water-risk exposure, using data from the Aqueduct tool.
Incorporating water risk into McDonald’s Environmental Scorecard is an important step in engaging suppliers not only on water efficiency, but also in overall stewardship, including cooperation with local watershed stakeholders.
The international clothing company H&M is working to reduce water-quality risk in its supply chain.
Through its Cleaner Production Program, the company works with NGOs in Bangladesh and China to implement cost-saving improvements that reduce their fabric mills’ impact on local water quality.
Similarly, the beverage company SABMiller is targeting a 25% reduction in the water intensity of its beer production between 2008 and 2015, and is now enhancing its water resilience throughout its global operations.
Through its Water Futures Partnership, the company has identified which of its facilities are located in areas facing water-security risks and has created partnerships in the local watersheds to address these risks.
The message is clear: water-risk management is shifting into the mainstream of business practices.
More than 90 signatories of the United Nations Global Compact’s CEO Water Mandate have pledged to develop, implement, and report on water-sustainability policies and practices in both their own and their suppliers’ operations, and to work with stakeholders beyond their own operations to address water risk.
Leading companies are showing that sustainable water management benefits all involved.
While many executives have traditionally underappreciated the risks from climate change and resource degradation, understanding water risk – and acting to minimize it – is just one way that businesses are starting to incorporate natural-resource management into their core strategy and operations.
Smart business leaders are investing in new tools that can provide comprehensive and up-to-date data, and companies are increasingly moving beyond recognition of natural risks to developing strategic responses to them.
As more companies do so, laggards will be at a growing competitive disadvantage.
They, too, will have to act before the next flood or drought strikes.
Read more from "Fragility and Resilience"
The Economic Costs of Fear
BERKELEY – The S&amp;P stock index now yields a 7% real (inflation-adjusted) return.
By contrast, the annual real interest rate on the five-year United States Treasury Inflation-Protected Security (TIPS) is -1.02%.
Yes, there is a “minus” sign in front of that: if you buy the five-year TIPS, each year over the next five years the US Treasury will pay you in interest the past year’s consumer inflation rate minus 1.02%.
Even the annual real interest rate on the 30-year TIPS is only 0.63% – and you run a large risk that its value will decline at some point over the next generation, implying a big loss if you need to sell it before maturity.
So, imagine that you invest $10,000 in the S&amp;P index.
This year, your share of the profits made by those companies will be $700.
Now, imagine that, of that total, the companies pay out $250 in dividends (which you reinvest to buy more stock) and retain $450 in earnings to reinvest in their businesses.
If the companies’ managers do their job, that reinvestment will boost the value of your shares to $10,450. Add to that the $250 of newly-bought shares, and next year the portfolio will be worth $10,700 – more if stock-market valuations rise, and less if they fall.
In fact, over any past period long enough for waves of optimism and pessimism to cancel each other out, the average earnings yield on the S&amp;P index has been a good guide to the return on the portfolio.
So, if you invest $10,000 in the S&amp;P for the next five years, you can reasonably expect (with enormous upside and downside risks) to make about 7% per year, leaving you with a compounded profit in inflation-adjusted dollars of $4,191.
If you invest $10,000 in the five-year TIPS, you can confidently expect a five-year loss of $510.
That is an extraordinary gap in the returns that you can reasonably expect.
It naturally raises the question: why aren’t people moving their money from TIPS (and US Treasury bonds and other safe assets) to stocks (and other relatively risky assets)?
People have different reasons.
And many people’s thinking is not terribly coherent. But there appear to be two main explanations.
First, many people are uncertain that current conditions will continue.
Most economists forecast the world a year from now to look a lot like the world today, with unemployment and profit margins about the same, wages and prices on average about 1.5% higher, total production up roughly 2%, and risks on both the upside and the downside.
But many investors see a substantial chance of 2008 and 2009 redux, whether triggered by a full-fledged euro crisis or by some black swan that we do not yet see, and fear that, unlike in 2008 and 2009, governments would lack the power and will to cushion the economic impact.
These investors do not view the 7% annual return on stocks as an average expectation, with downside risks counterbalanced by upside opportunities.
Rather, they see a good-scenario outcome that only the foolhardy would trust.
Second, many people do see the 7% return on stocks as a reasonable expectation, and would jump at the chance to grab it – plus the opportunity of surprises on the upside – but they do not think that they can afford to run the downside risks.
Indeed, the world seems a much more risky place than it seemed five or ten years ago.
The burden of existing debts is high, and investors’ key goal is loss-avoidance, not profit-seeking.
Both reasons reflect a massive failure of our economic institutions.
The first reason betrays a lack of trust that governments can and will do the job that they learned how to do in the Great Depression: keep the flow of spending stable so that big depressions with long-lasting, double-digit unemployment do not recur.
The second reveals the financial industry’s failure adequately to mobilize society’s risk-bearing capacity for the service of enterprise.
As individuals, we appear to view a gamble that has a roughly 50% chance of doubling our wealth and a roughly 50% chance of halving it as worthy of consideration – not a no-brainer, but not out of the question, either.
Well-functioning financial markets would mobilize that risk-bearing capacity and put it to use for the benefit of all, so that people who did not think that they could run the risks of stock ownership could lay that risk off onto others for a reasonable fee.
As an economist, I find this state of affairs frustrating.
We know, or at least we ought to know, how to build political institutions that accept the mission of macroeconomic stabilization, and how to build financial institutions to mobilize risk-bearing capacity and spread risk.
Yet, to a remarkable degree, we have failed to do so.
The Economic Governance the EU Needs
BRUSSELS – Two lessons have emerged from Europe’s financial crisis. First, there is no substitute for timely and coordinated action when the single currency is under pressure.
Second, all eurozone countries are effectively in the same boat. If the boat springs a leak, everyone sinks.
A quicker and more concerted response might have limited the fall-out from the crisis, and thus its cost.
The European Financial Stabilization Facility (EFSF), hurriedly established in May 2010 in an effort to stop the rot, will shortly be able to call on some €500 billion in the event that any more eurozone countries face serious liquidity problems.
And eurozone member states have agreed to perpetuate this financial-stability mechanism from 2013 onwards, and even to amend the Lisbon treaty to avoid any legal ambiguity.
Despite all this, markets remain unconvinced by the eurozone’s shows of solidarity.
Greek sovereign debt has been downgraded to below that of Egypt.
Portugal has had to ask for assistance from the EFSF and the International Monetary Fund.
Irish banks reportedly need an additional €24 billion to stay afloat.
And Spain is doing all it can to avoid the contagion.
The irony is that the euro has been a hugely successful project, bringing considerable stability to participating countries.
Indeed, without the single currency, many of these countries would have succumbed to a downward spiral of devaluation, default, and recourse to the IMF.
The European Central Bank has played a crucial role in preventing a worst-case scenario, but the obvious lacuna in Europe’s economic and monetary union (EMU) remains: EMU established only a monetary union and largely omitted the economic union that has proven so closely linked to the euro’s strengths and weaknesses.
The real crisis facing Europe is one of economic governance.
Eurozone member states have increasingly gone their own way, even overtly defending nationalist economic policies that harm the eurozone as a whole.
This is not to say that a single economic policy should be imposed on everyone; but Europe does need a higher degree of coordination and convergence to ensure that everyone is at least heading in the same direction.
Like cars on a highway, some may drive more slowly than others, but there are minimum and maximum speeds and all must go with the flow of traffic.
Moreover, all motorists must respect the rules of the road, and anyone who breaches them must be held to account, and possibly penalized, because even one rogue driver will most likely cause a major pile-up if not stopped.
So it is with economic governance: anarchy would be devastating.
Agreement is needed on both the rules and the impartial body to enforce them.
European Union leaders have in recent summits come close to identifying a number of economic-policy areas where closer coordination would improve competitiveness, including sustainability of pensions, wage-to-productivity ratios, corporate taxation, investment in research and development, and the financing of major infrastructure projects.
Yet the same EU members have failed to endow the European Commission with overall responsibility for holding member governments to their commitments and, where necessary, imposing penalties for breaches.
This intergovernmental approach lay behind the Lisbon Agenda’s failure to deliver the results needed to make Europe more competitive and dynamic by 2010, and the same shortcomings will bedevil its successor, the new “Europe 2020” strategy.
Indeed, it is a failure of governance that has characterized the Stability and Growth Pact, designed (largely by Germany) to ensure sound macroeconomic policy by limiting national debt and deficit ratios.
Most eurozone members are now in breach of the Pact, yet none has been subjected to the penalties envisaged by its architects.
Recently adopted changes create a more sensible and graduated system for sanctioning recalcitrant countries, but still leave the decision to initiate an excessive deficit procedure to member states, rather than establishing the more automatic mechanism sought by the European Commission.
Meanwhile, the Commission already polices the internal market – one of Europe’s major policy successes – by monitoring member states’ compliance with the single market’s rules. It also launches infringement proceedings against member states that have not implemented valid directives on time, or in the correct manner.
Similarly, EU competition policy has stood firm for many years against monopolies and abuse of dominant market positions.
Here, too, the Commission plays the role of neutral judge.
There may be disputes in some cases, but the system has brought a degree of legal certainty across the single market that the EU’s member states could not have achieved on their own.
The challenge now for EU leaders is not to repackage old policies, but to express a collective vision and will to act together.
I have been arguing for a Community Act that would bring together all elements of economic governance under a single framework, with the European Commission at its center.
As with the single-market program of the 1980’s, the Commission could be in charge of overseeing a convergence of national economic policies, within certain parameters, throughout the EU.
Straying outside of those parameters would lead to warnings and sanctions, but otherwise there would be some flexibility for member states to pursue the EU’s collective goals at a pace adapted to their national circumstances.
A cluster of EU commissioners holding economic-related portfolios could even be made responsible for guiding the process forward, providing it with direction and momentum.
If European countries are to emerge stronger from the current crisis, they need to think bigger and put more faith, not less, in the collective enterprise that is the EU.
After all, European unification was conceived as a project of pooled sovereignty, not surrendered prosperity.
The GM Reactionaries
PALO ALTO – People everywhere are increasingly vulnerable to the use of what Nobel Prize-winning chemist Irving Langmuir dubbed “pathological science” – the “science of things that aren’t so” – to justify government regulation or other policies.
It is a specialty of self-styled public-interest groups, whose agenda is often not to protect public health or the environment, but rather to oppose the research, products, or technology that they happen to dislike.
For example, modern techniques of genetic engineering – also known as biotechnology, recombinant DNA technology, or genetic modification (GM) – provide the tools to make old plants do spectacular new things.
Yet these tools are relentlessly misrepresented to the public.
More than 17 million farmers in roughly three dozen countries worldwide are using GM crop varieties to produce higher yields with fewer inputs and lower environmental impact. Most of these new varieties are designed to resist crop-ravaging pests and diseases, so that farmers can adopt environmentally friendlier no-till practices and use more benign herbicides.
Critics of GM products insist that they are untested, unsafe, unregulated, unnecessary, and unwanted.
But the facts show otherwise.
For starters, there is a broad and longstanding consensus among scientists that recombinant DNA techniques are essentially an extension, or refinement, of earlier methods for genetic modification, and that gene transfer using these precise, predictable molecular techniques does not present any risk per se.
After the cultivation of more than a billion hectares of GM crops worldwide – and the consumption in North America alone of more than two trillion servings of foods that contain GM ingredients – not a single case of injury to a person or disruption of an ecosystem has been documented. Meanwhile, the benefits of GM-crop cultivation include higher yields, lower use of chemical pesticides, and biofuel production.
Far from being under-regulated, GM plants (and other organisms) have been subjected to expensive, discriminatory, and unscientific over-regulation that has limited the commercial success of maize, cotton, canola, soybeans, and papaya, among other crops.
In fact, opponents often assert that commercial cultivation of GM crops has been a disappointment, because it has offered little direct benefit to consumers.
But many advantages have already been realized.
And GM crops currently in development will deliver even more direct and easily identifiable consumer benefits.
No-till farming techniques, in which the soil is not plowed, mean less soil erosion, less runoff of agricultural chemicals, and lower fuel consumption and carbon emissions by mechanized farm equipment.
From 1996 to 2009, the shift to biotech crops reduced carbon emissions by 17.6 billion kilograms, the equivalent of removing 7.8 million cars from the road for a year.
GM crops also have significant economic benefits.
Higher yields and lower production costs have reduced global commodity prices (corn, soybeans, and derivatives), resulting in higher farm income, enhanced supplies of food and feed products, and more readily available high-quality calories.
Indeed, farm income grew by nearly $65 million from 1996 to 2009, as biotech crops increased global corn and soybean production by 130 million and 83 million tons, respectively, owing to higher yields and, in Argentina, second cropping of soybeans.
As a result, by 2007, global corn and soybean prices were nearly 6% and 10% lower, respectively, than they would have been had farmers not embraced these crops.
Given their benefits, GM crops’ “repeat index” – the proportion of farmers who, after trying a GM variety, choose to plant it again – is very high.
The boost to farm incomes and farm security – which translates into higher household incomes and improved standards of living – is particularly important in developing countries, where income levels are lowest but per-hectare benefits from planting GM varieties have been greatest.
But GM crops do not benefit only those who grow and consume them.
According to a 2010 study, fields of insect-resistant GM corn have an “area-wide suppression effect” on insects, benefiting neighboring fields containing conventional corn varieties.
The researchers calculated that, from 1996 to 2010, cultivating GM varieties increased farmers’ profits in three US states by roughly $3.2 billion – $2.4 billion of which accrued to farmers whose nearby fields had not been planted with GM varieties.
The farmers planting the conventional varieties benefit disproportionately, because they do not have to buy the more expensive GM seeds.
Future generations of GM crops will bring even more benefits – but only if they are allowed to flourish.
To that end, consumers must understand that GM crops hold great potential, while posing negligible risks, and governments must adopt regulatory policies that face facts and reject pathological science.
The Economic Imperatives of the Arab Spring
WASHINGTON, DC/ISTANBUL – Almost a year has passed since revolution in Tunisia and protests in Cairo’s Tahrir Square toppled ossified authoritarian regimes and ignited a much wider – and still raging – storm in the Arab world.
No one can safely predict where these events will eventually take the Arab people and nations.
But one thing is certain: there is no turning back.
New social and political movements and structures are emerging, power is shifting, and there is hope that democratic processes will strengthen and spread across the Arab world in 2012.
Events in the Arab world in 2011 recall other far-reaching regional transitions, such as in Eastern Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
There are differences, of course, but the upheavals’ sweeping and contagious nature is strongly similar to that of the revolutions that brought communism to an end in Europe.
So, too, is the debate about the relative contributions of political and economic factors to the eventual eruption of popular protest.
While the yearning for dignity, freedom of expression, and real democratic participation was the driving force underlying the Arab revolutions, economic discontent played a vital role, and economic factors will help to determine how the transition in the Arab world unfolds. &nbsp;Here, three fundamental and longer-term challenges are worth bearing in mind.
First, growth will have to be much more inclusive, especially in terms of job creation.
The youth employment-to-population ratio was about 27% in the Arab countries in 2008, compared to 53% in East Asia.
Moreover, income inequality has widened, with the global phenomenon of increasing concentration of wealth at the top very pronounced in many Arab countries.
Top incomes in these countries have resulted largely from political patronage, rather than from innovation and hard work.
While Tunisia was an extreme case of a regime furthering the economic interests of a small clique of insiders, the pattern was widespread.
That is why a knee-jerk, simplistic “Washington Consensus” prescription of more liberalization and privatization is inappropriate for the Arab world in 2012.
There is a clear political need for a growth strategy in which inclusion is the centerpiece, not an afterthought.
Neither the old statist left, nor the rent-seeking, crony-capitalist right had policies to respond to the yearning for inclusion.
New political forces in the Arab world, Islam-inspired or social-democratic, will have to propose policies that do not just perpetuate rent-seeking capitalism or reliance on a discredited state bureaucracy.
It will be necessary to harness grass-roots dynamism and entrepreneurial potential to achieve social solidarity and equity.
While a truly competitive private sector has to be unleashed, the state must not be weakened but transformed, to become one that is at the service of citizens.
Generous but targeted and performance-oriented social transfers, conditional on participation in health and basic education programs, will have to replace the old, largely untargeted subsidies.
Public development finance will have to focus on large-scale access to housing and a people-oriented infrastructure.
All of this has to be achieved within a sustainable budget framework, requiring both funds and comprehensive administrative reforms.
Accompanying inclusive growth, the second challenge is skill development, for which a performance-oriented education system must become a top priority.
Many Arab countries have spent huge sums on education; the problem is that the return on these investments has been dismal.
Arab students, for example, score well below average on international mathematics and science tests.
Deep reforms – focused on quality and performance, rather than on enrollment and diplomas – are needed to transform the learning process and unleash the productivity growth that a young labor force requires.
The third challenge, instrumental to meeting the first two, will be to strengthen regional Arab solidarity.
Many outsiders underestimate or purposefully minimize the “Arabness” of the Arab world.
But the revolutions of 2011 demonstrated that a strong sense of identity, a common language, and much shared history bind Arabs together, despite huge differences in natural-resource endowments, political circumstances, and average per capita incomes.
How else can one explain that an act of revolt in Tunisia led to popular revolts from North Africa to the Arabian Peninsula?
One implication of this is that the oil-rich states and leaders cannot expect to remain isolated and protected from the unfolding events.
The future of the region is also their future; the transition that started in 2011 unleashed forces that cannot be stopped.
But the transition can be more orderly, more peaceful, and less disruptive if states that command immense resources and wealth generously support the poorer countries – and back the reforms that all Arab countries need.
Existing institutions with proven track records, such as the Arab Fund, can help, but this requires scaling up their funds dramatically.
Prosperity and peace in the region will depend on thinking big and acting fast.
The revolutions of 2011 are a historic opportunity for all Arabs.
Making the most of it will require realism, courage, willingness to change, and a readiness to support change, particularly among those who have the greatest means to do so.
The Economics of Happiness
NEW YORK – We live in a time of high anxiety.
Despite the world’s unprecedented total wealth, there is vast insecurity, unrest, and dissatisfaction.
In the United States, a large majority of Americans believe that the country is “on the wrong track.”
Pessimism has soared.
The same is true in many other places.
Against this backdrop, the time has come to reconsider the basic sources of happiness in our economic life.
The relentless pursuit of higher income is leading to unprecedented inequality and anxiety, rather than to greater happiness and life satisfaction.
Economic progress is important and can greatly improve the quality of life, but only if it is pursued in line with other goals.
In this respect, the Himalayan Kingdom of Bhutan has been leading the way.
Forty years ago, Bhutan’s fourth king, young and newly installed, made a remarkable choice: Bhutan should pursue “gross national happiness” rather than gross national product.
Since then, the country has been experimenting with an alternative, holistic approach to development that emphasizes not only economic growth, but also culture, mental health, compassion, and community.
Dozens of experts recently gathered in Bhutan’s capital, Thimphu, to take stock of the country’s record.
I was co-host with Bhutan’s prime minister, Jigme Thinley, a leader in sustainable development and a great champion of the concept of “GNH.”
We assembled in the wake of a declaration in July by the United Nations General Assembly calling on countries to examine how national policies can promote happiness in their societies.
All who gathered in Thimphu agreed on the importance of pursuing happiness rather than pursuing national income.
The question we examined is how to achieve happiness in a world that is characterized by rapid urbanization, mass media, global capitalism, and environmental degradation.
How can our economic life be re-ordered to recreate a sense of community, trust, and environmental sustainability?
Here are some of the initial conclusions.
First, we should not denigrate the value of economic progress.
When people are hungry, deprived of basic needs such as clean water, health care, and education, and without meaningful employment, they suffer.
Economic development that alleviates poverty is a vital step in boosting happiness.
Second, relentless pursuit of GNP to the exclusion of other goals is also no path to happiness.
In the US, GNP has risen sharply in the past 40 years, but happiness has not.
Instead, single-minded pursuit of GNP has led to great inequalities of wealth and power, fueled the growth of a vast underclass, trapped millions of children in poverty, and caused serious environmental degradation.
Third, happiness is achieved through a balanced approach to life by both individuals and societies.
As individuals, we are unhappy if we are denied our basic material needs, but we are also unhappy if the pursuit of higher incomes replaces our focus on family, friends, community, compassion, and maintaining internal balance.
As a society, it is one thing to organize economic policies to keep living standards on the rise, but quite another to subordinate all of society’s values to the pursuit of profit.
Yet politics in the US has increasingly allowed corporate profits to dominate all other aspirations: fairness, justice, trust, physical and mental health, and environmental sustainability.
Corporate campaign contributions increasingly undermine the democratic process, with the blessing of the US Supreme Court.
Fourth, global capitalism presents many direct threats to happiness.
It is destroying the natural environment through climate change and other kinds of pollution, while a relentless stream of oil-industry propaganda keeps many people ignorant of this.
It is weakening social trust and mental stability, with the prevalence of clinical depression apparently on the rise.
The mass media have become outlets for corporate “messaging,” much of it overtly anti-scientific, and Americans suffer from an increasing range of consumer addictions.
Consider how the fast-food industry uses oils, fats, sugar, and other addictive ingredients to create unhealthy dependency on foods that contribute to obesity.
One-third of all Americans are now obese.
The rest of the world will eventually follow unless countries restrict dangerous corporate practices, including advertising unhealthy and addictive foods to young children.
The problem is not just foods.
Mass advertising is contributing to many other consumer addictions that imply large public-health costs, including excessive TV watching, gambling, drug use, cigarette smoking, and alcoholism.
Fifth, to promote happiness, we must identify the many factors other than GNP that can raise or lower society’s well-being.
Most countries invest to measure GNP, but spend little to identify the sources of poor health (like fast foods and excessive TV watching), declining social trust, and environmental degradation.
Once we understand these factors, we can act.
The mad pursuit of corporate profits is threatening us all.
To be sure, we should support economic growth and development, but only in a broader context: one that promotes environmental sustainability and the values of compassion and honesty that are required for social trust.
The search for happiness should not be confined to the beautiful mountain kingdom of Bhutan.
The Unstarvable Beast
CAMBRIDGE – As the world watches the United States grapple with its fiscal future, the contours of the battle reflect larger social and philosophical divisions that are likely to play out in various guises around the world in the coming decades.
There has been much discussion of how to cut government spending, but too little attention has been devoted to how to make government spending more effective.
And yet, without more creative approaches to providing government services, their cost will continue to rise inexorably over time.
Any service-intensive industry faces the same challenges.
Back in the 1960’s, the economists William Baumol and William Bowen wrote about the “cost disease” that plagues these industries.
The example they famously used was that of a Mozart string quartet, which requires the same number of musicians and instruments in modern times as it did in the nineteenth century.
Similarly, it takes about the same amount of time for a teacher to grade a paper as it did 100 years ago.
Good plumbers cost a small fortune, because here, too, the technology has evolved very slowly.
Why does slow productivity growth translate into high costs?
The problem is that service industries ultimately have to compete for workers in the same national labor pool as sectors with fast productivity growth, such as finance, manufacturing, and information technology.
Even though the pools of workers may be somewhat segmented, there is enough overlap that it forces service-intensive industries to pay higher wages, at least in the long run.
The government, of course, is the consummate service-intensive sector.
Government employees include teachers, policemen, trash collectors, and military personnel.
Modern schools look a lot more like those of 50 years ago than do modern manufacturing plants.
And, while military innovation has been spectacular, it is still very labor-intensive.
If people want the same level of government services relative to other things that they consume, government spending will take up a larger and larger share of national output over time.
Indeed, not only has government spending been rising as a share of income; so, too, has spending across many service sectors.
Today, the service sector, including the government, accounts for more than 70% of national income in most advanced economies.
Agriculture, which in the 1800’s accounted for more than half of national income, has shrunk to just a few percent.
Manufacturing employment, which accounted for perhaps a third of jobs or more before World War II, has shrunk dramatically.
In the US, for example, the manufacturing sector employs less than 10% of all workers.
So, even as economic conservatives demand spending cuts, there are strong forces pushing in the other direction.
Admittedly, the problem is worse in the government sector, where productivity growth is much slower even than in other service industries.
Whereas this might reflect the particular mix of services that governments are asked to provide, that can hardly be the whole story.
Surely, part of the problem is that governments use employment not just to provide services, but also to make implicit transfers.
Moreover, government agencies operate in many areas in which they face little competition – and thus little pressure to innovate.
Why not bring greater private-sector involvement, or at least competition, into government?
Education, where the power of modern disruptive technologies has barely been felt, would be a good place to start.
Sophisticated computer programs are becoming quite good at grading middle-school essays, if not quite up to the standards of top teachers.
Infrastructure is another obvious place to expand private-sector involvement.
Once upon a time, for example, it was widely believed that drivers on privately operated roads would constantly be waiting to pay tolls.
Modern transponders and automatic payment systems, however, have made that a non-issue.
But one should not presume that a shift to greater private-sector provision of services is a panacea.
There would still be a need for regulation, especially where monopoly or near-monopoly is involved.
And there would still be a need to decide how to balance efficiency and equity in the provision of services.
Education is clearly an area in which any country has a strong national interest in providing a level playing field.
As US President in the 1980’s, the conservative icon Ronald Reagan described his approach to fiscal policy as “starve the beast”: cutting taxes will eventually force people to accept less government spending.
In many ways, his approach was a great success.
But government spending has continued to grow, because voters still want the services that government provides.
Today, it is clear that reining in government also means finding ways to shape incentives so that innovation in government keeps pace with innovation in other service sectors.
Without more ideas about how to innovate in the provision of government services, battles such as one sees playing out in the US today can only become worse, as voters are increasingly asked to pay more for less.
Politicians can and will promise to do a better job, but they cannot succeed unless we identify ways to boost government services’ efficiency and productivity.
The Economics of Peace in Afghanistan
KABUL – Suicide bombings, assassinations of top Afghan leaders, brutal attacks on Charikar and other places close to Kabul, Afghanistan’s capital, and a rapid increase in civilian deaths from drone attacks are jeopardizing the withdrawal of American and NATO forces from the country.
So pervasive has the violence become that Ahmed Rashid, the renowned expert on the Taliban, has concluded that speeding up the peace process through dialogue with the insurgents is the only option.
The economics of what an Afghanistan at peace would look like must be a critical part of any negotiations.
But what, precisely, does the economics of peace entail, and why is it so important?
One main objective should be to transform Afghanistan’s vast underground economy, which has thrived, despite the large number of NATO forces, by creating profitable opportunities for Taliban and other groups involved in the fighting.
To reintegrate these fighters into the productive economy will require a change in policies, including a rapid reactivation of rural development schemes and the promotion of local entrepreneurship, public works, and other legal activities.
In particular, the United States, together with other donors and NATO troop contributors, should heed “Ten Commandments” during and after the negotiations.
First, apply the dictum of T.E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia) that it is better to let “them” do it than it is to try to “do it better” for them.
Thus, let national negotiators, local leaders, and communities determine what their economic needs and priorities are, and let insurgents determine their preferred venue for reintegration.
Unless the participants are empowered and take ownership, programs will not be sustainable, resources will go to waste, and peace will not endure.
Second, ensure integration – rather than merely coordination – of economic factors into the political and security agenda.
This would entail using reintegration and other economic programs as a carrot to support the negotiations, and would also support peace and stability in the long run.
Third, support a peace agreement designed in accordance with the country’s financial and technical capacity to implement it.
This requires reasonable projections for domestic tax revenue and aid, as well as the right mix of foreign expertise to support the process.
Avoid overly optimistic projections that lead to unworkable plans and unreasonable expectations, which the government will not be able to fulfill, as happened in Guatemala, for example, when its civil war ended.
Fourth, channel aid through the central government budget, or through local authorities, so that officials can acquire legitimacy by providing services and infrastructure, and provide subsidies and price-support programs to replace poppies with licit crops such as cotton, which was produced in the past.
Fifth, ensure that such aid moves quickly from short-run humanitarian purposes – to save lives and feed those giving up war – to reconstruction activities aimed at creating investment, productivity growth, and the sustainable employment that will enable people to live dignified lives.
What needs to be avoided is a failure – such as occurred in Haiti following its devastating earthquake – to move from the first stage to the second.
Sixth, establish well-planned and synchronized programs for demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration, which are sine qua non for making the transition from war to peace irreversible.
In doing so, remember that the “vagueness versus specificity” dilemma also applies to economic issues.
Too much specificity on some variables and too much vagueness with regard to others required a renegotiation of the arms-for-land agreement in El Salvador to make it implementable.
Seventh, establish different programs for higher-level commanders, providing more orientation, training, credit, and technical assistance.
The United Nations acknowledged better results from the “Plan 600” in El Salvador than from programs for lower-ranking combatants, which lacked such support.
Eighth, increase support for NGOs with successful records in creating entrepreneurs in rural development, in carpet weaving, jewelry design, or any other activity that Afghans want to develop.
Active policies to promote new start-ups and local companies’ expansion through credit, training, and technical support are imperative.
Ninth, establish economic reconstruction zones to jump-start sustainable economic activity, create jobs and export earnings, improve aid effectiveness and accountability, and avoid aid dependency.
The zones could combine integrated rural development for domestic consumption and labor-intensive manufacturing and agro-businesses for export.
The US and other countries should open their markets to goods produced in these zones.
Finally, ensure that the political or peace objective prevails at all times, even if it delays economic stability and development.
This often means accepting that optimal and best-practice economic policies are not attainable – or, indeed, even desirable.
The independence of the central bank and the “no overdraft” rule for budget financing will almost certainly prove too restrictive to carry out critical peace-supporting activities in Afghanistan.
In settling the Afghan war, the government and donors should seek to eschew the pattern of unkept promises that has bedeviled reconstruction of the country in the past.
Only then will Afghanistan be able to break out of its decades-long vicious circle of violence, insecurity, corruption, unemployment, drug trafficking, and aid dependency.
The Economics of Strategic Containment
NEW DELHI – At their recent summit in Cannes, the G-20 shelved, if not buried, the World Trade Organization’s moribund Doha Development Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
Crisis-weary Europe and America face a rising tide of protectionism at home, and are trying to find ways to blunt the edge of China’s non-transparent trade competitiveness.
Turning his attention from the Atlantic to the Pacific, US President Barack Obama – with his eye, once again, trained on China – has now unveiled a new regional trade initiative.
Why was the US unwilling to move forward on the Doha Round, but willing to pursue a regional free-trade agreement?
The answer lies in the fact that the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), launched by Obama and the governments of eight other Pacific economies – Australia, Brunei, Chile, Malaysia, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, and Vietnam – is not just about trade.
While Obama chose to stick to the economic factors driving the TPP, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, on the eve of the just-concluded Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation gathering in Hawaii, laid out the initiative’s wider strategic context.
“The United States will continue to make the case that….[the region] must pursue not just more growth, but better growth,” which “is not merely a matter of economics,” Clinton said. “Openness, freedom, transparency, and fairness have meaning far beyond the business realm,” she continued.
“Just as the United States advocates for them in an economic context, we also advocate for them in political and social contexts.”
Following up on these remarks, Obama drew attention to persistent US concern about China’s exchange-rate policy, inadequate protection of intellectual property, and impediments to market access.
“For an economy like the United States – where our biggest competitive advantage is our knowledge, our innovation, our patents, our copyrights – for us not to get the kind of protection we need in a large marketplace like China is not acceptable,” Obama observed.
The TPP initiative should be viewed against this background, and not just in the context of the collapse of the Doha Round.
The TPP’s nine sponsors have resolved “to establish a comprehensive, next-generation regional agreement that liberalizes trade and investment and addresses new and traditional trade issues and twenty-first-century challenges.”
These leaders also agreed to fast-track the TPP initiative, and to consider opening it to other members – most importantly Japan, a late convert to the idea of a Pacific region free-trade agreement.
The TPP’s agenda is divided into three categories: core, cross-cutting, and emerging issues.
The core agenda is to stitch together a traditional free-trade agreement focused on industrial goods, agriculture, and textiles.
The agreement would also have provisions for intellectual-property protection and what are dubbed the social and environmental issues.
In short, the TPP’s core agenda will offer the region a “Doha Round-type” agreement that includes the social and environmental agenda that developing economies have been resisting within the WTO.
Going beyond the core, the cross-cutting issues include investor-friendly regulatory systems and policies that enable “innovative” or “employment-creating” small and medium-size enterprises to operate freely across borders within the TPP region.
Finally, the TPP seeks to bring into the ambit of a trade and investment agreement “new and emerging” issues.
These include “trade and investment in innovative products and services, including digital technologies, and ensuring state-owned enterprises compete fairly with private companies and do not distort competition in ways that put US companies and workers at a disadvantage.”
In short, the US has moved to bring together all of the economies in the region that are worried about China’s beggar-thy-neighbor trade and exchange-rate policies.
For the US, the eight other TPP countries, with a combined population of 200 million, constitute its fourth largest export market, behind only China, the European Union, and Japan.
If Japan joins, the TPP’s importance would rise dramatically.
While the economics of the TPP is important, the strategic component is even more so.
This is the second leg of America’s new “Pacific offensive,” aimed at offering nations in the region an alternative to excessive and rapidly growing dependence on a rising China.
The first leg of the offensive was the idea of the “Indo-Pacific” region, which Clinton developed a year ago and followed up this year with an essay called “America’s Pacific Century.”
There, she defines the new region of US strategic engagement as “stretching from the Indian subcontinent to the western shores of the Americas.”
Extending east from the Indian Ocean and west via the Pacific, the US is creating a new strategic framework for the twenty-first century.
The TPP is just one of the pillars of that new edifice.
The Economy and the Presidency
CAMBRIDGE – America’s presidential election is now just six months away.
If history is a reliable guide, the outcome will depend significantly on the economy’s performance between now and November 6, and on Americans’ perception of their economic future under the two candidates.
At the moment, America’s economy is limping along with slow growth and high unemployment.
Output grew by just 1.5% last year, and real GDP per capita is lower now than before the economic downturn began at the end of 2007.
Although annual GDP growth was 3% in the fourth quarter of 2011, more than half of that reflected inventory accumulation.
Although the rate was down from 9% a year ago, about half of the change reflected a rise in the number of people who have stopped looking for work, rather than an increase in job creation and the employment rate.
Indeed, the official unemployment rate understates the weakness of the labor market.
An estimated 6% of all employees are working fewer hours per week than they would like, and about 2% of potential employees are not counted as unemployed because they have not looked for work in the past few weeks, even though they would like to work.
Adding these individuals to those officially classified as unemployed implies that about 15% of potential labor-force participants are working less than they want.
Solid increases in payroll employment at the start of the year contributed to a general sense of confidence.
But the rate of increase in payroll employment fell in March to less than half of the rate recorded in previous months, and the number of workers claiming unemployment benefits recently jumped to a four-month high.
Even those who are working are seeing their incomes shrink.
Real average weekly earnings have fallen in recent months, and are now lower than they were 18 months ago.
The broader measure of real per capita after-tax personal income has also been falling, and is back to levels last seen a year ago.
Despite their declining incomes, households raised their spending in early 2012 at a rapid pace by cutting their saving rate to just 3.7%.
Without further declines in the saving rate from this very low level, consumer spending will not continue to grow as robustly.
Recent reports of declining consumer confidence reinforce the likelihood that spending will slow in the months ahead.
Moreover, the housing market remains in bad shape.
The most reliable index of comparable house prices has continued to decline month after month, and prices are now about 7% lower in real terms than a year ago, implying a $1 trillion loss of household wealth.
With roughly 25% of all homeowners with mortgages owing more than their homes are worth, the decline in house prices reflects high rates of default and foreclosure.
Falling prices, together with stricter lending standards, has spurred a shift by would-be home buyers to the rental market, causing recent declines in the sales of both new and existing homes.
The weakness of America’s economy is not limited to the household sector.
Industrial production has been unchanged for the past two months, and utilization of industrial capacity has declined.
But the public is likely to place the blame on the president, and surveys indicate that a growing number of Americans believe that Mitt Romney, the almost certain Republican candidate, would do a better job than Obama at managing the economy.
The polls are very close, and voters have not yet locked in their decisions.
The economy could rise more sharply than expected in the months ahead.
If not, Obama will try to shift attention from the overall economy by emphasizing his plan to raise taxes on high-income individuals.
And a variety of other issues, including immigration and the role of women, might influence voters.
But the state of the economy is usually the most important determinant of who wins national elections in the United States.
And US economic conditions now favor Romney.
The Education Myth
We all know that more education is a Good Thing, especially for our economic futures.
This is why many countries, particularly in Europe, have numerical targets driving their education policies: 50% participation in post-secondary education in the UK or Sweden, for example, or 80% to baccalaureate level in France.
Chancellor Schroeder’s big idea for solving Germany’s economic problems is, of course, education: including yet more undergraduates in a system struggling to cope with those it has.&#160; 
Governments see their main job as delivering economic prosperity, and they view education as a necessary and reliable tool for achieving that end.
But is it?
We are told that in a “knowledge economy,” a country needs ever more graduates and formal qualifications to stay competitive.
But education simply does not deliver economic growth the way our politicians – and businessmen – believe: more education in does not mean more growth out.
Worse, the education policies that follow from current beliefs have serious negative consequences for opportunities for young people and the quality of education itself.
The argument that education matters for the economy is plausible because, at one level, it is obviously right.
A modern society 
 does
 need educated people: not just engineers, chemists, and doctors, but millions of people who can write coherent letters, fill in complicated forms, explain insurance policies, and interpret statistical data from machines on factory floors.
Some of these skills can be learned only in universities; others can (and should) be mastered in primary and secondary schools.
Employers naturally tend to hire the most educated workers on offer, and so as the number of graduates increase, so does the number of “graduate” jobs.
However, every study I know of – whether British, Scandinavian, or American – agrees that large numbers of these “graduate” jobs require no more than they did when non-graduates performed them perfectly well.
In this sense, many societies are already “over-educated.”
But perhaps this is irrelevant.
Maybe better-educated workers do their jobs more efficiently, in which case we will surely find a clear relationship between educational attainment and economic growth.
Alas, no.
A few recently industrialized countries have pursued successful government-driven education strategies that seem to boost economic development.
But for every such case – South Korea is the favorite example – there is another, like Hong Kong, where meteoric economic growth had nothing to do with centrally planned education policy.
Instead, parents pushed their children towards the best schools to give them an individual head start – something parents do the world over – only
 after
 they got richer.
Moreover, for every South Korea, and every Hong Kong, we can also find developing countries where expanding education merely fueled competition for white-collar jobs in a bloated, deadweight state bureaucracy.
Countries like this explain why large international studies often find a 
 negative
 relationship between education and growth rates. 
Egypt is a classic example of this.
Between 1970 and 1998, its primary school enrollment rates grew to over 90%, secondary schooling soared from 32% to 75%, and university education doubled.
Egypt started the period as the world’s 47th poorest country; it ended the period as the 48th poorest.
But it is not only among developing countries that links between education and growth prove elusive.
Switzerland has been one of the richest countries in the world for a century – and not because of its natural resources.
Yet it has the lowest rate of university attendance in Western Europe. 
If you look for a relationship between children’s performance on international surveys of achievement, and their countries’ growth rates twenty years on, you will look in vain.
No such relationship exists.
So, while any developed country obviously needs an educated population, the idea that having the most education will get you the most prosperity is a chimera.
Does this matter, though?
Surely, education has other virtues, over and above its economic role.
So maybe we should stop criticizing and start celebrating governments’ enthusiasm for spending on education.
But this would ignore the dark underside of our educational spiral.
The creation of more “graduate” jobs only proves that as credentials become more common, they become more important.
Moreover, in the past, someone who left school without the “right” qualifications could still succeed, through an apprenticeship or by working his way up from the shop floor.
Today, that is becoming impossible: we are creating societies in which the sheep and the goats are marked for life in their teens.
As university attendance becomes more common, fewer capable young people enter vocational training.
Yet our economies still need highly trained craftspeople far more than another batch of arts graduates.
Moreover, rapid expansion of university education all too often comes at the expense of quality.
Education is expensive because it uses people: there are no vast economies of scale or leaps in productivity.
Relative pay for teachers has been dropping as their total numbers increase, which affects teacher quality.
University classes become larger, which means that students are taught less effectively.
It becomes harder to maintain good university-based research because of the demands of other parts of the education budget.&#160; 
Is this really the best route to a vibrant economy and a civilized, cultured, and open society?
The Education Solution
WASHINGTON, DC – The world is assailed by problems that defy easy answers.
Economic shocks are destabilizing countries and regions, and inflicting great social and financial hardships on families and their communities.
Environmental damage threatens our food supplies, the air we breathe, and the rich biodiversity that sustains the balance of life.
Wars and conflict produce millions of new refugees.
Moreover, new health risks are emerging, with diabetes, obesity, and other non-communicable diseases now stalking low- and middle-income countries – even as many of those countries are still locked in combat with tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other infectious diseases. Hundreds of millions of young people around the world are searching for jobs in a very uncertain labor market.
The infrastructure we use to produce our energy, transport our goods, and transact our business is under stress.
This list of worries is not meant to discourage, but to challenge.
As the world’s physical resources grow scarcer, we must increasingly rely on the best and most proven renewable resource available – human ingenuity.
Just as they confronted problems in the past, our scientists and entrepreneurs have brought us solutions by way of the Green Revolution, new vaccines, communications technology, and cleaner energy.
Scholars and leaders have given us the means to identify and resolve social and economic dilemmas.
Rising levels of education have given people more control over their own health, household circumstances, governments, and culture.
The global challenges that we face today are proof that we need a world of problem solvers.
We need a world of people who are productive, resilient, creative, and versatile enough with technology and culture to find solutions to the many challenges we face.
Education helps to build that world.
Households with more education cope better with economic shocks and with extreme weather events.
People with higher levels of education earn more, have more control over their fertility, and have healthier and better-educated children.
Education gives people the skills to earn a living, to innovate, to invent, and to access culture – all of which allows them to live more fulfilling lives.
The good news is that the global community has united to help all people acquire these skills – and with real results.
In 1990, a broad coalition of governments, the World Bank, United Nations agencies, and civil-society organizations committed to a strategy called “Education for All.”
Twenty years later, there has been significant progress in enrolling children in school and expanding access to secondary school and universities.
Globally, 88% of children now complete primary school, and 67% go on to enroll in secondary school.
But low-income countries are still far from meeting the goal of ensuring that all children complete primary school: only 63% of children in those countries achieve that milestone.
Poor children, children with disabilities, girls, and ethnic minorities still face daunting barriers to education.
Many countries struggle simply to build schools quickly enough to keep up with population growth.
Severely overcrowded classrooms, lacking in trained teachers and basic supplies, are not uncommon.
In the rush to expand services, school systems have sometimes neglected teachers’ professional development, student assessment, and even basic building standards.
Over the years, we have learned that the real challenge is not just to enroll children in school, but to help them to acquire the skills necessary for employment, entrepreneurship, family life, and citizenship.
We need well-designed systems of finance, student assessment, professional development and management, quality assurance, and monitoring and evaluation.
We need more robust and transparent relationships between central and local governments, state and private education providers, and households and communities.
And we need stronger links between schools and employers to ensure that graduates acquire skills that are relevant to a changing job market.
We have much to learn from systems that have demonstrated continuous improvement, in contexts as varied as Singapore, Chile, Ghana, Slovenia, and England.
While each of these countries had very different starting points, progress has been aided by the political will to measure outcomes and learn from results, define a sustainable path for change, and make smart, effective investments.
To foster learning about how systems improve, the World Bank is embarking on a major initiative to assess the quality of education policies around the world.
Its new databases will catalogue which policies countries have adopted to promote learning in each part of the education system, in areas ranging from teacher policies to student assessment to school financing mechanisms.
Our goal is to facilitate the spread of good policy and practice, allowing countries to learn from a variety of approaches and to understand which ones might work in their own context.
The case for improving education systems is urgent.
Imagine our world, 20 years from now, if we could educate a new generation of young people so that they have the skills and creativity to take on the great economic and technological challenges of the day.
Imagine, in particular, that all girls are educated, with all the profound benefits that this would yield in the areas of population growth, health and welfare, poverty alleviation, human rights, and politics.
Now imagine the alternative and ask yourself: Which world do I want to live in?
Reefer Madness?
LONDON – Is cannabis harmful to mental health?
That question has provoked much debate over the years, often generating more heat than light.
The bottom line is this: within the scientific community, there is a general consensus that most people who use cannabis will not develop significant mental-health problems.
Certain individuals, however, are more susceptible to the negative effects of its use.
It was long thought that cannabis was a relatively harmless drug, and that concerns about its use were overstated.
Some psychiatrists had reported that excessive use could lead to a psychotic state, including hallucinations, delusions, and thought disturbance.
But the first significant indication of a link between cannabis use and psychotic illness came only in 1987, from a large Swedish study that followed more than 50,000 subjects over 15 years.
Reported cannabis use at the study’s start increased the likelihood of being diagnosed with schizophrenia in the next 15 years.
The greater the use, the higher the likelihood of being diagnosed.
Curiously, this finding did not spur much interest, and no similar studies were reported until 2002.
Since then, however, many studies have explored the association between cannabis use and psychotic illness.
In 2007, a compilation of the best studies concluded that frequent (daily) cannabis use doubles the risk of a psychotic outcome.
Since the lifetime prevalence of a psychotic illness is roughly 1% of the population, daily cannabis use would increase this to 2%.
Of course, the existence of a positive correlation between cannabis use and psychosis does not allow us to draw a direct causal link between the two.
Psychosis could cause cannabis use, rather than vice versa, or an unknown mediating factor could cause both cannabis use and psychosis.
Other factors already complicate the relationship.
For example, the age at which cannabis use begins appears to be an important factor.
People who started using cannabis before the age of 16 have a higher risk of psychosis compared to those who start after 18.
This is in line with biological evidence suggesting that the maturing brain is more susceptible to the negative impact of cannabis.
Recent research has shown that a particular variant of a gene called AKT1 mediates the risk of psychosis.
For carriers of the C/C variant (which occurs in roughly 20% of the population), the risk of psychosis increased seven-fold – but only for the people who used cannabis every day.
Using cannabis on weekends or less often posed no increased risk, which was also the case for daily and weekend use among carriers of the C/T and T/T variants of AKT1.
Moreover, different strains of cannabis pose more or less risk for psychosis.
A comparison of the two most common types of cannabis in the United Kingdom, hash and sinsemilla (“skunk”), found that using skunk implied a significantly greater risk of psychosis, while hash did not.
The explanation for this difference lies in the composition of the two main components of cannabis, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD).
Skunk in the UK has high levels of THC while being virtually devoid of CBD; hash, on the other hand, has roughly equal quantities of the two components.
This was highlighted in our lab when healthy volunteers were given either pure THC or THC and CBD.
Those who received only THC had a significant increase in paranoid thoughts, psychotic symptoms, and memory impairment, while those who received the combination experienced no paranoia, had fewer psychotic symptoms, and maintained memory function.
Some studies have also explored the role of cannabis use in disorders such as depression and anxiety.
While little sign of a link has been found, there is better evidence for the addictive potential of cannabis.
Roughly 10% of people who smoke cannabis go on to develop dependence, which produces withdrawal symptoms when use is stopped, such as craving, irritability, sleep disturbances, abdominal pain, and nervousness.
Again, CBD seems to offset the addictive effects of cannabis, and seems to provide relief from withdrawal symptoms.
Many studies have focused on the possible negative impact of cannabis use on memory and other cognitive functions.
It is generally accepted that frequent and prolonged cannabis use impairs cognitive functioning, but that these effects are reversible following abstinence of 3-12 months.
However, a recent study that followed people from birth to age 38 found that those who started using cannabis early, every day, and for several years had a permanent 8-point drop in IQ scores.
(The study has not yet been replicated.)
A final, and often-overlooked, source of harm to mental health associated with cannabis is the legal fallout of being caught with it.
Penalties for cannabis possession range from none (for example, the Netherlands and Portugal) to legal warnings, fines, and even life imprisonment (Southeast Asia).
A criminal record can negatively affect future employment, education, and ability to travel.
Such consequences may carry independent risks to mental health; for example, unemployment poses a significant risk for suicide, anxiety, depression, and psychosis.
So, does cannabis use harm mental health?
Yes and no.
Much depends on how old you are when you start, your genes, and how much, how often, and what kind you use – and, of course, on whether you get caught.
The Middle East Turmoil Trap
MADRID – Instability continues to spread in the Middle East, with the military coup in Egypt the latest episode to trigger political tremors throughout the region.
With its 85 million people and strategically vital location, Egypt is the most important country on the Mediterranean’s southern shore.
Continuing the democratization process that began there in 2011 is urgent.
The Muslim Brotherhood’s Islamist government, led by Mohamed Morsi, demonstrated all too well its incompetence and incapacity to ensure an inclusive democratic transition.
But the solution offered by Egypt’s military is far from ideal.
Coups always tend to exacerbate problems, not solve them, and this one is no exception.
The first consequence is that Egyptian society is even more divided over the question of political legitimacy.
Morsi’s supporters cite the legitimacy of his victory in a democratic election a year ago – and the illegitimacy of the army’s coup and detention of the deposed president – while his opponents defend the legitimacy of the massive, countrywide protests against him.
The Muslim Brotherhood tried to go too far too fast.
Its Islamist agenda put crucial state institutions – namely, the army and the judiciary – on edge and clashed with the liberal, modernizing demands of its opponents.
The Tamarod movement, which organized the protests that led to Morsi’s ouster, celebrated the military’s decision to intervene.
That precedent is, without doubt, dangerous for a fledgling democracy.
The Islamists must have representation in order to ensure that they do not renounce the ballot box as a means of pursuing their objectives.
Neither the Islamists nor the military can build a new regime against the will of a significant part of the population.
Despite Morsi’s poor performance in office – a year in which he presided over grave economic deterioration – a solution that served the cause of national and regional stability would have been preferable.