That was a useful signal.
Anderson did not just approach me on her own; she was introduced.
It turns out that Anderson is working on the answer to precisely this problem of asymmetry in introductions.
The trick is not just to find the right target (that is, a person), as social networks such as LinkedIn and search tools can do, but to enlist allies and manage a campaign to achieve a specific goal with the ultimate help of, yes, the target.
Werqit’s workflow solution does a good job of discovering, through social activity, who is likely to help you – and, just as important, who will probably brush you off.
In other words, the behavior her startup looks for is not purchasing behavior (like so many “social” tools), but actual social behavior.
Werqit plans to build a “collaboration graph” by looking not only at ability to help or collaborate, but also at indicators of willingness.
Willingness reflects a complex mix of incentives influencing when, whom, and how to help – and also reflects how busy a potential ally or target is.
(As in any market, you need to consider not just your targets, but also who is competing with you for their attention.)
The indicators of willingness might include the frequency with which someone engages with a particular person; how often people are asked (or overloaded with requests) for help; the types of requests they accept; which topics they engage with, and with whom; and what kind of help they give.
Werqit uses these indicators to suggest who in your network is likely to be most helpful in the context of a particular mission or goal, enabling you to enlist them as allies.
Then it helps to figure out whom to target to achieve that goal – whether it’s funding for a startup, a job for yourself, a sale for your product, a publisher for your book, or any other mission you can define (and add to a crowd-sourced collection).
The service, currently in beta, is not an app; it is a full-featured workflow tool that will use machine learning over time.
The premise is that willingness to help is influenced not just by connections, but also by the kind of connections and by the requester’s ability to formulate a clear and specific request.
Clearly, Werqit is both a flattering compliment (and complement!) to LinkedIn and a competitor for what LinkedIn does only in part.
LinkedIn provides “introduction” workflow, but Werqit includes mission-specific templates and a curated collaboration graph for finding allies.
Currently, Werqit relies on what it can glean from public data and the user’s own Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn interactions.
Over time, it will develop its own database of users.
This is the first new tool that I have come across whose creators seem to understand that the problem is not simply to find the right people; it is to run the right process to succeed at a specific task with the help of those people.
Consider my own interaction with Anderson.
I frequently advise people who approach me without an introduction that they should start with someone who knows them, not with a stranger they would like to know.
Even at a conference, that is good advice.
Maybe my friend was lucky to speak with only two of the 20 people in his breakout group.
As Werqit’s Anderson knows, the most effective introductions are those made by others.
The Soft Power of the United Nations
Joseph Stalin once dismissed the relevance of “soft power” by asking, “How many troops does the Pope have?”
Today, many self-styled realists dismiss the United Nations as powerless, and argue that it can be ignored.
They are mistaken.
Power is the ability to affect others to produce the outcomes one wants.
Hard power works through payments and coercion (carrots and sticks); soft power works through attraction and co-option.
With no forces of its own and a relatively tiny budget, the UN has only as much hard power as it can borrow from its member states.
It was created in 1945 to be the servant of its member states, and Article 2.7 of its charter protects the sovereign jurisdiction of its members.
After the failure of the League of Nations in the 1930’s, the UN was designed to have the Security Council’s permanent members act as policemen to enforce collective security.
When the great powers agreed, the UN had impressive hard power, as demonstrated in the Korean War and the first Gulf War.
But such cases were exceptional.
During the Cold War, the Council was divided.
As one expert put it, its permanent members’ veto was designed to be like a fuse box in an electrical system: better that the lights go out than that the house burn down.
Despite those limits, the UN has considerable soft power that arises from its ability to legitimize the actions of states, particularly regarding the use of force.
People do not live wholly by the word, but neither do they live solely by the sword.
For example, the UN could not prevent the invasion of Iraq in 2003, but the absence of its imprimatur greatly raised the costs to the American and British governments.
Some American leaders then tried to de-legitimize the UN and called for an alternative alliance of democracies.
But they missed the point: Iraq policy had divided allied democracies, and, with its universal membership, the UN remained an important source of legitimacy in the eyes of most of the world.
The greatest damage to the UN’s legitimacy has been self-inflicted.
For example, in recent years the internal bloc politics among its member states produced a Human Rights Council with little interest in fair procedures or the advance of human rights.
Likewise, administrative inefficiency has led to poor performance of high-profile efforts like the oil-for-food program.
The job of UN Secretary General involves very little hard power, but some people have filled the post with great effect, using their soft power resources to leverage the hard power of governments.
For example, Dag Hammarskjold seized the opportunity of the Suez Crisis created by Britain and France’s invasion of Egypt in 1956 to persuade governments to create peacekeeping forces – an institution that is not mentioned in the UN original charter.
In the wake of the UN’s failures to prevent genocide and ethnic cleansing in Rwanda and Kosovo in the 1990’s, Kofi Annan worked with others to persuade governments to recognize a new responsibility to protect endangered peoples.
But such innovations have their limits.
In the aftermath of the 2006 Israel-Lebanon War, states turned once again to UN peacekeepers, as they have in dealing with the problems in the Congo and Darfur.
But, while there are currently more than 100,000 troops from various nations serving in UN peacekeeping missions around the world, member states are not providing adequate resources, training, and equipment.
Moreover, governments have found ways to delay effective international action, as has been the case in Sudan.
It remains to be see whether China, concerned that its oil trade with Sudan might jeopardize the 2008 Olympics, will decide to exert more pressure.
Similarly, while the General Assembly may have agreed that states have a “responsibility to protect,” many members agreed only in a very limited sense.
Many developing countries, in particular, remain jealous of their sovereignty and fear that the new principle could infringe it.
For example, in the aftermath of the recent government crackdown in Myanmar (Burma), the Secretary General was able to send a representative to the country, but with powers limited to reporting and attempted mediation.
That may be enough to influence some governments, but the Burmese junta recently expelled the UN’s representative after he warned of “a deteriorating humanitarian situation.”
The UN has impressive power – both hard and soft – when states agree on policies under Chapter 7 of the Charter.
It has modest but useful soft power when great powers disagree but are willing to acquiesce in a course of action.
And it has very little power when the great powers oppose an action, or repressive member governments ignore the claims of the new “responsibility to protect.”
In such cases, it makes no sense to blame the UN.
Soft power is real, but it has its limits.
The fault lies not with the UN, but with the lack of consensus among member states.
The Soft Underbelly of China’s Growth
China’s explosive economic growth hinges on the rest of the world, radically changing the global production chain and challenging the global trading system.
If China maintains its growth momentum over the next two decades, the global system will face huge challenges.
Indeed, the question is not so much whether the global system will endure the imbalances spawned by China, but how severe those imbalances will prove to be.
Much of the concern over the past few years has centered on America’s yawning current account and fiscal deficits, and its effort to get China to let the yuan float more freely against the dollar.
China, by contrast, sees its growth as tied to a stable currency, and may not want to introduce a more flexible exchange-rate regime, even after the 2.1% revaluation in July, pending alleviation of structural problems for which it is extremely difficult to set a timetable.
In fact, even as China’s economy has boomed over the past decade, structural adjustment in its domestic sectors slowed, mainly owing to political constraints.
The banking system remains unhealthy and fragile; capital markets are dying.
The private sector’s growth is hemmed in by its inability to invest in economic sectors that the government still monopolizes.
Mounting regional disparities, as well as the widening urban-rural divide, impede household consumption growth, increasing the economy’s dependence on exports and foreign investment.
For years, as optimists see it, China has been the world’s cheap assembly shop for shoes, clothing, and microwave ovens.
Now, it is laying the groundwork to become a global power in more sophisticated, technology-intensive industries.
Billions of dollars are flowing into auto, steel, chemical, and high-tech electronics plants, setting the stage for China to be a major exporter of high-end products.
While this argument suggests that the global trading system must make more room for a rising China (and India), it overlooks the need to address the enormous structural problems in China’s domestic sectors if export-led growth is to become sustainable.
For these sectors, rapid investment-driven growth in the past decade has produced a mountain of excess capacity, reflected in stagnant prices and the banking sector’s soaring volume of bad loans, as price wars squeeze profitability and stimulate real-estate speculation.
Postponing structural reforms eventually constrains any economy’s performance, as we saw in Japan in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
China has similar problems, with the investment-growth nexus threatening macroeconomic stability – witness the overheating that occurred in 2003 and 2004.
Indeed, China faces tremendous challenges in maintaining macroeconomic stability under conditions of export-led growth, with huge repercussions for the rest of the world.
Given China’s size and its rising share in the global market, macroeconomic instability there fuels volatility in global prices for basic commodities and raw materials.
But the political reality is that China’s government favors rapid growth in the short run over the structural reforms needed to sustain long-term economic performance.
Fiscal consolidation and the abrupt closure and restructuring of inefficient banks and state enterprises would, after all, constitute a powerful brake on short-term growth, threatening social peace and political stability.
This may explain the growing efforts of Chinese businesses in recent years to go global themselves.
Globalization is increasingly viewed as an alternative to domestic structural complexity.
This strategy will exact a heavy price, just as it did in Japan twenty years ago.
The main lesson of Japan’s approach is that launching an aggressive buying spree overseas merely upsets established international balances of interests – thus generating greater tensions with the rest of the world – while hiding the seriousness of structural problems at home.
China has much to gain by avoiding such a strategy.
Focusing squarely on structural reforms would allay some of the fears that China’s rise has inspired in the rest of the world, while winning praise from the international business community.
Rather than scaring global corporations and their home states, China would retain strong political support abroad – and the financing that it needs for its continued development.
In economic terms, China has no choice: it must remove the structural obstacles that stand in the way of rapid growth over the next decade or two.
Above all, truly secure and sustainable economic development requires that it build a large consumer base at home.
Of course, the global imbalances associated with China’s economic rise can take longer to adjust than they otherwise would, simply because the US welcomes it as being in America’s own interest.
But China’s long-term interest, and that of the world, requires that it get serious about domestic structural reform.
The Software of Life
Being alive, we tend to think that life is easy to grasp.
In the accepted classification of sciences, mathematics is thought to be the queen, and the most difficult to grasp, followed by physics, chemistry, and, finally, biology.
But this scientific hierarchy is false and misleading: we now know that biology contains more mathematics than we ever imagined.
When molecules entered the scientific understanding of life with the discovery of DNA, biology climbed one step up the scale, to chemistry.
Then, with recognition of the abstract schemas dictating how genes are expressed, biology climbed even closer to mathematics.
Today’s buzzword in the study of life is “systems” biology.
For a long time, those who studied the nature of life and heredity were divided into two camps: epigeneticists , who emphasized environmental influences on living organisms, and preformists , who stressed the similarities between parents and progeny.
The epigeneticist view was clearly wrong, because something stable had to be transmitted across generations.
But the preformist view that the entity transmitted across generations was the whole organism was contradicted by the impossibility of segmenting objects infinitely.
What had to be transmitted was not the final organism, but the recipe to make it.
Consider the old metaphysical puzzle: is a wooden boat whose planks are gradually replaced as they decay the same boat after all the planks have been changed?
“Systems” biology is biology that recognizes that what remains the same is the design of the boat – that which determines the relationships between the planks.
This thought paved the way for the concept of a “genetic program,” akin to a computer program – a metaphor that became almost self-evident when the structure of DNA was discovered, because DNA could be visualized as a linear string of symbols, which is exactly what computers read as a program.
Like a computer program, DNA does not preserve the final state of what it codes for; rather, it embeds in a symbolic but concrete way (it is a real “text”) the relationships between all the objects and agents that it specifies and controls.
A remarkable observation supports this analogy: viruses behave like individual pieces of programs, using the cell as the machine needed to make them multiply and subsequently propagate (often by destroying the machine).
When computer programming became widespread, pieces of software were found to behave the same way, and were thus called “viruses.”
And when it became possible to manipulate DNA in vitro, the metaphor of a “genetic program” appeared even more precise: scientists could construct experiments that corresponded to the reprogramming of cells merely by working on symbols in silicon.
The metaphor comes from the famous mathematician and computer scientist Alan Turing, who, along with John von Neumann and other theoreticians, uncovered the link between the mathematics of whole numbers and logic.
Turing proposed that all computations and logical operations could be performed by a simple machine, which he called the Universal Turing Machine, reading and modifying a linear sequence of symbols.
This required only the physical separation of the symbols (visualized as a tape) handled by the machine and the machine itself. Moreover, the tape carried the data that allowed the machine to proceed.
So the data could be split into two types: a program that embedded the “meaning” of the logical sequence recognized by the machine, and the pure data that provided the context for the program to run.
Genetic engineering rests on the manipulation of DNA molecules (whether real or artificially constructed) in order to reprogram foreign cells.
As a result, many bacteria today produce human proteins.
But this represents only a small part of the genetic program.
Transfer of genes between organisms is widespread. Nuclear cloning, illustrated by the sheep Dolly, has made the Universal Turing Machine a highly revealing, if not all explaining, model of the cell.
If we take this metaphor at face value, there is a surprising consequence.
It has been shown that, the outcome of some computer programs is at once entirely deterministic, innovative, and unpredictable.
The computer metaphor thus implies that living organisms are material systems that, facing an unforeseeable future, arrive at improbable solutions so that some of their progeny can survive in unpredictable conditions. Life is inherently creative.
However, the metaphor is limited by a simple fact: computers do not make computers.
The challenge for the new biology is to understand how they would.
The Sources of Chinese Conduct
BEIJING – Six decades ago, the American diplomat George Kennan wrote an article, “The Sources of SovietConduct,” that galvanized American and world opinion, which soon hardened into the rigid postures of the Cold War.
Today, given China’s decisive influence on the global economy, and its increasing ability to project military power, understanding the sources of Chinese conduct has become a central issue in international relations.
Indeed, better understanding of China’s foreign policy motivations may help prevent relations between China and the United States from hardening into rigid and antagonistic postures.
Since 2008, discussions among Chinese scholars and strategists on the nature of their country’s foreign policy have focused on two issues: its ideological foundations, and China’s international appeal and standing – its “soft power.”
Mainstream thinking, known as the Chinese School, insists, with the government, on “Marxism with Chinese characteristics” as the bedrock principle of China’s foreign policy.
But a minority school argues that China should rely instead on the country’s traditional political thought, emphasizing the universal value of traditional Chinese philosophy.
While People’s Daily, the Chinese Communist Party’s official newspaper, consistently attacks that position, the Party itself has been rehabilitating Confucius, the central figure in Chinese traditional thought, going so far as to erect a statue of him in Tiananmen Square.
The Chinese School insists on adhering to Deng Xiaoping’s doctrine of maintaining a low profile in international diplomacy, while the traditionalist group advocates taking on greater international responsibility.
The mainstream school defines China as a developing country, pointing to China’s per capita GDP, which ranks only 104th in the world.
The traditionalists argue that China should assume responsibility for world affairs consistent with its status as the world’s second-largest economy, behind only the US.
Today, the impact of the Chinese School seems to be limited mostly to official statements, while the traditionalists are gradually gaining policy influence.
For example, the Chinese government reiterated its core diplomatic principle of non-intervention in other countries’ affairs during the Libya crisis, yet China accepted the imposition of United Nations’ sanctions on Muammar Qaddafi’s government.
Moreover, China dispatched a warship and four military aircraft to the Mediterranean to help evacuate 35,860 Chinese nationals and 2,100 others from Libya.
That measure, the first projection of Chinese naval power so far from home, is consistent with Confucianism, which regards morality as the top priority of policymaking, rather than Marxism, according to which economic interests alone drive foreign policy.
Early Confucian thinkers were writing in a world of small countries competing ruthlessly for territorial advantage.
For them, the key to international power was political power, and the central attribute of political power was a morally informed leadership.
Rulers, they believed, should act in accord with moral norms whenever possible.
And the sphere of concern for any humane ruler should be the whole world, not just the people of one state.
Thus, thinkers such as Mencius, Confucius’s leading intellectual heir, argued that humane authorities should punish immoral rulers in other states who tyrannize their people.
Rulers who rely mostly on military or economic might divorced from morality, he argued, cannot achieve long-term success on the international stage.
Although China is building Confucius Institutes across the globe, China’s traditional political philosophy does not often play decisive role in policymaking.
China’s policy toward Libya, which differs significantly from previous policy, may or may not have been shaped by it; nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility of it becoming the mainstream of thinking in Chinese foreign-policy circles in the near future.
Indeed, Henry Kissinger once told me that he believes that Chinese traditional thought has a greater chance than any foreign ideology (say, Marxism or liberalism) of becoming the dominant intellectual force behind Chinese foreign policymaking.
Domestic politics is always an important factor influencing a country’s foreign policy.
At the recently concluded 11th People’s National Congress, the word heard most often in policy discussions was “happiness,” which had suddenly replaced “economic growth” as the official mantra.
This change may augur future adjustments in China’s foreign policy as well, for “happiness” is a word used more frequently in Chinese traditional political thought than in Marxist political philosophy.
According to early Confucian thinkers, a key task for rulers is to strive to improve a peoples’ happiness, which is itself grounded in a moral way of life.
Because poverty was an obstacle to moral behavior, they believed that the state should be vitally concerned with eliminating it.
The idea that the state should pursue economic growth without consideration for moral concerns was anathema to Confucius and his followers.
In February 2010, at “Spring Festival” – one of China’s biggest holidays, marked by family reunions – Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said that the government should help people live with dignity and happiness.
At a press conference this month, he said that economic reform cannot succeed without political reform, and that corruption currently poses the gravest danger to China.
Such statements sounded new to Chinese ears, because they accentuated politics rather than trumpeting the Party’s usual emphasis on economic determinism.
Today, it is impossible to tell what impact and how much influence Chinese traditional political thought – the traditional concern with moral duty, happiness, and honor – will have on China’s foreign policy. But it is certain that the influence of traditional ideas in Chinese public life is growing.
Indeed, no force seems able to reverse this trend in the coming years.
US Interest Rates Will Continue to Rise
CAMBRIDGE – Six months ago, I wrote that long-term interest rates in the United States would rise, causing bond prices to fall by so much that an investor who owned ten-year Treasury bonds would lose more from the decline in the value of the bond than he would gain from the difference between the bonds’ interest rate and the interest rates on short-term money funds or bank deposits.
That warning has already proved to be correct.
The interest rate on ten-year Treasury bonds has risen almost a full percentage point since February, to 2.72%, implying a loss of nearly 10% in the price of the bond.
But what of the future?
The recent rise in long-term interest rates is just the beginning of an increase that will punish investors who are seeking extra yield by betting on long-term bonds.
Given the current expected inflation rate of 2%, the real rate on ten-year bonds is still less than 1%.
Past experience implies that the real rate will rise to at least 2%, taking the total nominal interest rate to more than 4%, even if expected inflation remains at just 2%.
The interest rate on long-term bonds has been kept abnormally low in the past few years by the Federal Reserve’s “unconventional monetary policy” of buying massive amounts of Treasury bonds and other long-term assets – so-called quantitative easing (QE) – and promising to keep short-term rates low for a considerable period.
Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s announcement in May that the Fed would soon start reducing its asset purchases and end QE in 2014 caused long-term interest rates to jump immediately.
Although Bernanke’s announcement has focused markets on exactly when this “tapering” will begin and how rapidly it will proceed, these decisions will not affect the increased level of rates a year or two from now.
The promise to keep the overnight interest rate low for an extended period was intended to persuade investors that they could achieve higher returns only by buying long-term securities, which would drive up these securities’ prices and drive down their yields.
But the current version of this promise – not to raise the overnight interest rate until the unemployment rate drops below 6.5% – no longer implies that short-term rates will remain low for an “extended” period.
With the unemployment rate currently at 7.4% – having fallen nearly a full percentage point in the last 12 months – markets can anticipate that the 6.5% threshold could be reached in 2014.
And the prospect of rising short-term rates means that investors no longer need to hold long-term bonds to achieve a higher return over the next several years.
Although it is difficult to anticipate how high long-term interest rates will eventually rise, the large budget deficit and the rising level of the national debt suggest that the real rate will be higher than 2%.
A higher rate of expected inflation would also cause the total nominal rate to be greater than 5%.
Today’s investors may not recall how much interest rates rose in recent decades.
The interest rate on ten-year Treasuries increased from about 4% in the mid-1960’s to 8% in the mid-1970’s and 10% in the mid-1980’s.
It was only at the end of the 1970’s that the Fed, under its new chairman, Paul Volcker, tightened monetary policy and caused inflation to fall.
But, even after disinflation in the mid-1980’s, long-term interest rates remained relatively high.
In 1985, the interest rate on ten-year Treasury bonds was 10%, even though inflation had declined to less than 4%.
The greatest risk to bond holders is that inflation will rise again, pushing up the interest rate on long-term bonds.
History shows that rising inflation is eventually followed by higher nominal interest rates.
It may therefore be tempting to invest in inflation-indexed bonds, which adjust both principal and interest payments to offset the effects of changes in price growth.
But the protection against inflation does not prevent a loss of value if real interest rates rise, depressing the value of the bonds.
The relatively low interest rates on both short-term and long-term bonds are now causing both individual investors and institutional fund managers to assume duration risk and credit-quality risk in the hope of achieving higher returns.
That was the same risk strategy that preceded the financial crisis in 2008.
Investors need to recognize that reaching for yield could end very badly yet again.
The Specter of Global Stagflation
New York – Will rising global inflation lead to a sharp global economic slowdown?
Even worse, will it revive stagflation, that deadly combination of rising inflation and negative growth? 
Inflation is already rising in many advanced economies and emerging markets, and there are signs of likely economic contraction in many advanced economies (the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Japan).
In emerging markets, inflation has – so far – been associated with growth, even economic overheating.
But economic contraction in the US and other advanced economies may lead to a growth recoupling – rather than decoupling – in emerging markets, as the US contraction slows growth and rising inflation forces monetary authorities to tighten monetary and credit policies.
They may then face “stagflation lite” – rising inflation tied to sharply slowing growth.
Stagflation requires a negative supply-side shock that increases prices while simultaneously reducing output.
Stagflationary shocks led to global recession three times in the last 35 years: in 1973-1975, when oil prices spiked following the Yom Kippur War and OPEC embargo; in 1979-1980, following the Iranian Revolution; and in 1990-91, following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Even the 2001 recession – mostly triggered by the bursting high-tech bubble – was accompanied by a doubling of oil prices, following the start of the second Palestinian intifada against Israel. 
Today, a stagflationary shock may result from an Israeli attack against Iran’s nuclear facilities.  This geopolitical risk mounted in recent weeks as Israel has grown alarmed about Iran’s intentions.
Such an attack would trigger sharp increases in oil prices – to well above $200 a barrel.
The consequences of such a spike would be a major global recession, such as those of 1973, 1979, and 1990.
Indeed, the most recent rise in oil prices is partly due to the increase in this fear premium.
But short of such a negative supply-side shock, is global stagflation possible?
Between 2004-2006 global growth was robust while inflation was low, owing to a positive global supply shock – the increase in productivity and productive capacity of China, India and emerging markets.
This positive supply-side shock was followed – starting in 2006 – by a positive global demand shock: fast growth in “Chindia” and other emerging markets started to put pressure on the prices of a variety of commodities.
Strong global growth in 2007 marked the beginning of a rise in global inflation, a phenomenon that, with some caveats (the sharp slowdown in the US and some advanced economies), continued into 2008.
Barring a true negative supply-side shock, global stagflation is thus unlikely.
Recent rises in oil, energy and other commodity prices reflect a variety of factors:
High growth in demand for oil and other commodities among fast-growing and urbanizing emerging-market economies is occurring at a time when capacity constraints and political instability in some producing countries is limiting their supply.
The weakening US dollar is pushing the dollar price of oil higher as oil exporters’ purchasing power in non-dollar regions declines. Investors’ discovery of commodities as an asset class is fueling both speculative and long-term demand.
The diversion of land to bio-fuels production has reduced the land available to produce agricultural commodities.
Easy US monetary policy, followed by monetary easing in countries that formally pegged their exchange rates to the US dollar (as in the Gulf) or that maintain undervalued currencies to achieve export-led growth (China and other informal members of the so-called Bretton Woods 2 dollar zone) has fueled a new asset bubble in commodities and overheating of their economies.
Most of these factors are akin to positive global aggregate demand shocks, which should lead to economic overheating and a rise in global inflation.
Exchange rate policies are key.
Large current-account surpluses and/or rising terms of trade imply that the equilibrium real exchange rate (the relative price of foreign to domestic goods) has appreciated in countries like China and Russia.
Thus, over time the actual real exchange rate needs to converge – via real appreciation – with the stronger equilibrium rate.
If the nominal exchange rate is not permitted to appreciate, real appreciation can occur only through an increase in domestic inflation.
So the most important way to control inflation – while regaining the monetary and credit policy autonomy needed to control inflation – is to allow currencies in these economies to appreciate significantly.
Unfortunately, the need for currency appreciation and monetary tightening in overheated emerging markets comes at a time when the housing bust, credit crunch, and high oil prices are leading to a sharp slowdown in advanced economies – and outright recession in some of them.
The world has come full circle.
Following a benign period of a positive global supply shock, a positive global demand shock has led to global overheating and rising inflationary pressures.
Now the worries are about a stagflationary supply shock – say, a war with Iran – coupled with a deflationary demand shock as housing bubbles go bust.
Deflationary pressure could take hold in economies that are contracting, while inflationary pressures increase in economies that are still growing fast.
Thus, central banks in many advanced and emerging economies are facing a nightmare scenario, in which they simultaneously must tighten monetary policy (to fight inflation) and ease it (to reduce the downside risks to growth).
As inflation and growth risks combine in varied and complex ways in different economies, it will be very difficult for central bankers to juggle these contradictory imperatives.
The Spring of the Zombies
New York – As spring comes to America, optimists are seeing “green sprouts” of recovery from the financial crisis and recession.
The world is far different from what it was last spring, when the Bush administration was once again claiming to see “light at the end of the tunnel.”
The metaphors and the administrations have changed, but not, it seems, the optimism.
The good news is that we may be at the end of a free fall.
The rate of economic decline has slowed. The bottom may be near – perhaps by the end of the year.
But that does not mean that the global economy is set for a robust recovery any time soon.
Hitting bottom is no reason to abandon the strong measures that have been taken to revive the global economy.
This downturn is complex: an economic crisis combined with a financial crisis.
Before its onset, America’s debt-ridden consumers were the engine of global growth.
That model has broken down, and will not be replaced soon.
For, even if America’s banks were healthy, household wealth has been devastated, and Americans were borrowing and consuming on the assumption that house prices would rise forever.
The collapse of credit made matters worse; and firms, facing high borrowing costs and declining markets, responded quickly, cutting back inventories.
Orders dropped abruptly – well out of proportion to the decline in GDP – and those countries that depended on investment goods and durables (expenditures that could be postponed) were particularly hard hit.
We are likely to see a recovery in some of these areas from the bottoms reached at the end of 2008 and the beginning of this year. But examine the fundamentals: in America, real estate prices continue to fall, millions of homes are underwater, with the value of mortgages exceeding the market price, and unemployment is increasing, with hundreds of thousands reaching the end of their 39 weeks of unemployment insurance.
States are being forced to lay off workers as tax revenues plummet.
The banking system has just been tested to see if it is adequately capitalized – a “stress” test that involved no stress – and some couldn’t pass muster.
But, rather than welcoming the opportunity to recapitalize, perhaps with government help, the banks seem to prefer a Japanese-style response: we will muddle through.
“Zombie” banks – dead but still walking among the living – are, in Ed Kane’s immortal words, “gambling on resurrection.”
Repeating the Savings ampamp; Loan debacle of the 1980’s. the banks are using bad accounting (they were allowed, for example, to keep impaired assets on their books without writing them down, on the fiction that they might be held to maturity and somehow turn healthy).
Worse still, they are being allowed to borrow cheaply from the United States Federal Reserve, on the basis of poor collateral, and simultaneously to take risky positions.
Some of the banks did report earnings in the first quarter of this year, mostly based on accounting legerdemain and trading profits (read: speculation).
But thiswon’t get the economy going again quickly.
And, if the bets don’t pay off, the cost to the American taxpayer will be even larger.
The American government, too, is betting on muddling through: the Fed’s measures and government guarantees mean that banks have access to low-cost funds, and lending rates are high.
If nothing nasty happens – losses on mortgages, commercial real estate, business loans, and credit cards – the banks might just be able to make it through without another crisis.
In a few years time, the banks will be recapitalized, and the economy will return to normal.
This is the rosy scenario.
But experiences around the world suggest that this is a risky outlook.
Even &nbsp;were banks healthy, the deleveraging process and the associated loss of wealth means that, more likely than not, the economy will be weak.
And a weak economy means, more likely than not, more bank losses.
The problems are not limited to the US.
Other countries (like Spain) have their own real estate crises.
Eastern Europe has its problems, which are likely to impact Western Europe’s highly leveraged banks.
In a globalized world, problems in one part of the system quickly reverberate elsewhere.
In earlier crises, as in East Asia a decade ago, recovery was quick, because the affected countries could export their way to renewed prosperity.
But this is a synchronous global downturn.
America and Europe can’t export their way out of their doldrums.
Fixing the financial system is necessary, but not sufficient, for recovery.
America’s strategy for fixing its financial system is costly and unfair, for it is rewarding the people who caused the economic mess.
But there is an alternative that essentially means playing by the rules of a normal market economy: a debt-for-equity swap.
With such a swap, confidence could be restored to the banking system, and lending could be reignited with little or no cost to the taxpayer.
It’s neither particularly complicated nor novel.
Bondholders obviously don’t like it – they would rather get a gift from the government.
But there are far better uses of the public’s money, including another round of stimulus.
Every downturn comes to an end. The question is how long and deep this downturn will be.
In spite of some spring sprouts, we should prepare for another dark winter: it’s time for Plan B in bank restructuring and another dose of Keynesian medicine.
Autumn of the Patriarchs
MADRID – “How difficult it is to die!”
Francisco Franco is reputed to have exclaimed on his deathbed.
Death, it seems, is always particularly difficult for autocrats to manage, even when they succeed in dying of natural causes.
A dictator’s death throes are always a form of theater, featuring ecstatic masses, would-be successors fighting for political survival, and, behind the scenes, the dictator’s coterie locked in efforts to extend the life of their patriarch until they can secure their privileges.
Franco’s son-in-law, who was also the family doctor, kept the dying despot on life-support machines for more than a month.
It is not exactly clear how long Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez was actually dead before his passing was officially announced.
Buying time to secure their own political future, Venezuelan officials carefully stage-managed Chávez’s illness and eventual death, even suggesting near the end, while he was undergoing complex and agonizing cancer treatments, that he was still “walking and exercising.”
The information vacuum was reminiscent of the secrecy surrounding the deaths of Stalin and Mao, and the practice in the Ottoman empire of keeping the sultan’s death a secret for weeks until the succession was settled.
The emotional manipulation of the mise-en-scene surrounding Chávez’s death appears certain to translate into electoral support for his grey successor, Nicolás Maduro.
But will this suffice to create a Chávista lineage?
In Argentina, despite the disaster of Juan Perón’s return to power in 1973, after an 18-year exile, Perónism was reincarnated in the 1980’s in the presidency of Carlos Saúl Menem, and again with the arrival of President Néstor Kirchner and, later, his wife, current President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.
Fernández’s melodramatic speeches are a transparent attempt to elevate her late husband to saintly status, just as Perón elevated his wife, Evita, to sainthood.
Upon taking office, she swore allegiance not only to the constitution, but to “Him” (Kirchner) as well.
Unlike mere mortals, dictators do have a good chance of enjoying an afterlife.
In ancient Egypt, deceased Pharaohs were embalmed and deified.
After Augustus, the first Roman princeps, the Senate could vote deceased emperors into divine status.
Such an apotheosis, of course, served the political interests of the emperor’s successors, who could claim a godly lineage while aspiring to be raised to godlike status themselves.
Like the dying tyrant in Gabriel García Márquez’s The Autumn of the Patriarch, who righteously lamented the fate that would befall the poor after his passing, Chávez will remain for years to come the saintly benefactor, martyr, and redeemer of the destitute in the eyes of the Venezuelan masses.
Indeed, he is likely to achieve the kind of immortality that he always believed he deserved.
Part of the legend is almost invariably the mystery surrounding the circumstances of the leader’s death.
An ordinary, natural death does not accord with the superhero image of the patriarch fighting the nation’s enemies.
Maduro’s conspiracy theory that his mentor’s cancer was the result of poisoning by “the dark forces that wanted him out of the way” is not particularly original, though it does raise the stakes.
Chávez himself always maintained that his idol, Simón Bolívar, was poisoned by his enemies in Colombia in 1830.
History, more imaginary than real, offers Maduro a score of additional examples.
Was Napoleon slowly poisoned by arsenic during his exile in St. Helena?
Did Lenin die of syphilis, a massive stroke, or poisoning by Stalin?
Given the bizarre circumstances of Stalin’s own death, was he poisoned by his secret police chief, Lavrentiy Beria, or perhaps by his archenemy, Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz Tito?
Did “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il suffer a heart attack in bed, or, more nobly, on a train trip while working for the welfare of his beloved people?
Allegations of poisoning by the wicked imperialists are, of course, a feature of the official Kim death story.
Maduro himself invoked the rumor that the Israelis poisoned former Palestinian President Yasser Arafat.
He could just as well refer to Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser, who dropped dead of a heart attack in 1970; Nasser’s confidant, the journalist Mohamed Hassanein Heikal, always maintained that the president had been poisoned by his deputy and successor, Anwar El Sadat.
Although Chávez’s legend may survive, Chávismo probably will not, for it is not truly a doctrine, but a sentiment based on the rejection of the old political order and the invention of enemies.
It lacks the solid foundations of, say, Perónism, an inclusive movement that relied on a traditionally well-organized working class and a nationalistic bourgeoisie.
Chávismo, apart from its reliance on charismatic leadership, has never amounted to more than a social program hitched to an oil bonanza.
The Stem-Cell Race Continues
Scientific research is usually conducted to improve our lives, but it is also an industry, one that represents a massive investment by governments and corporations alike.
The stakes and potential rewards for a few research topics are exceptionally high, which is why the recent finding that the Korean scientist Hwang Woo-suk fabricated the results of his work on stem cells has reverberated so widely.
The episode highlights the ongoing race in global health research that is playing out in the field of stem cells.
Possibly one of the biggest prizes in medical history is up for grabs, and anyone – truly anyone – could seize it.
The last big scientific race of this type was the effort to map the human genome, which promises to alter future lives radically.
That study was initiated by the United States, which used insights developed in the wake of the atomic bombing of Japan to understand the extent of long-term genetic damage.
The current research effort on stem cells and their potential is just as grand, because it will lead to an equally radical medical revolution.
A stem cell is special because it is able to reproduce a form that is different from itself.
Whereas a skin cell or a liver cell, for instance, can reproduce only more skin or liver, stem cells, which are the most robust at the beginning of human development, are “master” cells.
As a fertilized egg turns into an embryo, and then a fetus, those initial stem cells somehow show their daughter cells how to become skin, liver, eye, or bone.
We need to know how this transformation is activated.
Such knowledge would lead to huge, patentable advances.
Most attention is focused on genetic diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, and to muscular dystrophy.
In these cases, stem cells would be encouraged to restore nerve tissue.
This would also benefit patients with brain and spinal injuries, or those who have suffered strokes and paralysis.
There would be gains in parallel fields, too, such as gene therapy.
A stem cell changes its identity through a process of “triggering” – a signal literally “turns on” the liver cell gene inside the stem version.
When scientists figure out how to flip these switches, it might be possible to introduce stem cells into the body and activate them so that they correctly replace damaged tissue, whatever it is.
Not surprisingly, given its huge potential, teams of scientists have been mobilized almost everywhere for embryonic stem cell research.
The race has become all the more dramatic since the leading researcher, the US, dropped out, owing to the influence of religion on politics (although the state of California has decided not to miss out, and recently approved a $3 billion subsidy for embryonic stem cell research).
Because the promise is so great, and the science does not require massive infrastructure, many smaller countries have rushed to take advantage of the absence of the US.
Any competent medical research center can enter the race, whether in Mexico, Ethiopia, Indonesia or Yemen.
Whoever wins will have added the equivalent of a Saudi oil field to their economy.
But, although anyone can win, science at this level is never a “eureka” event, with some single breakthrough suddenly ending the race.
Discoveries occur incrementally, and, because it is science, each step is announced and tested.
Research establishments gain momentum this way, with the leaders sweeping up talent, resources, and prestige in a rough-and-tumble intellectual ecology.
Embedded in the larger race are many smaller ones, which jostle for early, impressive results.
In May 2005, Hwang’s research center in Seoul reported the first major achievement.
They claimed that they had developed a technique whereby new, perfect stem cells could be cloned from ordinary ones.
This was big news, for it implied that sufficient numbers of stem cells could be made without controversy, thus allowing anyone to be able to do quality research while avoiding what US President George W. Bush described as “taking a life to save a life.”
More importantly, the Koreans did a common thing these days: they claimed patent rights over the process.
It almost looked for a moment as though South Korea would become a world superpower in health matters.
We now know that the Seoul researchers made up the whole thing.
An investigation by a Seoul National University investigative panel has concluded that the “cloned” stem cells were really created by test-tube fertilizations.
The fraud has bewildered the science community, particularly because the claim that the Korean researchers made was so transparently false.
Why, then, did they place their reputations and careers in jeopardy?
Medical research has always faced many challenges, even when the scientific quest was simply one of discovery.
Now, the challenges are complicated by politics, market forces, and national interests.
With stem cell research, huge fortunes depend on which group takes the lead, wherever their laboratory is located.
As the competition heats up, we should expect amazing developments – and no doubt more public relations gimmicks.
The Stimulus Ostriches
BERKELEY – Of all the strange things that have happened this winter, perhaps the strangest has been the emergence of large-scale Republican Party opposition to the Obama administration's effort to keep American unemployment from jumping to 10% or higher.
There is no doubt that had John McCain won the presidential election last November, a very similar deficit-spending stimulus package to the Obama plan – perhaps with more tax cuts and fewer spending increases – would have moved through Congress with unanimous Republican support.
As N. Gregory Mankiw said of a stimulus package back in 2003, when he was President George W. Bush's chief economic advisor, this is not rocket science.
Deficit spending in a recession, he said, “help[s] maintain the aggregate demand for goods and services.
There is nothing novel about this.
It is very conventional short-run stabilization policy: you can find it in all of the leading textbooks...”
I can understand (though I disagree with) opponents of the stimulus plan who believe that the situation is not that dire; that the government spending will be slow and wasteful (whereas properly targeted tax cuts would provide a more effective stimulus); and thus that it would have been better to defeat Obama’s stimulus bill and try again in a couple of months.
I can also understand (though I disagree with) opponents who believe that the short-run stimulus effect of the plan will be small, while America’s weak fiscal position implies a large long-run drag on the economy from the costs of servicing the resulting debt.
What I do not understand is opposition based on the claim that the stimulus package simply will not work: the government will spend its money, households will receive their tax rebates, and nothing will happen afterwards to boost employment and production.
As far as I can tell, they are simply burying their heads in the sand.
In both of these cases, large groups of people in America decided to increase their spending.
You can argue that neither group should have boosted its spending to such a degree – that both were subject to “irrational exuberance” – and that someone should have taken away the punchbowl earlier.
But you cannot argue that these groups did not increase their spending, and that their increased spending did not pull large numbers of Americans – roughly two million in each case – into productive and valued employment.
The government’s money is as good as anybody else’s.
If businesses’ enthusiasm for spending on high-tech gadgetry and new homeowners’ enthusiasm for spending on three-bedroom houses can boost employment and production, then what argument can Harvey, Fama, Barro, Steil, and company make that government spending will not?
I simply do not see it.
The Storm Before the Calm
OXFORD – Central banks can stop worrying about inflation. Price deflation is far more likely in the near term.
But temporary deflation need not be the terror that central bankers fear, at least if the banking system is recapitalized and if interest rates in the industrial countries fall sharply.
As recently as September and October, the United States Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank both saw the risk of inflation as being roughly equal to the risk to growth.
Both were reluctant to lower interest rates markedly. Indeed, financial markets may have taken the Fed’s view on US inflation as representative of other central banks’ outlook on inflation, reinforced by the surprising ECB decision of October 2 to keep interest rates on hold.
In October the US was on the cusp of the most significant turning point for inflation in the last 20 years.
Of course, forecasting inflation is notoriously difficult.
There have been large structural shifts in the world economy (e.g., trade and financial globalization) as well as in individual economies (such as the decline in trade union power).
Monetary policy itself has shifted to a far greater focus on inflation.
Moreover, energy and food price shocks can be both large and largely unpredictable, while the speed of price changes tends to increase with big shocks.
Most forecasting models used by central banks therefore put a large weight on recent inflation.
This approach tracks inflation quite well, except at turning points , because the models miss key underlying or long-term influences.
The turning point that the US and world economy are facing is straightforward.
Global output is probably falling faster than at any rate since World War II, except perhaps for 1974-1975.
Under these circumstances, large excess capacity develops and commodity prices fall.
Indeed, it seems unlikely that governments in China and similar emerging markets can compensate swiftly enough to boost domestic consumption.
And, with growing over-capacity, investment in goods production may fall even further, with serious implications for GDP.
Hence demand for commodities, which has been driven by emerging-market growth, has fallen sharply, and help decrease global inflation.
Eventually, lower commodity prices and lower inflation will act like a huge tax cut for households, allowing interest rates to fall further and thus stabilize economic activity.
Paradoxically, the faster oil prices now fall, the shorter the subsequent period of deflation will be, as further damage to the economies of industrial countries is avoided.
Since oil and food prices have fallen sharply, and probably have further to fall, while unemployment is soaring, our models suggest that consumer price inflation, particularly in the US, must fall at record rates over the next 6-12 months.
It is entirely possible that US inflation, measured over 12 months, will become negative by mid-2009..
While some observers still fret about inflation risk, others are concerned that the usual monetary transmission mechanism is not working, and that the US could face a Japanese-style “lost decade,” while others worry about a 1930’s-style slump in the industrial countries.
So the policy debate now under way is about whether monetary policy can stem deflation and what happens if and when the “zero lower bound” on interest rates is reached.
The zero lower bound arises because nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero.
But if nominal interest rates stay positive, while inflation is negative, then real interest rates may become too high for an economy in recession, causing recession to become more severe and prolonged.
Deflation fears were mistakenly raised in 2001-2003, when the strong response of the US housing market and consumer spending to lower interest rates should have made the debate redundant.
Influenced by a misreading of the Japanese experience, this led to excessive protection against the “tail risk” of deflation.
Ironically, that policy response helped to fuel the credit and housing bubble, whose collapse has triggered the current recession, which may actually bring about deflation.
There are important differences between the structure of the Japanese and the US economies, including the enormously high level of liquid assets held by Japanese households, which tends to lead to lower consumption when interest rates fall.
These differences, and the lessons that have been learned from Japan’s “lost decade” about the need to refinance the banking system, suggest that a “lost decade” for the US is most unlikely.
The policy implications outside the US and Japan, where rates are close to zero, are that central banks can safely cut policy rates and continue aggressive liquidity support operations with little risk of inflation.,..
In any case, with so little confidence in the financial system, and credit constrained by concerns about falling housing prices, the usual transmission channels from the policy rate have been blocked.
Thus, the emerging emphasis on recapitalizing the banking system and more recently, on unorthodox policies, including the purchase of private sector credit securities is correct.
As some confidence returns in an eventually recapitalized banking system, and long bond yields decline with the fall in inflation, mortgage and other borrowing rates will fall and monetary transmission mechanisms will revive, supporting economic activity and stabilizing real house prices, albeit at a substantially lower level.
Finally, there are two major differences between the 1930’s and the present.
The industrial world is now far more dependent on (mostly foreign) oil than it was then.
The extreme rise in real oil prices was a major cause of the current recession, and its reversal will be a major factor in recovery.
The other crucial difference is that we know enough not to repeat the errors – particularly trade protectionism – of the 1930’s.
The Storm in Sub-Saharan Africa
WASHINGTON, DC – As the world struggles with the most serious financial turmoil of the post-war era, attention has focused on the advanced and emerging-market economies most immediately affected.
But the impact on poor countries is far more severe.
Weak global growth is shrinking export markets, and many commodity prices are plunging.
The combination of tighter credit conditions in the advanced economies and dimmer economic prospects in low-income countries is hitting investment flows.
And workers’ remittances, which now eclipse aid as the biggest financial flows to low-income countries, are also falling.
Sub-Saharan Africa depends heavily on commodity exports, so it is especially vulnerable to the global downturn.
Many African countries have used the past decade to put in place sound and sustainable economic policies that have delivered robust growth and low inflation.
Together with debt relief, these policies have resulted in low levels of public debt, relatively sound financial systems, and – most important – rising living standards.
These gains are now at risk.
The high food and fuel prices that prevailed until recently have taken a heavy toll on the finances of many African economies.
Now they face a second blow from the global recession.
The priority for Africa and the international community must be to ensure that the continent weathers the global financial storm, preserves the significant achievements of the past decade, and continues to make decisive progress in combating poverty.
This is not the time to take a break from efforts to achieve the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals.
How to help Africa meet this challenge – including by learning from the lessons of past success – will be the goal of a major conference sponsored by the IMF and President Jakaya Kikwete of Tanzania, to be held in Dar-es-Salaam this March.
This discussion of Africa’s prospects will involve not only official policy makers, but also representatives of the private sector and civil society, which, as we all recognize, have a key role to play.
Clearly, the responsibility to implement sound economic policies rests with African countries themselves.
But the international community must stand ready to help.
My view is that strong policies on the African side, with strong support from the international community, offer the best prospects for sustained growth and poverty reduction in Africa.
Here are three priorities that should guide us:
·        First, while there may be scope for fiscal stimulus in some countries, in many countries it is limited; hence, the region as a whole must protect its hard-won low level of public debt.
When the storm has passed, low levels of public debt and sustainable public finances will be crucial to preserving spending that helps the poor and to bringing back the international investors who are indispensable for Africa’s future growth;
·        Second, falling international prices create an opportunity to bring inflation back down from uncomfortably high levels caused by the global food and fuel price crisis early last year.
This does not mean imposing rigid inflation targets.
But a predictable monetary policy aimed at delivering medium-term price stability – with a flexible exchange rate where appropriate – benefits both the private sector and, most importantly, the poor.
·        Third, the international community is obliged to deliver on its commitment to increase aid.
This is not the time to renege on those commitments.
It is equally important to restart global trade talks and bring the Doha Round to a successful conclusion – not least in order to protect Africa from the risk of rising protectionism.
The IMF stands ready to do its part.
We are working closely with our 53 African members on crafting the appropriate policy response.
We have increased our financing to the countries most heavily affected by food and fuel shocks.
And we stand ready to provide additional support – including under a new financing mechanism for countries hit by exogenous shocks – to help those whom the global financial crisis has affected most severely.
We are also stepping up our technical assistance to strengthen economic policy making in Africa, and opening two new regional technical assistance centers.
At the conference in Tanzania, we look forward to feedback and ideas about how the Fund can do even more – and differently.
As Africa and its partners navigate the financial storm together, we must ensure that the most vulnerable are not forgotten.
We must also ensure that solutions for strengthening financial stability and avoiding future turmoil – the focus of April’s G-20 summit – are discussed with all countries concerned.
All eyes are focused right now on the immediate crisis.
But we must not lose sight of the longer-term challenges that will remain after the storm abates.
The Tanzania conference will allow us to assess what we have learned from past successes, as well as what needs to change in the future.
Our shared objective is clear: to ensure that Africa not only weathers the immediate storm, but emerges from it stronger.
The Strange Death of Multiculturalism
An ideology which holds that people from different cultures must live in separate communities within a country, should not take an interest in each other and must not criticise each other is both wrong and unworkable.
Of course, multiculturalism’s more thoughtful advocates never imagined that a cultural community could or should substitute for a political community.
They believed that so long as everyone abided by the law, it was not necessary for citizens to have a single hierarchy of values.
The ideal of multiculturalism at home was echoed with an ideology of cultural relativism abroad, especially in the 1970’s and 1980’s.
This evolved stealthily into a form of moral racism which held that white Europeans deserved liberal democracy but that people of different cultures had to wait for it.
African dictators might do dreadful things but somehow they did not meet with condemnation from many European intellectuals, for criticism implied cultural arrogance.
The Netherlands, where I was born, has perhaps been divided by the debate over multiculturalism more than any other country.
The murder of the filmmaker Theo van Gogh two and a half years ago by an Islamist assassin has incited a wrenching debate about the country’s entrenched culture of tolerance and easy access for asylum-seekers.
Long before the arrival of Muslim guest workers in the 1960’s and 1970’s Dutch society was in a sense ‘multicultural’ in that it was already organised into Protestant, Catholic, liberal and socialist “pillars,” each with its own schools, hospitals, TV stations, papers and political parties.
When guest workers from Morocco and Turkey became de facto immigrants, some began to champion the creation of an additional Muslim pillar.
But at the moment that multiculturalism’s advocates were making this suggestion, Dutch society was undergoing a dramatic transition.
With secularization taking hold, the traditional pillars began to break down.
Moreover, fierce attacks on Muslims started to come from people who, raised in deeply religious families, had turned into radical leftists in the 1960’s and 1970’s.
From defining themselves as anti-colonialists and anti-racists – champions of multiculturalism amp#45;amp#45; they have become fervent defenders of so-called Enlightenment values against Muslim orthodoxy.
These people feared the comeback of religion; that the Protestant or Catholic oppressiveness they knew first-hand might be replaced by equally oppressive Muslim codes of conduct.
But their turn away from multiculturalism is not what prevented the emergence of a “Islamic” pillar in Dutch society.
The main problem with this idea was that people from Turkey, Morocco, and the Arab countries, some deeply religious and some quite secular, and all with perceptible animosities towards each other, would never have agreed on what should constitute such a pillar.
In any case, it is now too late to create such a pillar.
With the earlier pillars having collapsed, the emergence of a new one would bring about a situation where an increasingly integrated majority would be negotiating with a minority, thus perpetuating its isolation in the process.
Whether Europeans like it or not, Muslims are part of Europe.
Many will not abandon their religion, so Europeans must learn to live with them and with Islam.
Of course, this will be easier if Muslims come to believe that the system also works to their benefit.
Liberal democracy and Islam are reconcilable.
Indonesia’s current political transition from dictatorship to democracy, although no unqualified success, shows that this is achievable.
Even if all of Europe’s Muslims were Islamists – which is a far cry from reality – they could not threaten the Continent’s sovereignty and, by the same token, its laws and Enlightenment values.
Of course, there are groups to which Islamism appeals.
The children of immigrants, born in Europe, sense they are not fully accepted in the country where they grew up, but neither do they feel a special bond with their parent’s native country.
Islamism, besides offering them an answer to the question why they do not feel happy with the way they live, gives them a sense of their self-worth and a great cause to die for.
In the end, the only thing that can truly damage European values is Europe’s response to its non-Muslim majority.
Fear of Islam and of immigrants could lead to the adoption of non-liberal laws.
By defending Enlightenment values in a dogmatic way Europeans will be the ones who undermine them.
Our laws prohibiting incitement to violence and insulting people for reasons of their religion are sufficient.
Further constraints on freedom of speech – such as anti-blasphemy laws or, indeed, those laws that make Holocaust denial punishable – go too far.
But this doesn’t mean that we should not weigh our words with care.
We should distinguish carefully between different kinds of Islam, and not confuse violent revolutionary movements with mere religious orthodoxy.
Insulting Muslims simply on the basis of their faith is foolish and counterproductive, as is the increasingly popular notion that we must make sweeping pronouncements as to the superiority of “our culture.”
For such dogmatism undermines scepticism, the questioning of all views, including one’s own, which was and is the fundamental feature of the Enlightenment.
The trouble today is that Enlightenment values are sometimes used in a very dogmatic way against Muslims.
They have become in fact a form of nationalism – “our values” have been set against “their values.”
The reason for defending Enlightenment values is that they are based on good ideas, and not because they are “our culture.”
To confuse culture and politics in this way is to fall into the same trap as the multiculturalists.
And it has serious consequences.
If we antagonize Europe’s Muslims enough we will push more people into joining the Islamist revolution.
We must do everything to encourage Europe’s Muslim to become assimilated in European societies.
It is our only hope.
The Strange Rebirth of American Leadership
FLORENCE – At the recent annual meetings of the American Economic Association, there was widespread pessimism about the future of the United States.
“The age of American predominance is over,” declared one economist.
“The US should brace for social unrest amid blame over who was responsible for squandering global primacy,” said another.
We have heard this story many times before, not only in the US, but in other places as well.
George Dangerfield’s controversial history, The Strange Death of Liberal England, describes his country’s sudden decline at the peak of its power at the turn of the last century. The world everyone knew simply and inexplicably seemed to disappear.
Many Americans – think of the Tea Party’s adherents, for example – fear that something similar is happening to their own country. Or that it has already happened.
Dangerfield based his diagnosis on a cross-section of institutions, politics, and personalities, set against the bitter class warfare of the time.