Achieving the goal of enhanced stability in the Middle East requires the two sides to work together.
Europe should not let this train pass it by.
Turkey, Europe and Middle-East Security
Many factors contributed to the French and Dutch objections to the proposed EU Constitution.
One – usually unstated – factor is a fear of Turkish membership in the Union.
That membership drive, however, has already transformed Turkey.
In order to prepare for EU accession, Turkey has undertaken vast and serious legal, political, and economic reforms.
Turkey’s bureaucrats, politicians, and citizens united to fulfill the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership and tolerated the pain of the IMF-directed structural-adjustment programs.
The looming accession process will be even more painful, but Turkey’s people are firmly resolved to face this challenge.
Turkey’s transformation has already put an end to the Cold War-style security-state apparatus that ruled the country for half a century, and has changed the framework of the country’s domestic and foreign policy.
By modernizing and democratizing at home, Turkey’s politicians gained self-confidence in their ability to conduct a successful regional policy.
As a result, Turkey’s leaders are now willing to pursue active diplomacy in the Middle East in an effort to minimize problems with neighboring countries.
Of prime importance is the fact that Turkey is emerging as a role model for those across the Middle East who are seeking reform and modernization.
This influence does not imply a hegemonic relationship, but rather points to an alternative path for reform and economic development that other primarily Muslim countries might take.
The EU is associated with peace, democracy, and economic development, while the Middle East is characterized by instability, authoritarianism, and economic backwardness.
Turkey’s reform process shows that the latter is not an unavoidable destiny for the countries of the region.
In this respect, Syria and Iran appreciate Turkey’s EU membership process.
They consider a European Turkey an opportunity to develop their own relations with the EU.
Turkey also shows that the supposed clash between democracy and security – and, indeed, between democracy and Islam – can be reconciled.
Other Muslim states seem to grasp this: recently, a Turk was chosen for the first time and by a majority vote to be Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic Countries.
Turkey’s other major contribution comes through constructive diplomatic engagement in the region.
The Turkish government has adopted an active role as a promoter of peace and has reconfigured its policies toward a number of regional problems.
For example, Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan broke with tradition by displaying a critical attitude toward Israel’s more hawkish policies in the occupied territories, and did so without severing diplomatic relations with Israel.
During a visit of Turkey’s Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul to Israel in early January, there was serious discussion about Turkey assuming a mediating role between Israel and the Palestinians, as well as in future Syrian-Israeli talks.
Turkey, of course, did not join the US-led occupation forces in Iraq, but it has put enormous effort into mobilizing regional support for a stable Iraqi state.
Indeed, Turkish policymakers have, on a regular basis, brought the countries bordering Iraq together for discussions about the future of the region.
The United Nations Security Council has taken these meetings seriously and has requested further regional cooperation on the Iraqi question.
Turkey’s constructive engagement with the EU creates a sense of trust in the West – among Western leaders at least, if not yet the general population -- for its regional initiatives.
Yet Turkey is also succeeding in keeping an equal distance between both the EU and the US.
For example, Turkey is closer to the EU in its policies toward Iraq and Palestine, yet follows a line similar to that of the US in the Balkans and Cyprus.
In recent history, a variety of regional powers – the Shah’s Iran and Nasser’s Egypt – have arisen in the Middle East.
Turkey’s arrival as a regional power is different in that its democratic structures make an active peacemaker, not a local bully.
This is both a necessary and a promising role, for the region needs a local dynamic force pushing for reform, transformation, and peace.
Turkey’s experience shows that true security in the region requires internal stability and social peace.
With luck, this model can be exported throughout the Muslim world.
Turkey’s Diplomatic Dogfight
MADRID – Turkey’s downing of a Russian warplane risks opening a new front in the violence engulfing Syria, thereby dashing the hopes for a rapprochement between Russia and the West that had arisen in the wake of the Paris massacre.
With Russian President Vladimir Putin and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan now engaged in a war of words, and given the nightmare scenario of something far worse, it is more important than ever that the European Union do all that it can to reinvigorate its ties with Turkey.
Prior to the attacks in Paris, Erdoğan had seemed to be holding all the cards in the bilateral relationship.
European leaders, faced with an escalating refugee crisis, agreed last month to pursue a joint action plan, which demanded that Turkey help stem the tide of migrants into Europe, in exchange for EU funds, visa liberalization, and, most relevant, renewed negotiations on Turkey’s EU accession.
Shortly after that decision, German Chancellor Angela Merkel reversed her previous opposition to Turkish membership in the EU, calling it an “open-ended issue” during a visit to Istanbul.
All of this served Erdoğan well in the run-up to Turkey’s November 1 general election.
The action plan and Merkel’s visit were viewed within Turkey as de facto endorsements of Erdoğan; the EU even delayed the release of a critical “progress report” on Turkey’s accession negotiations until after the vote.
In the end, Erdoğan’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) regained its comfortable parliamentary majority.
The G-20 Summit in Antalya, held on November 15-16, was to cement Erdoğan’s triumphant return to the world stage, ending a period of relative isolation by the West that reflected disapproval of his authoritarian tendencies.
And a joint EU-Turkey summit was scheduled for November 29 to formalize the action plan.
Then, as so often happens, events intervened.
The tragedy in Paris sidelined Turkey at its own summit, derailing Erdoğan’s international comeback.
Instead, the focus was on US President Barack Obama, Putin, and French President François Hollande acting from Paris.
Now, Erdoğan faces a different strategic outlook, particularly with Russia-Turkey relations under greater strain than at any time since the Cold War’s end.
With the world now more determined than ever to defeat the Islamic State – an enterprise that will, it is becoming clear, require boots on the ground – the major powers are seeking immediately available forces.
For the time being, that means, on the one hand, the Syrian Democratic Forces, dominated by the Kurdish People’s Protection Units, which oppose President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, and, on the other hand, the pro-regime forces backed by Russia, as well as Iran and its proxies, particularly Hezbollah.
From a Turkish perspective, both are unacceptable.
Meanwhile, Turkey faces a direct threat from the Islamic State, exemplified by the twin suicide bombings that killed more than 100 people in Ankara last month.
Turkish authorities have since foiled another attack, planned for the same day as those in Paris.
Finally, following Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, which drove a wedge between the Kremlin and the West, Turkey had carved out a strategically advantageous position between the two sides.
But Turkey now finds itself increasingly isolated from both camps, owing to its downing of the Russian fighter and its staunch opposition to Assad, whom both American and European leaders increasingly believe will have to play some role in any political settlement.
As France shuns NATO as the centerpiece of an international response to the Islamic State, Turkey’s zero-tolerance approach to encroachments on its airspace has put NATO-Russian relations under dangerous strain.
It is in easing those tensions that the EU has an important role to play.
While Turkey still has leverage vis-à-vis the EU, owing to the continued flow of refugees toward Europe, both sides are now approaching the partnership from positions of genuine need.
Neither side can afford further complication of the already volatile situation.
This should be reflected at the upcoming summit.
On the EU side, it is important to acknowledge Turkish sensitivities regarding Kurdish forces.
This means establishing credible safeguards to prevent potential safe zones in northern Syria, essential to stemming refugee flows and beginning to stabilize the country, from threatening Turkey’s internal security.
European leaders – along with the US – must weigh in to avoid an escalation between Turkey and Russia.
And they must do a better job of reassuring the Turkish government that, despite Assad’s possible inclusion in Syria’s initial transition, he has no long-term future as the country’s leader.
For its part, Turkey needs to broaden its perspective.
The developments on its southern border concern far more than the Kurdish question; they have far-reaching implications for regional stability.
The AKP’s election victory offers a chance for the government to shift its attention back toward resolving the broader problems in its neighborhood – that is, to act like a true regional leader, instead of pursuing a narrow, self-serving agenda.
To address today’s most urgent challenges, Turkey and the EU must commit to building a genuine partnership, based on common interests, in particular security interests, rather than a transactional arrangement that addresses issues à la carte.
This necessarily includes a good-faith approach to negotiations on Turkey’s accession to the EU.
In the wake of Turkey’s fraying relations with Russia, the decision to proceed with the planned EU-Turkey Summit is an important one.
Now more than ever, the EU and Turkey have a responsibility to act together, before an already appalling situation gets even worse.
Senjata Rahasia Demokrasi di Turki
OXFORD – Upaya kudeta gagal di Turki lagi-lagi menyoroti kerentanan sebuah negara terhadap pengambilalihan kekuasaan oleh militer.
Namun peristiwa tersebut juga menyingkap aset terbaru – dan sangat ampuh – sebuah aset yang layak dipupuk oleh negara-negara tetangganya: penduduk kelas menengah (middle class) yang kuat serta siap dan mampu dimobilisasi melawan ancaman ekstremis.
Nah, pertanyaan yang harus dijawab Turki adalah: apakah Presiden Recep Tayyip Erdoğan akan memperkuat aset tersebut atau tidak.
Bagi Timur Tengah secara keseluruhan, isunya adalah bagaimana membangun kelas menengah yang sanggup menjaga stabilitas.
Ketika ribuan orang memenuhi jalanan di kota Istanbul pada tengah malam, dalam upaya melawan aktor kudeta militer, jelas bahwa itu merupakan bentuk aksi kolektif yang perkasa – sebuah aksi yang patut dikagumi pemimpin politik manapun, apalagi jika ingin memperkuat negaranya.
Analisis kudeta condong berfokus pada persaingan di dalam elite Turki dan kelemahan Erdoğan (pastinya tidak sedikit).
Namun analisis tentang pergeseran struktural dalam ekonomi politik yang telah memberdayakan kelas menengah Turki masih relatif terbatas, padahal kelompok inilah yang melandasi pendirian Partai Keadilan dan Pembangunan (AKP).
Selama 20 tahun terakhir, Turki memberlakukan sejumlah aksi hebat di bidang perekonomian yang akhirnya menyembuhkan negara lesu di Eropa menjadi salah satu negara dengan ekonomi yang solid dan jantung perdagangan di Timur Tengah.
Kunci keberhasilan transformasi ini adalah investasi pada infrastruktur, dukungan pada usaha menengah, ekspansi perdagangan regional, dan pengembangan sektor pariwisata.
Buah dari segala upaya tersebut adalah naiknya pendapatan per kapita sebanyak 3 kali lipat dalam waktu kurang dari 10 tahun, selain dari tingkat kemiskinan yang berkurang hingga setengahnya, menurut estimasi Bank Dunia.
Hal ini menyokong mobilitas ekonomi yang luar biasa di kalangan angkatan kerja Turki di pedesaan, pengusaha kecil, dan pekerja dengan upah rendah, yang mengangkat banyak warga dari kondisi berkekurangan hingga hidup layak.
Kebijakan luar negeri pun sedapat mungkin diselaraskan dengan kepentingan ekonomi dari bangkitnya kelas menengah (meskipun intervensi terhadap Suriah menunjukkan pergeseran dalam prioritas kebijakan luar negeri).
Bagi kelas menengah Turki yang baru, kelangsungan demokrasi adalah hal terpenting dan seperti dibuktikan dalam peristiwa baru-baru ini, mereka rela memperjuangkannya.
Betul bahwa kudeta di Turki tidak hanya menampilkan pergulatan kekuasaan antara Erdoğan dan rivalnya, tapi peristiwa itu juga menyoroti tekad kelas menengah untuk memastikan agar negaranya tidak kembali ke sistem politik yang akan menggerogoti kemajuan ekonomi dan politik yang sudah dibuat.
Dengan demikian, jelas bahwa dalam menyikapi upaya kudeta, Erdoğan dan pendukungnya harus berpikir di luar menghukum faksi militer yang mensponsori kudeta, walaupun tindakan itu diperlukan.
Erdoğan juga harus fokus pada penguatan kelas menengah yang menjadi pembela pemerintahannya.
Maka, tantangan nyata yang dihadapi Turki dalam beberapa bulan dan tahun ke depan bukan berasal dari konspirator militer atau asing.
Menyerah pada godaan untuk mengumpulkan kekuasaan di tangan presiden, walau tampak bermaksud melindungi wewenang pemerintahnya, bisa membatasi checks and balances dan mengekang ruang bagi oposisi politik, termasuk dari dalam partainya sendiri.
Itu akan merongrong sistem yang jelas-jelas sedang diperjuangkan kelas menengah.
Tentu saja, Erdoğan tidak perlu memperkukuh basis politiknya, termasuk memperbarui ikatan dengan pendukung setianya.
Pembersihan militer dan birokrasi sipil dari pendukung kudeta jelas akan membuat loyalis partainya merasa puas.
Namun ia tetap harus memperbaiki keretakan politik dan memupuk konsensus baru yang menunjang kemakmuran ekonomi.
Barangkali yang terpenting adalah AKP perlu menghilangkan bahaya perpecahan dari model integrasi perekonomian regional Turki, berdasarkan kebijakan luar negeri “zero problems with neigbors” yang awalnya dilahirkan oleh mantan Perdana Menteri Ahmed Davutoğlu tapi muncul kembali akhir-akhir ini.
Hubungan Turki dengan hampir semua negara tetangga di Timur Tengah sudah retak.
Memburuknya hubungan diplomatik dengan Rusia semakin melemahkan posisi Turki.
Selain itu, status Turki sebagai model demokrasi Islam perlahan memudar dan polarisasi politik pun semakin kuat, di tengah meningkatnya ancaman terhadap stabilitas negara.
Seluruh kondisi di atas tidak menguntungkan ekonomi yang menjadi tumpuan kelas menengah Turki, serta keberhasilan AKP dalam pemilu.
Tapi ada harapan bahwa kudeta gagal, dengan menonjolkan peran kelas menengah sebagai garda melawan pemberontak militer, akan mendorong pemerintah di bawah Erdoğan untuk menyelesaikan kebuntuan politik yang menimpa Turki dan membangkitkan pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Kelas menengah Turki tidak akan mendukung partai yang gagal memenuhi kepentingan mereka dan mewujudkan kemakmuran ekonomi.
Tetapi AKP yang kembali ke visi awal untuk menciptakan mobilitas ekonomi, ya itu urusan lain.
Pada dasarnya, apabila Erdoğan berupaya memusatkan kekuasaan lebih besar di tangan Presiden, ia seharusnya mengingat kembali kejadian yang mengakibatkan kebangkitan dan akhirnya keruntuhan Kesultanan Ottoman.
Seperti bangkitnya AKP, kesultanan saat itu beralaskan pada dukungan masyarakat di pedesaan yang memperoleh kebebasan, terutama di tengah Anatolia.
Tapi, setelah mendapat kekuasaan di Konstantinopel, penguasa Ottoman seketika menetapkan struktur kesultanan yang berlawanan dengan asal-usul sikap progresif – dan lalu menggerogotinya dari dalam.
Dengan pemusatan kekuasaan yang membesar, penguasa Ottoman menjadi semakin bergantung pada elite dalam negeri dan kerajaan-kerajaan di Eropa.
Jika AKP yang menjadi naungan Erdoğan hendak menghindari nasib serupa, partai tersebut harus berhenti mengkampanyekan pendirian struktur Kesultanan masa lampau.
Demokrasi yang sejahtera dan inklusif adalah satu-satunya pemecahan bagi Turki dan hanya demokrasi yang akan memulihkan teladan yang sangat dibutuhkan negara-negara Timur Tengah.
Why Turkey Won’t Go Nuclear
ISTANBUL – According to conventional wisdom, if Iran develops nuclear weapons, then Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and perhaps Egypt will try to follow suit.
Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu went further when he addressed the United States Congress in early March, asserting that even allowing Iran a uranium-enrichment program would “spark a nuclear arms race in the most dangerous part of the planet.”
Each of these potential nuclear dominoes should be analyzed separately and carefully.
And, as far as Turkey is concerned, the conventional wisdom seems to be largely wrong.
Turkey does have a nascent nuclear energy program.
After decades of false starts, the Turkish government signed a contract with Russia in 2010 for the construction and operation of the country’s first nuclear power plant.
The project, located on Turkey’s Mediterranean coast, is now under construction.
The Turkish government’s effort to secure other international suppliers has been complicated by the fact that the terms offered by Russia are significantly more generous than those proposed by its competitors.
Still, Turkey is in negotiations with a Franco-Japanese consortium for the construction of a second nuclear power plant on the Black Sea.
Turkey has valid economic arguments for developing the capacity to produce nuclear energy.
Primary energy imports comprise almost half of Turkey’s chronic current-account deficit, because the country imports more than 90% of its oil and natural gas.
Moreover, unlike in Europe, Turkey’s electricity demand continues to grow at 5-6% per year.
Turkish policymakers see nuclear power as an almost indispensable tool for enhancing energy security and reducing the import bill.
These economic interests, combined with national-security considerations, give Turkey an incentive not to seek nuclear weapons.
As a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Turkey is prohibited from developing military applications of the technology.
If it were perceived to be breaking this commitment, other states, including those that would otherwise contribute to its nuclear energy program, would turn against it and jeopardize its ability to meet growing demand at an affordable cost.
This, in turn, would undermine the economic growth that has been central to sustaining the government’s popular support over the past two decades.
Moreover, Turkey is a member of NATO and thus benefits from the security guarantee that the alliance provides, including its nuclear umbrella.
Indeed, the US has based nuclear weapons in Turkey for decades.
More recently, NATO and the US have deployed ballistic missile defenses in the country.
If the Turkish government sought to acquire its own nuclear weapons, it would jeopardize these security guarantees and turn NATO against it.
In any case, Turkey lacks the know-how and technical infrastructure to produce a nuclear weapon quickly, and the country would need a long time – probably more than a decade – to develop this capacity.
During this period, Turkey would face severe political, economic, and security pressures not only from the US and other NATO states, but also from Russia, Iran, and others.
Meanwhile, Turkey’s immediate security threats would be exacerbated.
Nuclear weapons would do little to reduce the dangers posed by Syria’s violent disintegration, the rise of the Islamic State, and the unresolved challenge of Kurdish separatism.
Turkey’s relations with Iran, which heretofore have been manageable, could become more prone to crisis.
All of these considerations point to the serious risks that seeking nuclear weapons would pose to Turkey’s security.
These risks could in turn exacerbate internal discord in the country at a time when the ruling Justice and Development Party is struggling to retain popular support.
In these circumstances, it matters how the rest of the world portrays and talks about Turkey’s nuclear future.
To assert that Turkey will naturally – perhaps inevitably – seek to acquire a nuclear arsenal ignores the important incentives the country has not to militarize its existing civilian energy program.
Glib talk of nuclear proliferation risks should not mislead Turks about their own interests.
The rest of the world would be wiser instead to reaffirm the country’s efforts to pursue a purely peaceful nuclear energy program and to work within NATO to seek a resolution of the Iranian challenge.
Turkey’s Politics of Peace
VIENNA – Turkey is moving into unchartered political territory, following the failure of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) to retain its parliamentary majority in the country’s recent general election.
The choices that Turkey makes in establishing a new government will not only be pivotal to shaping the future of democracy there; the next administration could also play a decisive role in a series of peace processes vital to restoring stability in the wider Middle East.
First and foremost for Turkey, there is the ongoing peace process with its own Kurdish population.
At its core, this process is about redefining the secular, unitary state created in 1923.
Everyone in the new republic who was not explicitly defined as a member of an officially recognized minority was supposed to merge into a new Turkish identity.
But this did not happen as Atatürk planned.
Kurds held fast to their own ethnic identity.
Eventually, the suppression of the Kurdish language and culture fueled a brutal insurgency, led by the Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK) which has cost the country more than 30,000 lives.
It is to the great credit of President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that he had the courage to launch an open peace process with the PKK in 2013.
Since then, that process has made progress that seemed unthinkable only a few years ago.
Yet key steps toward lasting peace remain to be taken.
A comprehensive settlement of the Kurdish issue within Turkey will be key to the country’s stability and the future of its bid for accession to the European Union.
Otherwise, one can envisage scenarios in which the forces of disintegration now roiling the neighboring Levant actually spread into Turkey itself, with unimaginable consequences.
The success of the mainly Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) in capturing 13% of the vote in the recent election – a total well above the party’s core constituency – should boost the Kurds’ confidence and ease the way ahead in the peace process.
But the far-right Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) performed strongly in the election, capturing 16% of the vote, probably owing largely to popular opposition to the opening to the Kurds.
Indeed, even Erdoğan, evidently trying to stop the MHP’s advance, used campaign rhetoric that alienated many Kurdish voters.
A high priority for any new government in Turkey should be to complete the peace process that Erdoğan began.
And Erdoğan should understand that his legacy might well be shaped by whether that process succeeds or fails.
The second peace process at stake is the new attempt to unify Cyprus, which has been divided since its constitutional breakdown in 1963 and Turkey’s invasion in 1974.
Indeed, it is bizarre that the capital of an EU member country is divided by a dead zone patrolled for decades by United Nations peacekeeping troops.
The continued division of Cyprus is blocking both the EU accession talks with Turkey and increasingly necessary cooperation between the EU and NATO.
But now, under President Nicos Anastasiades and the newly elected president of Northern Cyprus, Mustafa Akinci , there is a real possibility, after years of stalemate, of reaching a settlement that can re-unify the island.
UN-supported talks have acquired new and important momentum.
But a settlement will not be possible without the clear support of the Turkish government.
The new administration’s stance will thus be critical: Turkey has much to gain by supporting a solution in Cyprus; but it could also revert to old habits and spoil today’s unique opportunity.
The third peace process in play concerns Turkey’s relationship with Armenia, which, if improved, could help create the conditions for a peace settlement between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
A far-sighted agreement was signed by Armenia and Turkey in Zürich in October 2009; but wider regional forces eventually blocked progress, with Russian intervention decisive.
Maintaining the frozen conflict with Armenia is not in the long-term interests of Turkey or any other state in the region.
The ongoing blockades and military face-offs could, at some point, lead to violent upheaval in the southern Caucasus, with very negative effects for Turkey.
The next government should resume the approach it took in Zürich – and Armenia’s government must do the same.
The fourth and most immediately consequential peace process concerns Syria.
Turkey has taken a principled and strong stand against President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, and has generously taken in more than a million refugees.
But the dangers posed by the ongoing conflict, particularly the strains on Turkey itself, should not be underestimated.
All key actors have a common interest in preserving the Syrian state while changing the regime.
A complete collapse, fueled by efforts to impose a political solution by military means, would most likely lead to catastrophic consequences for decades to come, with Turkey among the worst affected.
So Turkey’s new administration should be ready to engage in a constructive dialogue, together with the United States and Iran, on possible solutions.
The immediate task facing Turkey is to bridge old divisions and establish a functioning coalition government.
Otherwise, a fresh election – and thus fresh political uncertainty – will be unavoidable.
That is why Turkey’s friends should take this opportunity to remind the country’s leaders of what is at stake – for Turkey itself, as well as for peace in the region.
Turkey’s Changing Freedom Deficit
DURHAM – Turkey’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) rose to power in 2002 on the promise that it would give pious Muslims religious freedom.
Fourteen years later, “freedom” is the last thing the AKP has delivered.
Today, even AKP supporters need to measure their words carefully, lest they be perceived as criticizing the government or siding with its enemies.
This imperative has intensified since the failed coup against President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government on July 15.
Now, destroying any evidence of association with the AKP’s foes – especially Fethullah Gülen, the reclusive Pennsylvania-based imam whom the government accuses of masterminding the putsch – is a matter of self-preservation.
Erdoğan’s government is by no means the first to compel Turkish citizens to hide their preferences and beliefs.
Under the secular governments that ruled Turkey from the 1920s to 1950, and to some extent until 2002, pious Turks seeking advancement in government, the military, and even commerce had to downplay their religiosity and avoid signaling approval of political Islam.
The leaders of the three Islamist parties that preceded the AKP resented the barriers to religious expression.
They held that French-style secularism had perverted Turkish culture.
Though careful not to challenge the constitution openly, from 1971 to 2001, they were successively banned as threats to secularism.
In 1999, Erdoğan himself was jailed for reciting a poem deemed an incitement to sectarian violence.
In the same year, Gülen, under investigation for advocating an Islamic state, moved to the United States.
As fellow opponents of secular governance, Gülen’s Hizmet (Service) movement and the AKP were natural allies.
Indeed, they spent a decade working together to undermine Turkey’s secular institutions.
After a constitutional referendum in 2010 terminated the staunchly secular military’s guardianship of the Republic, they saw an historic opportunity for overhauling Turkey’s institutions, though there was some disagreement – and, indeed, tension – over how that should occur.
Erdoğan, who was then Prime Minister, began to transform Turkish society according to his own conservative interpretation of Islam.
Religious education was intensified.
Alcohol restrictions were tightened.
Women were instructed to have at least three children and, later, not to laugh loudly in public.
What news media the AKP did not buy off were subdued through threats of punitive taxation and jail time for uncooperative journalists.
Secular Turks, once the politically dominant vanguards of modernity, were characterized as lacking in morality, decency, and even Turkishness.
But devout Muslims were not free from fear, either, not least because of the ensuing power struggle between the Erdoğan and Gülen camps.
Though Gülen’s supporters initially shared the privileges of power under AKP rule, including preferential treatment in government hiring and contracts, tensions came to a head in 2013, when Gülenists tried to implicate Erdoğan in a corruption probe.
Erdoğan responded by initiating a purge of suspected Gülenists from state institutions.
With two academics having already revealed that several sensational legal cases against the old secular establishment rested on fabricated evidence, AKP officials began to blame Gülen for all judicial improprieties.
While there was no doubt that the AKP knew that the victims of the lawsuits, including hundreds of generals, were framed, few Turks said a word, for fear of being labeled part of Gülen’s “parallel state.”
Two months after the bloodiest coup attempt in Turkish history, Turks still talk incessantly about the surreal bombardments, the televised images of tanks in the street, and the ferocious government response, which has included tens of thousands of arrests.
Some wonder whether Erdoğan staged the coup to justify the epic purge.
Of course, any such questions are raised in private, amid assertions of antipathy to the “Fethullah Terror Organization,” the new official designation for Hizmet.
Turks know that the government may equate the slightest connection to Gülen, however old or tenuous, with treason.
Alleged sympathizers are being summarily dismissed from their jobs, if not also jailed.
People educated on Gülen scholarships are prime suspects, as are millions who have had dealings with a Gülenist-owned business.
Gülenists’ assets are being seized, in the biggest wealth grab since the 1940s.
Under the circumstances, extolling the merits of the Gülenist charities that are being destroyed would amount to professional suicide.
This is beyond excessive, not least because, whatever the involvement of Gülen himself, the putsch was not the work of Gülenists alone.
Disaffected officers of many persuasions participated, as did opportunists seeking promotion.
The putsch’s failure may have stemmed from the fact that information about it was leaked in advance, inducing many conspirators, including some key military units, to withdraw from the plot.
Many generals, intelligence officers, and other officials hesitated when it became known that a putsch was underway.
Erdoğan’s top generals and intelligence chief kept him uninformed for hours, even as an assassination squad made its way to his vacation residence.
The wait-and-see approach adopted by many Turkish security officials ended up landing some in jail.
Among other Turks, too, there are doubtless many who decided to wait to see how the putsch would end, before turning against Gülen.
The AKP and many of its opponents agree on one thing: had the putsch succeeded, the repression would be far worse.
And, indeed, AKP supporters far outnumber Gülenists.
But the AKP has made bitter enemies over the last 14 years, and millions of Turks would have applauded the jailing of its leaders, even as many of those leaders plausibly claimed that their support for Erdoğan was feigned.
Today, Turkey is further than ever from creating a society whose members feel free to speak openly and honestly.
The ongoing witch hunt causes citizens of all persuasions to fear for their jobs and their lives.
They seek refuge in dissimulation – social, political, intellectual, and religious.
This pervasive untruthfulness reinforces the underpinnings of Turkey’s recurrent political crises.
Turkey’s Syrian Tangle
MADRID – As 2015 draws to a close, new steps – albeit small and tentative – have been taken toward ending the war in Syria.
The United Nations Security Council has adopted Resolution 2254, expressing its backing for a transition out of the conflict, and the International Syria Support Group has set a date for its next meeting, to be held next month.
But the ISSG comprises both allies and adversaries – for example, Saudi Arabia and Iran – meaning that continued progress will be a challenge.
Now, another pair of countries in the process, Turkey and Russia, appear headed down the road to mutual enmity.
Turkey, whose proximity to Syria generates both challenges and opportunities, could play an especially significant role in shaping how the peace process plays out.
But Turkey’s downing of a Russian warplane on its border with Syria last month has spurred a swift and sharp deterioration in bilateral relations, with the Kremlin imposing retaliatory economic sanctions.
Russia, for its part, is facing the tough reality of maintaining an active military presence in the Middle East.
Its efforts to bolster President Bashar al-Assad’s regime (and thus to strengthen its own role at the negotiating table) places it at odds with the countries – including NATO member Turkey – that want Assad out.
The problem for Turkey is that its interests are not as straightforward as stopping the Islamic State (ISIS), or even driving Assad from power.
It also aims to ensure that Kurdish groups – such as the Democratic Union Party (PYD) of Syria, which is closely affiliated with Turkey’s Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) – do not consolidate control of territory in Syria, now or during the post-conflict reconstruction.
Since the summer, when several severe outbreaks of violence effectively ended a two-year old ceasefire between the PKK and the Turkish government, the Kurdish conflict in Turkey has once again been burning white-hot, raising fears about the impact of an empowered PYD.
Ongoing domestic political upheaval, including two parliamentary elections in just six months, has complicated Turkey’s situation further.
Turkey’s opposition to empowering the Kurds has been a source of tension with its traditional ally, the United States, which believes the Kurds are the only force on the ground capable of fighting ISIS.
The rekindled hostility between Turkey’s government and the PKK is thus undermining Turkey’s interest in the success of the Syrian peace negotiations.
Amid these challenges, however, is a ray of hope: Turkey’s relations with the European Union have lately improved markedly.
Europe’s desperation to resolve the refugee crisis has strengthened its incentive to cooperate with Turkey. This creates an important opportunity to restart negotiations for Turkish accession to the EU – a prospect that had been nearly extinguished.
To be sure, in its latest report on Turkey’s progress toward meeting the accession criteria, the European Commission noted “significant shortcomings” relating to the judiciary, freedom of expression, and freedom of assembly, and appealed for the resumption of efforts to resolve the Kurdish issue.
But now the mood is significantly improved.
Already, the EU and Turkey have agreed on a joint-action plan, which entails some visa liberalization, and there has been talk of a possible “privileged” bilateral relationship.
Moreover, there has been some promising forward movement on the Cyprus issue, a longstanding impediment to Turkey’s EU accession.
With Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders having resumed talks in May, Turkey now has the opportunity to take decisive steps toward uniting the island.
In short, the refugee crisis has tilted the EU toward Turkey.
But defeating ISIS remains a top priority.
This will require negotiating with Russia – something that EU members have recognized.
Since the Paris attacks in November, efforts to strengthen cooperation against terrorism, including between France and Russia, have intensified.
If Turkey wants its relationship with the EU to continue to improve, it will have to engage, too.
The tension between Turkey and Russia has also hurt Turkey’s own position in Syria.
Beyond the economic sanctions, Russia has now equipped its warplanes with air-to-air missiles, making it more difficult for Turkey to defend its airspace and maintain its influence over the northeastern Syrian border, an area that it considers critical to prevent the PYD from crossing the Euphrates to the West.
Turkey should reflect on its position.
It cannot risk being perceived as a country that jeopardizes basic freedoms, thereby widening the gap with the EU.
Two factors will sustain its position as an essential ally of the US and the EU: improved relations with the Kurds and progress toward a settlement in Cyprus.
In the Syrian peace process, the decisions Turkey makes can either drive or impede progress toward a settlement.
The myriad factors shaping Turkey’s position make decision-making very difficult.
But there is a way out of the current tangle: a strategic approach that makes the most of rapprochement with the EU, recognizes the importance of stabilizing Syria as soon as possible, and clarifies, once and for all, Turkey’s role in the fight against the Islamic State.
Turkey recently demonstrated its ability to overcome complex challenges, wisely restoring full diplomatic relations with Israel after a five-year breach in ties.
Given this, reconciliation with Russia cannot be ruled out.
Such an approach would, no doubt, facilitate the management of a host of risks that have been exacerbated by the Syrian conflict.
Turkey’s Balancing Act
EAST LANSING, MICHIGAN – Turkey has over the past few weeks become the spearhead of a joint Western-Arab-Turkish policy aimed at forcing President Bashar al-Assad to cede power in Syria.
This is quite a turnaround in Turkish policy, because over the past two years the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had gone out of its way to cultivate good relations with neighboring Syria, with whom it shares a long land border.
This change of course on Syria has also cost Turkey a great deal in terms of its relations with Iran, the principal supporter of Assad’s regime, which Turkey had also cultivated as part of Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu’s “zero problems with neighbors” policy.
Given these new strains, it is worth recalling that a only few months ago many American leaders were livid at what they perceived to be Turkey’s betrayal.
In their view, Turkey had re-oriented its foreign policy toward the Muslim Middle East and away from the West – a shift supposedly reflected in the country’s deteriorating relations with Israel and improving ties with Iran and Syria.
Many American policymakers and publicists, unable or unwilling to distinguish Turkish-Israeli relations from Turkish-American relations, interpreted Erdoğan’s condemnation of Israel’s blockade of Gaza as a bid to cozy up to his Arab neighbors at the expense of Turkey’s relations with not only Israel but with the West in general.
Turkey’s attempt to mediate between the major Western powers and Iran concerning the Islamic Republic’s uranium stockpile went unappreciated in the West; indeed, the United States scuttled the effort just as it seemed to be bearing fruit.
And Turkey’s subsequent vote in the United Nations Security Council against imposing additional sanctions on Iran seemed to offer further proof that Turkey had adopted an “Islamic” foreign policy.
America’s anxiety assumed that it is a contradiction for Turkey to seek good relations with both the West and the Muslim Middle East, and that Ankara’s decision to improve its relations with its Muslim neighbors was motivated primarily by religious and ideological concerns considered important by the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP).
Turkey’s recent tense relations with Iran demonstrate this assumption’s basic fallacy, and point to a non-ideological foreign policy that caters to Turkish national interests as defined by the country’s political elite – including the post-Islamists in power today.
Disagreement between Turkey and Iran initially centered on their conflicting approaches to the internal rebellion against Assad’s dictatorship.
Iran has been heavily invested in the Assad regime, its lone Arab ally and the main conduit for delivering material support to Hezbollah in Lebanon.
Turkey, on the other hand, after some initial hesitation, has thrown its weight fully behind Assad’s opponents, including by providing refuge to them, as well as to defectors from Syria’s army.
Indeed, Turkey has gone further by helping the divided Syrian opposition to come together on its territory to establish a joint front against the Assad regime and provide a credible alternative to it.
Turkey abruptly shifted its stance on Syria, and aligned its position with that of the major Western powers, for two reasons. First, the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) could not afford to be seen as opposing democracy in Syria, given that its own legitimacy rests heavily on its democratic credentials.
Second, once Erdoğan’s government concluded that Assad’s regime was bound to fall, it sought to secure its future interests in Syria, which is of strategic importance to Turkey – even at the cost of jeopardizing relations with Iran.
Iran’s displeasure at Turkey’s “betrayal” of Assad was compounded by the Erdoğan government’s recent decision to install a NATO anti-missile early-warning facility – aimed at tracking Iranian missile activity – in Malatya in eastern Turkey.
According to Iranian authorities, NATO’s system is designed to neutralize Iran’s deterrent capacity vis-à-vis Israel, thereby increasing the likelihood of an Israeli or US strike against Iranian nuclear facilities.
Iranian officials went so far as to warn Turkey that it would make the Malatya facility its first target in retaliation for a Western strike on Iran.
In reality, Israel can track Iranian missile activity from several sites other than Malatya.
Iran’s threat, therefore, is an expression more of discontent with Turkey than of genuine concern that the Malatya facility will adversely affect its deterrent capacity.
Iranian-Turkish tensions reflect three larger realities. First, the Arab Spring, and especially the Syrian uprising, exposed the two sides’ underlying rivalry for influence in the Middle East and the Arab world.
Second, Turkey’s turn toward the east is not ideologically or religiously inspired, but instead is based on solid strategic and economic calculations; as the fluid situation in the Middle East continues to develop, Turkey will adapt its policies accordingly.
Finally, Turkey has invested far too much in its strategic relations with NATO, and with the US in particular, to fritter them away in exchange for uncertain gains in relations with Iran.
This does not mean that Turkey will return to its traditional strategic dependence on the US and its allies, an approach that defined Turkish foreign policy throughout the Cold War and the decade following it.
The AKP government is committed to the country’s strategic autonomy and to greater activism in the Middle East. But it is also aware that such policies must not cost Turkey its relationship with NATO and the US.
Turkey is engaged in an intricate effort to preserve its old relationship with the West while building new ties with its Muslim neighbors.
Turkey’s leaders understand that the country can best preserve and enhance its leverage with both sides by maintaining good relations with each.
Turkey’s Choice
In what may be Turkey’s most important political event since the republic was founded in the 1920’s, the Justice and Development Party (AKP) has won a landslide parliamentary election victory, with around 47% of the vote.
Only two other parties – the Republican People’s Party (CHP) with 21% and the National Movement Party (MHP) with 14% – surpassed the 10% threshold for representation in parliament.
A number of independents will complete the legislative roster.
What makes the result so complex is that the ruling AKP got far more votes – up 13 percentage points from 2002 – but fewer seats than it had before.
The party will be able to form a government by itself, but will lack the two-thirds majority needed to bring about some of the big changes that it seeks.
Still, the AKP can be satisfied that after five years in office its popular support has climbed, while the opposition has been shown to be incapable of challenging it seriously.
The AKP’s resounding victory means that the Turkish republic originally shaped as a secular state by Kemal Ataturk in the 1920’s is dead.
However, this does not necessarily mean that Turkey will become an Islamic, must less an Islamist, country.
Ataturk viewed Islam as a major factor holding back Turkey’s progress.
He sought to banish Islam as a political and social force from the public sphere, though of course the vast majority of the population remained Muslim by religion.
For Ataturk, Westernization and modernization went hand in hand.
And, indeed, Turkey achieved great success – arguably more than any other Muslim-majority state in the world – in building democracy, maintaining stability, and moving forward economically.
This period came to an end for several reasons.
A key factor was the increasing prominence and power of more traditional sections of the population from central Anatolia, where many small businesses grew big, enriching a more Islamic-oriented middle class.
At the same time, millions of people emigrated from villages to cities, becoming mobilized and politicized as a result.
The end of the Cold War – in which Turkey was a frontline state – and the growth of political Islam elsewhere also contributed to a rebirth of Islam in the public arena.
Equally significant was the development in the old Islamic party of talented leaders that wanted to break with its backward-looking ways and extremist image.
They successfully reconciled Islamic politics with the Turkish lifestyle and modernity in general.
Cleverly, they positioned the party as conservative rather than Islamist – a process aided by the corruption, bickering, and incompetence of the existing parties.
Indeed, while the socialist left survived by uniting around the CHP, the conservative parties that largely dominated Turkish politics for a quarter-century fell apart.
Unwilling to change or work together, and unable to devise ways of appealing to voters, these once-powerful groups simply disappeared, leaving the AKP largely in control of the conservative electoral base.
But not completely.
The election’s other success story was the MHP, which has often been seen as a neo-fascist party since its creation immediately after World War II, but which has been reinventing itself along conservative nationalist lines.
The fact that two-thirds of the voters supported parties that were long considered extremist and whose allegiance to democracy is questionable has shocked many Turks, including those who comprised most of the ruling elite in modern times.
There are two sets of questions that now need to be answered.
First, what does the AKP want?
Is it a conservative party of good government that seeks equality for Islam in the public sphere, as its leaders usually suggest, or an Islamist wolf in moderate sheep’s clothing, as its enemies fear?
These alternatives are not necessarily contradictory.
The AKP contains people with both views.
Moreover, it might be that the party will push as far as it can until it is stopped by fear of a military coup or a rejection of its program by the voters.
That leads to the second question: how far can the AKP go in changing Turkish society?
The problem is that unless there is a viable opposition, the only check on the AKP will be its own conscience and a crackdown by the still secular-oriented armed forces.
But, as part of its seemingly endless effort to get into the European Union – an aspiration that seems all but doomed at present – Turkey implemented reforms that undercut the military’s political role.
Also at the top of the AKP’s agenda is choosing a president in tune with its worldview.
The president names the head of the armed forces, a power that could potentially turn the military into a servant of the government.
Given that the government can change laws, name judges, and staff the state administration, Turkey’s slide to another political model could reach a point of no return.
But what precisely would that model be?
If such a model means a Turkey that is more willing to embrace its traditional and religious heritage, the outcome would be relatively benign for most of its citizens as well as its strategic alliances.
But if it means a more anti-Western Turkey increasingly oriented toward Iran, Syria, and radical Islamist movements, a major shift in international politics would be accompanied by mounting domestic instability.
Turkey’s Democratic Dusk
CAMBRIDGE – When questioned recently about a constitutional law professor who was arrested for lecturing at an institute run by the country’s main pro-Kurdish political party, Turkey’s interior minister, Idris Naim Sahin, couldn’t hide his irritation: “I am having a hard time understanding those saying a professor should not be arrested while thousands of other people are being arrested in Turkey.”
Presumably, Sahin meant to say that a professor cannot claim special treatment under the law.
But his remark inadvertently underscored Turkey’s new reality, in which any perceived opponent of the current regime can be jailed, with or without evidence, for terrorism or other violent acts.
Special courts, tasked with prosecuting terrorism and crimes against the state, have been working overtime to produce charges that are often as absurd as they are baseless.
For example, journalists have been imprisoned for producing articles and books at the behest of an alleged terrorist organization called “Ergenekon,” whose existence has yet to be confirmed, despite years of investigation.
Likewise, military officers have been charged on the basis of blatantly fraudulent – indeed, amateurishly produced – documents containing obvious anachronisms.
A senior police commissioner is currently languishing in jail for allegedly collaborating with far-left militants he spent his entire career hunting down.
These prosecutions have cast an ever-widening net, ensnaring scores of journalists, authors, and academics, hundreds of military officers, and thousands of Kurdish politicians and activists, among others.
Self-censorship has become routine.
Media bosses anxious to retain Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s favor have fired many of those journalists who continue to criticize his regime.
And government control now extends beyond the media, judiciary, and academia to the worlds of business and sports.
Previously autonomous regulatory bodies (such as the competition authority) have been quietly subordinated to the government, with no debate or discussion. 
Even the Turkish Academy of Sciences has been targeted.
A recent decree, widely condemned abroad, allows the government to appoint two-thirds of the Academy’s members, thereby ending even the semblance of scientific independence.
Erdoğan seems immune to criticism.
His success at expanding access to health, education, and housing has enabled him to win three general elections – each with a greater share of the popular vote than previously.
He has broken the power of the military old guard and the hold of its stale Kemalist ideology – the secular nationalism introduced by Turkey’s first president, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk – thereby permanently altering the makeup of Turkish politics.
He has presided over the emergence of a vibrant new class of Anatolian entrepreneurs.
And, under his rule, Turkey has become a regional power.
Yet, while Erdoğan may appear to be at the pinnacle of power, it is his government’s “Gülenist” allies who have grown increasingly powerful.
Members of the transnational Gülen movement – inspired by followers of Fethullah Gülen, a Pennsylvania-based Muslim theologian – are staffing Turkey’s police, judiciary, bureaucracy, and universities.
The Gülenist media now set the country’s new ideological tone, producing a steady stream of disinformation in their vocal support of the country’s show trials.
These trials are, in fact, often staged to serve Gülenist ends specifically.
Prominent detainees, such as the journalist Nedim Sener and police commissioner Hanefi Avci, landed in jail after exposing the wrongdoings of Gülenist police and prosecutors.
Editorials in Zaman, the Gülen network’s Turkish-language daily newspaper, no longer mince words: a new Turkey is being created; those who stand in the way are getting what they deserve.
Erdoğan has benefited greatly from Gülenist support, yet he detests sharing power and remains suspicious of the movement.
Early on, he successfully exploited the Gülenist-supported political trials in order to demonize the opposition.
But, as the charges have increased in scope and implausibility, the trials have complicated his relationships with the military, domestic liberals, and outsiders such as foreign media and the European Union.
Moreover, individuals close to him and his administration have recently become entangled in the net of judicial manipulation, which suggests that he may be losing control over the police and the special courts.
Given that the fight against the common enemy, the secularist old guard, has been decisively won, an eventual break between Erdoğan and the Gülenists is perhaps inevitable.
Unfortunately, regardless of which side emerges victorious, the outcome will not be good news for Turkish democracy.
For Turkey’s friends abroad, it is time for some tough love.
So far, the European Union and the United States have reacted to Turkey’s descent into authoritarianism with little more than vague statements of concern.
No official has offered criticism analogous to Swedish Foreign Secretary Carl Bildt’s condemnation of former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko’s show trial in that country, or US Secretary of State Hilary Clinton’s frank statements about Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin’s erosion of the rule of law.
Incredibly, the EU’s progress reports on Turkey have continued to call the Ergenekon trials, which are heavily supported by the Gülenists, an opportunity to strengthen the rule of law.
It wasn’t long ago that Turkey appeared to be a bright beacon of democracy and moderation in a region accustomed to autocracy and radicalism.
Now it looks more like a country heading towards authoritarianism at home and embracing adventurism abroad.
It is understandable that Europeans and Americans do not want to offend a regional power.
But playing Erdoğan’s game only reinforces his sense of invincibility.
It does not advance the cause of democracy in Turkey; nor does it make Turkey a more reliable ally.
Will Turkey Weather the Middle East Storm?
ISTANBUL – A cycle of terrible violence has taken over much of the Middle East.
Its center has shifted from Iraq (where sectarian strife has recently escalated again) to Syria, but it encompasses Egypt, Yemen, Libya, and Tunisia as well.
Farther east, Afghanistan is suffering its second decade of violent conflict, while Pakistan seems to be chronically on the brink of war, civil war, or social breakdown.
The most worrisome underlying threat is the increase in fighting between Sunni and Shia Muslims.
Likewise, pious conservatives and liberal and leftist secular youth, who joined forces in Cairo and Tunis in 2010-2011 to challenge the dictators, have now turned on each other: witness the Egyptian security forces’ appalling massacres of Islamist demonstrators in Cairo recently, following a military coup carried out with liberals’ support.
The region’s people are sliding into enemy camps, deepening their societies’ wounds in the process.
I have often argued that Turkey should not intervene in the internal affairs of its neighbors or adopt a Middle East-centered policy.
Both government and opposition should remain steadfastly focused on Europe, despite the obstacles that the European Union has placed in Turkey’s way during membership negotiations.
But Turkey cannot be indifferent to the tragedy engulfing its southern neighbors.
The Arab world’s pain is acutely felt, owing to Turkey’s historical, religious, and emotional bonds with these countries.
Moreover, economic ties and sheer proximity mean that Turkey’s prosperity depends, to some degree at least, on that of the Middle East.
In recent years, there was hope that Turkey could help by serving as a model of a successful economy and well-functioning democracy; but recent events have raised doubts.
In fact, Turkey must overcome four sources of internal tension if it is to continue to thrive economically, consolidate its democracy, and act as a compelling example to others.
The first and most serious source of tension stems from the need to recognize Kurdish identity as a fully legitimate part of the Turkish Republic.
Those who wish to express a Kurdish identity, as well as all other citizens, must be confident that, while all remain committed to national unity, Turkey is a country in which diversity can thrive.
Second, there is an underlying historical tension between the large Sunni majority and the Alevi-Bektashi minority, loosely linked to Shia Islam.
Third, there is the difference between those who adhere to the tradition of political Islam and those who uphold the strict secularism that came with the republic.
Often this social “divide” intersects with the Sunni-Alevi cleavage, as the Alevis have increasingly aligned themselves with the political left.
Finally, there is a growing perception of partisanship within the public administration.
Building independent, non-partisan regulatory bodies was one of the key pillars of the 2001-2002 reform program.
But these reforms have been rolled back recently, with independent regulatory authorities again coming under the control of government ministries (though it seems that the central bank has retained much of its autonomy).
As the perception of non-partisanship in public administration has diminished, proximity to those in power has become another source of tension.
Turkey benefits from republican reflexes and values that have been built over decades, as well as from humanist wisdom anchored in centuries of history.
Yet, given the regional context, Turkey’s internal tensions now represent a serious threat.
All sides must manage these tensions with great care and caution.
Respect for diversity and individual freedom, and concern for generating growth and jobs in an atmosphere of social peace, must be guiding principles.
Healing the wounds to which all sides have at times contributed, and practicing forgiveness, should be the order of the day.
A spiral of frustration and antagonism must not be allowed to develop.
Turkey must look carefully at the catastrophe unfolding around it in the Middle East.
Humanitarian help is necessary, and Turkey is providing it generously, in ways that should serve as an example for Western countries.
But Turkey’s political leaders, opinion shapers, and citizens must also recognize that the only protection against a similar disaster at home is a vibrant democracy, a fully professional public administration, and a tolerant society embodying pride and affection for the country’s diversity.
Others will not protect Turkey; some may even promote strife within its borders (historical examples of such tactics abound).
Turkey alone can protect itself, and only by upholding truly democratic behavior at home and pursuing an external policy that promotes peace and democracy but does not take sides in the region’s ongoing battles, particularly between Sunni and Shia.
Fortunately, there is hope.
The Gezi Park demonstrators who in June protested peacefully against the use of excessive police force by simply standing still also protested peacefully, years ago, against the ban on the headscarf then in effect in Turkey’s universities.
This kind of concern for the rights of all is a hallmark of Turkey’s young generation.
Similarly, when the outgoing governor of Van sent a farewell message last month to the largely Kurdish-speaking people in his southeastern province, he delivered it in Kurdish – and received warm wishes in return.
A large majority of Turkey’s citizens share such generosity of spirit.
That is why, despite serious difficulties, Turkey has a good chance of overcoming its internal tensions and becoming the example that its Middle East neighbors (and perhaps a few of its European neighbors as well) so desperately need.
Turkey’s Middle Eastern Road to Europe
ISTANBUL – Just a few years ago, Europe headed Turkey’s agenda.
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s newly elected government had embarked on a series of ambitious reforms to meet the European Union’s political criteria for membership.
At the end of 2004, the EU decided to initiate accession talks.
But pro-European euphoria proved short-lived: for all practical purposes, the accession negotiations are now at an impasse.
Euro-skepticism is now at an all-time high in Turkey, fueled by some European political leaders’ rhetoric opposing Turkey’s accession, and by the EU’s own failure to dispel doubts about the feasibility of Turkey’s eventual membership.
Domestic support for EU accession was 70% at the start of the negotiations, but is now closer to 40%.
Not surprisingly, Turkey’s government has also lost its appetite for EU-related reforms.
For more than two years, the European Commission has found little positive to say in its annual progress reports on political reform.
Yet, just as Europe is looking more distant, the Middle East is looming larger, as Turkey shifts its attention from Brussels to Beirut and beyond.
The frustrations of dealing with an undecided Europe have led Turkish policymakers to focus their efforts on an area where the expected return on their investment is more immediate and more concrete.
In fact, whereas Erdoğan recently visited many Middle East countries – Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Algeria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Iraq – until this month, he had not been to Brussels since 2005.
Turkey was traditionally a bystander in Middle East politics.
Its leaders believed that there was little to be contributed or gained by getting involved in the region’s problems, and that Turkey’s Ottoman legacy would leave its Arab neighbors suspicious.
But developments in recent years have enabled Turkey to become a more active player in the region, and to score several diplomatic successes.
Turkey was instrumental in bringing about an end to Lebanon’s factional strife, and its overtures to Syria – undertaken despite warnings from the United States – have paid off handsomely.
Turkey was able not only to defuse the international tensions surrounding its Arab neighbor, but also to engineer the start of direct talks between Syria and Israel.
Such activism has been even more pronounced concerning Iran, with Turkish leaders multiplying diplomatic efforts in recent months to help ease the nuclear standoff with the West.
Turkey, more fearful of the regional repercussions of a nuclear Iran than of any direct threat it would pose, went as far as to host a visit by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad last August.
Turkey’s ability to make headway in the Middle East reflects the erosion of US legitimacy and lack of EU influence.
The US lost its ability to play a more constructive role in the region following its ill-fated intervention in Iraq, while the Bush administration’s neo-conservative “freedom agenda” for the Arab world also backfired.
While the US initially distanced itself from the more autocratic Arab leaders in a bid to support homegrown democratic alternatives, when the only realistic alternative turned out to be political Islam, America quickly returned to its traditional policy of supporting the status quo .
Unlike the US, the EU’s difficulties stem not from a perceived lack of legitimacy or crude attempts at promoting democracy, but from a real lack of unity and, therefore, influence.
The absence of a common denominator among EU governments’ positions has hardly been conducive to the emergence of the cogent and reliable diplomacy needed to address the Middle East’s deep problems.
In these circumstances, Turkey has been able to leverage both its regional ties and its standing in the transatlantic community to play a more instrumental role vis-à-vis its southern neighbors.
Two additional factors further enhance Turkey’s potential for regional influence.
First, the rise of an Arab political class that is more influenced by religion than by secular nationalism has eroded the main structural barrier to Turkish engagement.
The Ottoman legacy of a working state structure, tolerant of religion, has begun to be viewed in a more favorable light, and the contemporary Turkish model, with its ability to nurture a democracy-friendly Islam, is suddenly in demand.
Second, Turkey has been more prepared than ever to take advantage of these fundamental shifts.
Erdoğan’s ruling AKP traces its roots to political Islam, and many of its leaders’ social networks are in Islamic countries – in stark contrast to the secular style of Turkey’s previous leaders, who proudly displayed their Western identity.
As a result, formal and informal links between the new Turkish political élite and the Arab world have been easier to forge.
There can be no doubt that growing foreign-policy activism, especially in relation to the Middle East, has begun to enhance Turkey’s role and influence in its own region.
Indeed, Turkey is now firmly set to become a regional power, with its recent election to the UN Security Council a further testimony to its diplomatic prowess.
But does Turkey’s shift of focus southward and toward regional power status come at the expense of the country’s EU ambitions?
For optimists, Turkey’s growing regional influence enhances its value for the EU.
But this assumes that Europe is willing and able to benefit from what Turkey has to offer.
In other words, this strategy is compatible with EU accession only if the EU strengthens its own capacity for concerted action on foreign policy.
In that case, Turkey’s membership would not, as European federalists argue, lead to a weaker Europe. On the contrary, it would make Europe a more influential and capable world power.
Turkey’s Nation of Faiths
ANKARA – After decades of official neglect and mistrust, Turkey has taken several steps to ensure the rights of the country’s non-Muslim religious minorities, and thus to guarantee that the rule of law is applied equally for all Turkish citizens, regardless of individuals’ religion, ethnicity, or language.
Turkey’s religious minorities include Greek Orthodox, Armenian, Assyrian, Kaldani, and other Christian denominations, as well as Jews, all of whom are integral parts of Turkish society.
As part of the Turkish government’s new initiative to end any sort of discrimination against these non-Muslim communities, President Abdullah Gül has emphasized that message by receiving Bartholemew, the Greek-Orthodox Patriarch of Istanbul, and by visiting a church and a synagogue in Hatay – a first by a Turkish president.
In August 2009, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan met with leaders of religious minorities on Büyükada, the largest of the Prince Islands in the Sea of Marmara, and listened to their problems and concerns, a clear signal of his government’s intent to buttress their sense of civil inclusion.
As Deputy Prime Minister, I met with representatives of religious minorities in March 2010, and visited the Armenian and Greek Orthodox Patriarchies in 2010 and 2011.
Likewise, Turkey’s minister for European Union affairs, Egemen Bağış, has met with these communities’ leaders on several occasions.
Beyond establishing warm relations between the Turkish government and the country’s religious minorities, official policy has been changing as well.
In May 2010, Prime Minister Erdoğan issued an official statement that warned public servants and citizens against any discrimination against religious minorities, and that emphasized the absolute equality of Turkey’s non-Muslim citizens.
But the groundwork for the initiative of recent years was laid long before.
In August 2003, the Erdoğan-led government introduced legal changes to resolve property-rights issues related to religious minority associations.
For the first time in the Republic’s history, 365 landholdings and buildings belonging to the minority communities were legally registered under their name.
In 2008, the government, despite fierce opposition from other political parties, changed the Law of Associations and allowed religious-minority associations to purchase real estate (and to receive contributions, regardless of size, from abroad).
Then, in August 2011, an important amendment to the Associations law mandated the return of more than 350 properties to religious minorities.
As part of these changes, the Greek-Orthodox Girls School in Beyoğlu, Istanbul, and the Jewish Community Center in Izmir have been granted legal status, ending a century-old dispute.
Even before that, in November 2010, the Greek-Orthodox Orphanage on Halki Island was returned to the Greek-Orthodox Patriarchy.
In order to facilitate their religious duties, the Orthodox metropolitans were granted Turkish citizenship.
Furthermore, the Associations Council, the country’s highest authority on religious associations, now includes for the first time a non-Muslim member representing minority faiths.
Moreover, the Directorate-General of Associations has been charged with the task of renovating houses of worship used by religious minorities, including the historic Aya Nikola Church in Gökçeada Çanakkale, and the Assyrian Catholic Church and Greek Catholic Church in Iskenderun.
A number of other churches and synagogues are also under renovation.
The authorities have taken many other historically and symbolically important steps as well.
The Ministry of Culture and Tourism has renovated the Panagia Sümela Monastery, a 1,600-year-old church in Trabzon on the Black Sea coast.
The first mass in decades was held in August 2010, led by Bartholomew and attended by hundreds of worshippers from Greece, Russia, Georgia, Europe, the United States, and Turkey.
Another milestone was the renovation and opening of the 1,100-year old Armenian Aghtamar Church in March 2007.
The first mass in 95 years was held in the church, led by the Armenian Archbishop Aram Ateşyan and attended by thousands of worshippers.
These measures have been taken to address the long-standing problems of Turkey’s non-Muslim religious minorities.
Turkish Muslims have lived with Jewish and Christian communities for centuries and treated them with respect and compassion.
We are determined to solve their remaining problems, and we believe that we can do so through mutual trust and cooperation.
Turkey’s Jews and Christians are full citizens with equal rights, and we will work to ensure that this reality is recognized in all areas of the country’s life.
Turkey’s New Course
CHICAGO – Turkey has recently been at the forefront of international economic and political debates.
On the one hand, despite the economic crisis engulfing neighboring Europe, Turkey remains the world’s second-fastest growing economy, after China.
On the other hand, there is almost no issue on the global agenda – from Iraq and Afghanistan to Somalia, Iran, and the Arab Spring, and from sustainable development to a dialogue among civilizations – on which Turkey is not playing a visible role.
This is a rather new phenomenon.
Until a decade ago, Turkey was regarded as no more than a staunch NATO ally.
That began to change in 2002, when an era of political stability dawned, giving rise to a vision for a stronger Turkey – and a firm commitment to realizing that vision.
To this end, Turkey’s governments since 2002 implemented bold economic reforms that paved the way for sustainable growth and provided a firewall against the financial crisis that hit in 2008.
As a result, in less than a decade, GDP has tripled, making Turkey the world’s 16th largest economy.
Moreover, the country benefits from strong public finances, prudent monetary policy, sustainable debt dynamics, a sound banking system, and well-functioning credit markets.
At the same time, we expanded the scope of individual rights, which had long been subordinated to security concerns.
We streamlined civil-military relations, guaranteed social and cultural rights, and attended to the problems of ethnic and religious minorities.
These reforms transformed Turkey into a vibrant democracy and a more stable society, at peace with itself and able to view its external environment in a different light.