But, despite modest material support, the US could not sustain a government that could not sustain itself.
Rather than the dominos falling following America’s retreat from Saigon in 1975, a Vietnam-Cambodian War ensued.
This in turn stimulated China’s unsuccessful intervention in North Vietnam.
The withdrawal by all of these invading armies to the recognized international boundaries demonstrated that nationalist forces were dominant in the region, not communist solidarity.
None of these American exits was without consequence.
But, while the US suffered costs to its reputation around the world, the supposed advantages from this for America’s opponents proved illusory.
America’s departure from Mesopotamia will likewise put the burden of problem solving onto Iraqis and other regional players, leaving the US offshore to assist when and where it deems appropriate.
History suggests that, in fits and starts, Iraq, like Vietnam and Lebanon, will find itself able to sort out its own affairs.
Trump’s Deplorables
NEW YORK – Hillary Clinton, the Democratic US presidential nominee, recently described supporters of her opponent, Donald Trump, as a “basket of deplorables.”
It was neither a tactful nor an elegant phrase, and she later apologized for her remark.
But she was more right than wrong.
Trump has attracted many supporters whose views on race, for example, are indeed deplorable.
The problem is that many of these deplorable voters are also relatively uneducated, which makes Clinton’s remark look snobbish.
Alas, the United States has too many relatively uneducated people.
Among developed countries, the US ranks low in terms of literacy, general knowledge, and science.
Japanese, South Koreans, Dutch, Canadians, and Russians score consistently higher.
This is at least partly the result of leaving education too much to the market: those with money are highly educated, and those with insufficient means are not educated enough.
So far, it seems clear that Clinton appeals to better-educated urban voters, while Trump attracts mainly less-educated white men, many of whom in earlier generations would have been Democrat-voting coal miners or industrial workers.
Does this mean that there is a link between education – or the lack of it – and the appeal of a dangerous demagogue?
One of the most remarkable things about Trump is the extent of his own ignorance, despite his high educational attainment, and the fact that he seems to benefit from flaunting it.
Perhaps it is easier for a loud-mouthed ignoramus to convince large numbers of people whose knowledge of the world is as slight as his own.
But this is to assume that factual truth matters in the rhetoric of a populist agitator.
Many of his supporters don’t seem to care much about reasoned argument – that is for the liberal snobs.
Emotions count more, and the prime emotions that demagogues manipulate, in the US and elsewhere, are fear, resentment, and distrust.
This was also true in Germany when Hitler came to power.
But the Nazi Party in its early days did not find the bulk of its support among the least educated.
Germany was more highly educated than other countries, on average, and the most enthusiastic Nazis included schoolteachers, engineers, and doctors, as well as provincial small businessmen, white-collar workers, and farmers.
Urban factory workers and conservative Catholics were, on the whole, less susceptible to Hitler’s blandishments than many more highly educated Protestants.
Low educational standards do not explain Hitler’s rise.
Fear, resentment, and distrust ran very high in Weimar Germany, after the humiliation of wartime defeat and amid a devastating economic depression.
But the racial prejudices whipped up by Nazi propagandists were not the same as the ones we see among many Trump supporters today.
The Jews were seen as a sinister force that was dominating the elite professions: bankers, professors, lawyers, news media, or entertainment.
They were the so-called back-stabbers who prevented Germany from being great again.
The Trump supporters are showing a similar animus against symbols of the elite, such as Wall Street bankers, “mainstream” media, and Washington insiders.
But their xenophobia is directed against poor Mexican immigrants, blacks, or Middle Eastern refugees, who are perceived as freeloaders depriving honest (read white) Americans of their rightful place in the social pecking order.
It is a question of relatively underprivileged people in a globalizing, increasingly multi-cultural world, resenting those who are even less privileged.
In the US today, as in the Weimar Republic, the resentful and the fearful have so little trust in prevailing political and economic institutions that they follow a leader who promises maximum disruption.
By cleaning out the stables, it is hoped, greatness will return.
In Hitler’s Germany, this hope existed among all classes, whether elite or plebeian.
In Trump’s America, it thrives mostly among the latter.
In the US and Europe, today’s world looks less scary to more affluent and better educated voters, who benefit from open borders, cheap migrant labor, information technology, and a rich mixture of cultural influences.
Likewise, immigrants and ethnic minorities who seek to improve their lot have no interest in joining a populist rebellion directed mainly against them, which is why they will vote for Clinton.
Trump must thus rely on disaffected white Americans who feel that they are being left behind.
The fact that enough people feel that way to sustain such an unsuitable presidential candidate is an indictment of US society.
This does have something to do with education – not because well-educated people are immune to demagogy, but because a broken education system leaves too many people at a disadvantage.
In the past, there were enough industrial jobs for less-educated voters to make a decent living.
Now that those jobs are vanishing in post-industrial societies, too many people feel that they have nothing more to lose.
This is true in many countries, but it matters more in the US, where putting a bigoted demagogue in charge would do great damage not only to that country, but also to all countries trying to hold onto their freedoms in an increasingly perilous world.
America’s Exploding Deficit
CAMBRIDGE – Two recent pieces of budget news are a grim reminder of the perilous state of fiscal policy in the United States.
President Barack Obama’s Office of Management and Budget announced that the federal government’s deficit this fiscal year will be about $600 billion, up by $162 billion from 2015, an increase of more than 35%.
And the annual Long-Term Budget Outlook produced by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) predicts that, with no change in fiscal policy, federal government debt will rise from 75% of GDP to 86% a decade from now, and then to a record 141% in 2046, near levels in Italy, Portugal, and Greece.
Although the US debt-to-GDP ratio doubled in the past decade, the Obama administration and Congress ignored the problem, focusing instead on the annual deficit’s decline since 2012 and the relative stability of the deficit as a share of GDP.
The Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policy has driven down the cost of the net interest on the federal debt to just 1.4% of GDP, despite the increase in the volume of the debt.
But as interest rates normalize and the volume of debt grows, the cost of servicing the interest on the national debt is projected to increase to 5.8% of GDP.
That projected interest cost may be much less than it would actually be if the rest of the deficit and debt forecast turns out to be correct.
With a federal debt of 141% of GDP, that 5.8%-of-GDP interest cost implies an average nominal interest rate of just 4% and, given the CBO’s inflation forecast, a real interest rate of about 2% – similar to historic rates when the debt ratio was less than 40% of GDP.
But investors in Treasury bonds might demand a much higher interest rate in exchange for loading up their portfolios with US debt.
In that case, the interest cost and the debt would be much greater.
The fact that more than half of the publicly held US government debt is now owned by foreign investors might make the interest rate even more sensitive to the debt’s relative size.
Foreign investors might fear that the government could adopt policies that reduced the real value of their holdings.
While the US government would never explicitly default, it could adopt policies such as deducting income tax on interest payments, which would disadvantage foreign holders and depress the value of the bonds.
Moreover, foreign investors might fear that very high debt levels could lead to inflationary monetary policy, which would depreciate the value of the dollar and lower the real value of their bonds.
Here is an amazing and disturbing implication of the CBO’s forecast.
By 2046, the projected outlays for the “mandatory” entitlement programs (Social Security and the major health programs), plus interest on the debt, would absorb more than all of the revenue that the government would collect with current tax rates.
A small deficit (1.6% of GDP) would emerge even before spending on defense and other annually appropriated “discretionary” programs.
There is no way to offset the growth of the mandatory programs by slowing the growth of defense and other discretionary outlays.
Total defense spending is now just 3.2% of GDP and is expected to decline to 2.6% over the next ten years and to remain at that level for the next 20 years.
That would be the lowest defense share of GDP since before World War II.
The same reduction is projected for all non-defense discretionary programs, also a record-low share of GDP.
The bright spot in this bleak picture is that it would not take much in terms of annual deficit reductions to prevent the rise in the debt ratio, or even to bring it back to where it was a decade ago.
Reducing the annual deficit by 1.7% of GDP by any combination of reduced spending and higher revenue would, if begun in 2017, prevent an increase from the current 75% debt-to-GDP ratio.
And reducing the deficit by 3% a year would reverse the debt trajectory and bring it back to where it was in the decades before the recession.
Neither of the presidential candidates has indicated either a plan or an inclination to reverse the projected rise in the national debt.
But it should be a top priority for whoever moves into the White House next year.
Given the need to act quickly to avoid the worst-case scenario, there is no excuse for waiting.
America’s Anti-Environmentalists
As an American, I am appalled, ashamed, and embarrassed by my country’s lack of leadership in dealing with global warming.
Scientific evidence on the risks mounts by the day, as most recently documented in England’s magisterial Stern Report .
Yet, despite the fact that the United States accounts for roughly 25% of all man-made global carbon emissions, Americans show little will or inclination to temper their manic consumption.
The first George W. Bush administration was probably right to refuse to sign the so-called “Kyoto Protocol,” albeit for the wrong reasons.
Among other problems, the Kyoto Protocol does not go far enough towards redistributing carbon emission rights towards developing countries.
But why can’t the US bring itself to raise taxes on gasoline and other sources of carbon emission like coal burning power plants?
It is not like the US government, running a huge deficit despite an economic boom, does not need the money.
Many people seem to think that the Bush administration is the problem.
Put a Texas oilman and his buddies in charge and what do you expect, conservation?
Unfortunately, that is a facile excuse.
American citizens’ resistance to moderating energy consumption for the sake of the global environment is much more deeply embedded.
Consider former US Vice President Al Gore, for example, whose documentary film on global warming, An Inconvenient Truth , is celebrated for its unflinching look at how fossil fuel consumption is leading mankind to the brink of catastrophe.
The evidence on global warming is considerably more muddled than Gore’s film suggests, but the basic problem is real.
Unfortunately, however, Gore was not successful in carrying the torch on global warming when he was a politician.
One cannot commend the 1990’s Clinton-Gore administration for taking any brave steps aimed at radically reducing carbon emissions.
Small wonder: the American public is fiercely resistant to anything that seriously forces them to compromise on their energy-burning, gas-guzzling lifestyle.
It is not just politicians who have failed to provide leadership here.
The venerable
Until Americans suck it up and start fixing global environmental problems that they, more than anyone, have caused, it will be difficult to get the wholehearted support of the rest of the world.
Developing countries ask why they should pay attention to global warming if rich countries are not prepared to curtail their own emissions sharply?
Why should poor countries worry about how deforestation contributes to global warming when rich countries remain so profligate?
The scientific evidence suggests that carbon emissions from anywhere in the world have about the same impact on global warming.
For this reason, a wide range of economists favor a uniform (“harmonized”) global tax that would tax carbon emissions equally everywhere in the world, and from whatever source – whether coal, oil, or gas, and whether consumers or businesses.
Such a tax is the most flexible and market-friendly approach, and would have the least impact on economic growth.
Instead, the complex system of quotas favored by the Europeans and embodied in the Kyoto Protocol is likely to lead to much larger inefficiencies and costs.
For this reason, England’s Stern Report is probably far too optimistic when it calculates that an eclectic approach to reducing carbon emissions will cost the world only 1% per year of income.
But the Stern Report is still right to argue that the potential risks of continued inaction are far greater.
America’s unwillingness to take the lead on environmental issues may some day be regarded as one of the country’s most profound political failures.
One hopes that it changes course soon, before we all are forced to wear swimsuits to work.
A New Low for China Bashing
NEW HAVEN – As America’s election season nears its finish, the debate seems to have come unhinged.
Nowhere is that more evident than in the fixation on China – singled out by both President Barack Obama and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, as a major source of pressure bearing down on American workers and their families.
Get tough with China, both stressed in the presidential debates, and the pain will ease.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Consider the following charges:
Currency manipulation.
Since China reformed its exchange-rate regime in July 2005, the renminbi has risen 32% relative to the dollar and about 30% in inflation-adjusted terms against a broad basket of currencies.
These are hardly trivial amounts, and more renminbi appreciation can be expected in the years to come.
Unlike Japan, which was pressured by the West into a large yen revaluation in 1985 (the “Plaza Accord”), the Chinese have opted to move gradually and deliberately.
American officials call this “manipulation,” arguing that market forces would have resulted in a sharper renminbi appreciation than has occurred.
Fixated on stability – a concept alien to US politicians and policymakers – the Chinese prefer, instead, to play a more active role in managing the adjustment of their currency.
I call that prudence – perhaps even wisdom.
Two lost decades later, the guinea pig, Japan, might have a view on which approach works best.
Outsourcing and intellectual property.
Notwithstanding some recent modest improvements in the US labor market, America’s job situation remains terrible.
Private-sector employment is still down 4.1 million from its January 2008 peak.
Yet there is not a shred of evidence to support bipartisan claims that this ongoing carnage is the result of outsourcing US manufacturing jobs to China.
While the manufacturing sector’s share of private employment fell from 11.9% in January 2008 to 10.7% in September 2012, this is only a small portion of the enormous secular decline since the early 1970’s, when manufacturing accounted for more than 30% of private-sector employment.
Weak demand – especially the post-crisis collapse in consumer spending growth – is a far more likely culprit than China in explaining the recent hiring shortfall.
China, for its part, has become a major workhorse of globalization – an assembly hub for inputs produced by multi-country supply chains and an offshore efficiency solution for hard-pressed Western multinational corporations.
About 50% of all exports leaving China have been processed previously by other economies, and close to 60% are shipped by Chinese subsidiaries of “foreign-invested enterprises.”
While these trends benefit Chinese workers, they also support America and other countries by holding down inflation and making it possible for their companies to cope with tough competitive pressures. They allow beleaguered American families to stretch their paychecks (think Wal-Mart).
And they have not stopped innovative Western companies from putting their intellectual property and new technologies on the line in China in order to deliver spectacular new products to US customers (think Apple).
The trade deficit.
Yes, the US runs a massive trade deficit with China – around $295 billion in 2011, or fully 40% of America’s total merchandise trade gap of $738 billion.
Republicans and Democrats alike argue that this is the crux of America’s jobs problem.
After all, trade deficits mean job losses.
Because the biggest share of the US trade gap is with China, a country vilified as a currency-manipulating cheater, the bilateral trade deficit has become the lightening rod for China bashers.
It is what has driven Obama to go to the mat with China on recent disputes within the World Trade Organization and on restrictions on Chinese investment in Oregon wind farms, and what has led to saber-rattling by Romney on currency manipulation and trade sanctions.
But neither candidate acknowledges the much bigger elephant in the room.
In 2011, the US had trade deficits with 98 countries.
The other 97 deficits did not magically appear.
They are all part of an enormous multilateral trade deficit that stems from America’s unprecedented shortfall of saving – a depreciation-adjusted “net national saving rate” (combining businesses, households, and the government sector) that has been negative since 2008.
Lacking in savings and wanting to grow, the US runs massive current-account and multilateral trade deficits in order to import other countries’ surplus savings.
This goes to the heart of the folly of China bashing.
No leading country in world history has persistently maintained a negative saving rate.
Trade deficits – with China or any other country – are part of the price that America pays for its unbridled profligacy.
Unless and until the US faces up to its chronic aversion to saving – namely, by reducing massive federal budget deficits and encouraging the rebuilding of severely depleted household saving – multilateral trade deficits will persist.
Simple arithmetic and basic economics tell us that a multilateral problem cannot be addressed by a bilateral solution.
Politicians have a penchant for simple and powerful messages.
Yet those messages are often more spin than substance.
American families are hurting, and elected officials want to pin the blame on China, thereby deflecting attention from the difficult task of rebuilding saving, restoring competitiveness, and living within the country’s means.
Indeed, one could argue that it is the American public that is being manipulated by the erroneous charges leveled at China.
Fortunately, the campaign season is nearly over.
Left unanswered, however, is what comes next.
China bashers typically change their tune after a presidential election.
But there is nothing typical about the pressures that are likely to continue squeezing American families long after November 6.
Both Obama and Romney run the risk of painting themselves into a corner when it comes to China.
That could take all of us to the edge of a slippery slope.
America’s leaders need to come clean with the American people – before it is too late.
America’s Coming Social Democracy?
Almost all of the world’s developed countries consider themselves, and are, social democracies: mixed economies with very large governments performing a wide array of welfare and social insurance functions, and removing large chunks of wealth and commodity distribution from the market.
The United States is something different. Or is it?
Whatever it has been in the past, the US in the future will have to choose whether, and how much, it will be a social democracy.
Once upon a time, according to mythology at least, America had little downward mobility.
On the contrary, before the Civil War you could start out splitting rails, light out for the Western Territory, make a success of yourself on the frontier, and wind up as President – if you were named Abraham Lincoln.
In the generation after World War II, you could secure a blue-collar unionized manufacturing job or climb to the top of a white collar bureaucracy that offered job security, relatively high salaries, and long, stable career ladders.
This was always half myth.
Setting out for the Western Territory was expensive. Covered wagons were not cheap.
Even in the first post-WWII generation, only a minority of Americans – a largely white, male minority – found well-paying stable jobs at large, unionized, capital-intensive manufacturing companies like GM, GE, or AT&T.
But if this story was half myth, it was also half true, particularly in the years after WWII.
Largely independent of education or family, those Americans who did value stability and security could grasp it in the form of jobs with “a future.”
Even for those not so lucky, economic risks were usually fairly low: the unemployment rate for married men during the 1960’s averaged 2.7%, and finding a new job was a relatively simple matter.
It was during this era – roughly from 1948 to 1973 – that sociologists found that a majority of Americans had come to define themselves not as working class, but as middle class.
The post-WWII period stands as a reference point in America’s collective memory, but it was in all likelihood an aberration.
In the early postwar decades, foreign competition exerted virtually no pressure on the economy, owing to the isolation of America’s continental market from the devastation of WWII.
At the same time, the war left enormous pent-up demand for the products of mass production: cars, washing machines, refrigerators, lawn mowers, television sets, and more.
Government policy back then began with a permanent military program of spending and R&D and continued through massive public works program and suburbanization, underpinned by the Federal Highway Program and subsidized home ownership loans from the Federal Housing Administration.
The regulatory institutions and behavioral norms that originated in the New Deal and developed during WWII came into full force: social security, a system of unionized labor relations, market regulation.
Favorable macroeconomic circumstances, the absence of foreign competition, a system of government support and regulation, and large-scale private provision of what in Europe would have been public social insurance all combined to give post-WWII America many of social democracy’s benefits without the costs. The economy did not stagger under the weight of ample benefits or high taxes.
Americans – at least white, male Americans – did not have to worry about tradeoffs between security and opportunity, because the US offered the advantages of both.
Corporate welfare capitalism substituted for what in Europe would have been government provided social democracy.
America was thus a special place.
It had its cake and ate it, too: a combination of security with opportunity and entrepreneurship.
It seemed that this was the natural order of things.
Hence there was little pressure for government-sponsored social democracy: Why bother?
What would it add?
Now things are very different.
The typical American employer is no longer General Motors.
It is Wal-Mart.
Private businesses are providing their workers with less and less in the form of defined-benefit pensions, health insurance, and other forms of insurance against life’s economic risks.
Sharply rising income inequality has raised the stakes of the economic game.
A government that cannot balance its own finances cannot be relied on to provide macroeconomic stability.
Indeed, former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve Paul Volcker sees the US as so macroeconomically vulnerable as to be running a 75% chance of a full-fledged dollar crisis over the next several years.
The coming generation will be one of massive downward mobility for many Americans.
The political struggles that this generates will determine whether America will move more closely to the social democratic norm for developed countries, or find some way to accept and rationalize its existence as a country of high economic risk and deep divisions of income and wealth.
Syria and September 11
PARIS – By chance, it appears that the US Congress will decide on or around September 11 whether to endorse President Barack Obama’s proposal to respond militarily to the Syrian government’s use of poison gas against civilians.
The shadow of two previous events that took place on September 11 looms over the outcome – indeed, over the fact that the question is even being considered at all.
Long before September 11 became a day of infamy in the United States, it acquired similar significance in Chile, where 40 years ago, on September 11, 1973, the armed forces, led by General Augusto Pinochet, overthrew the country’s democratically elected government.
More than any other event of our era, that violent coup was responsible for launching both the contemporary global movement for human rights and the American movement to promote human rights internationally.
In part, this reflected the new regime’s cruelty.
More than three thousand people were murdered or “disappeared” during Pinochet’s rule, thousands more were tortured by his forces, and tens of thousands were forcibly exiled.
To an even greater extent, however, the motivation that spurred the human-rights movement was revulsion worldwide, including in the US, against American aid to Pinochet’s forces, a policy directed by President Richard Nixon and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
In the US, members of Congress turned the coup into a platform for efforts to promote human rights.
They condemned developments in Chile, held hearings about the importance of promoting human rights, and adopted legislation – over President Gerald Ford’s veto – requiring that human-rights standards guide US foreign policy.
A slightly revised version of that legislation remains in force.
Obama’s proclamation that the use of chemical weapons in Syria would cross a “red line” – and his implicit threat to use force if that line were crossed – reflects the commitment that the US has made during the past four decades to promote human rights worldwide.
The events of September 11, 2001, are also playing a crucial role in deciding the question of a punitive strike against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
One consequence of the terrorist attacks 12 years ago is that Americans and others in the West became aware that developments in the Middle East could affect their own safety and security.
Initially, the attacks unleashed a strong desire to retaliate, which later gave way to caution about intervention, owing to unforeseen consequences.
In Britain, continuing intense resentment over the deceptions that led to the country’s engagement in the Iraq war seems to be the main reason for Parliament’s refusal to back a strike against Syria.
Wariness of another Middle East war has also underpinned Obama’s unwillingness to go beyond a one-time punitive strike on Syria – with some in Congress opposed to even that.
Though Congress must guard against repeating its disastrous mistake in 2003, when it supported the war in Iraq, the commitment to promote human rights that the US made following September 11, 1973, seems a more appropriate standard for weighing Obama’s proposal for US military action in Syria.
Maintaining the international prohibition on the use of chemical weapons is an urgent concern.
The Assad regime’s culpability for using these weapons is not in doubt.
If the US Congress deals with Obama’s proposal responsibly, and does not yield to those motivated by a partisan desire to embarrass him at every turn, it will enhance its own claim to recapture the constitutional power to authorize military conflict – a power that has been disregarded more often than not in the past half-century.
A critical part of its role must be to consider with care the limits that should be placed on a punitive strike.
The war in Iraq was misconceived from the start, because it was an attempt to avenge the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks by invading and occupying a country that had no part in them.
Obama’s proposal to strike Syria, by contrast, is an attempt to enforce an important human-rights norm by directly punishing – through means that do not involve invasion and occupation – those who committed a gross violation.
It restores human rights to the central place in American foreign policy set forth after September 11, 1973.
America’s Constrained Choice
NEWPORT BEACH – The conventional wisdom about the November presidential election in the United States is only partly correct.
Yes, economic issues will play a large role in determining the outcome.
But the next step in the argument – that the winner of an increasingly ugly contest will have the luxury of pursuing significantly different policies from his opponent – is much more uncertain.
By the time the next presidential term starts in January 2013, and contrary to the current narratives advanced by the Obama and Romney campaigns, the incumbent will find himself with limited room for maneuver on economic policy.
Indeed, the potential differences for America are elsewhere, and have yet to be adequately understood by voters.
They center on the social policies that would accompany a broadly similar set of economic measures; and, here, the differences between the candidates are consequential.
Whoever wins will face an economy growing at a sluggish 2% or less next year, with a nagging risk of stalling completely.
Unemployment will still be far too high, and almost half of it will be hard-to-solve, long-term joblessness – and even more if we count (as we should) the millions of Americans who have dropped out of the labor force.
The financial side of the economy will also be a source of concern.
The fiscal deficit will continue to flirt with the 10%-of-GDP level, adding to worries about the country’s medium-term debt dynamics.
The banking sector will still be “de-risking,” limiting the flow of credit to small and medium-size companies and undermining hiring and investment in plant and equipment.
And the household sector will be only partly through its painful de-leveraging phase.
The policy front will be equally unsettling.
Having dithered and bickered for too long, the US Congress will find it increasingly difficult to postpone action on these challenges.
Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve’s unusual activism, including an ever-expanding list of experimental measures, will yield fewer benefits and entail growing costs and risks.
The US economy will also be operating in a more difficult global environment.
In the next few months, Europe’s debt crisis will most likely worsen.
With emerging economies (including China) slowing, and with meaningful multilateral policy coordination remaining inadequate, protectionist pressures will mount as major trading powers compete for a stagnant pie.
So, whether President Barack Obama or Mitt Romney prevails in November, the next president will be constrained by the twin need for urgent economic stabilization and longer-term reforms.
And, with headwinds from Europe and a synchronized global slowdown, the candidates will have no choice but to pursue, at least initially, similar economic policies to restore dynamic job creation and financial stability.
In striking the right balance between immediate economic stimulus and medium-term fiscal sustainability, the most urgent step will be to counter properly the looming fiscal cliff, as temporary tax cuts expire and deep, across-the-board spending reductions kick in automatically.
Failure to do so would significantly increase the risk of an outright American recession.
Serious medium-term budget reforms are needed to deal with the legacy of repeated congressional failures.
And, if provided with realistic numbers, the next president will soon recognize that the right mix of tax and spending reforms falls into a much narrower range than today’s competing political narratives suggest.
It is certainly not an either/or proposition.
Fiscal reforms work best in a dynamic economy.
To this end, Obama and Romney will need to lift the impediments to growth and job creation.
Here again – in areas like housing, the labor market, credit intermediation, and infrastructure – there is less room for maneuver than most politicians would like us to believe.
But this does not mean that there is no scope for differences.
There is, and they reflect the fact that general economic tendencies will be accompanied by multi-speed dynamics at many levels.
From persistent differences in unemployment rates depending on skills and education to record-high income and wealth inequalities, each economic decision will be accompanied by the need for social judgment – whether explicit or, more likely, implicit – regarding its distributional impact.
After an “age” of excessive leverage, debt creation, and credit entitlement that culminated in the 2008 global financial crisis, America still faces the tricky challenge of allocating cumulative losses that continuously inhibit investment, jobs, and competitiveness.
Until now, Congress’s excessive political polarization has translated into an approach that has pushed more of the burden of adjustment onto those who are less able to bear it.
In an ideal world, America’s next president would rapidly embark on a two-step approach to restoring job dynamism and financial soundness.
First, he would devise a comprehensive set of economic-policy initiatives that are both feasible and desirable – and, again, the scope for major differences here is limited.
Second, he would accompany this with an explicit set of social policies – and here the potential differences are profound – that addresses the need for equitable burden-sharing.
This is not really an election about such hotly-debated issues as outsourcing, tax increases versus entitlement reforms, government control of production versus unfettered private sector activity, or job creators versus free riders.
It is much more about the accompanying concepts of social fairness, entitlement, equality and, yes, standards of behavior for a rich and civilized society.
This is an election about social responsibility – a society’s obligation to support those who are struggling, through no fault of their own, to find jobs and make ends meet.
It is about protecting the most vulnerable segments of society, including by providing them access to proper health coverage.
It is about reforming an education system that fails America’s young people (and about providing appropriate retraining to those who need it).
Among the numerous issues of fairness and equality, it is about the rich giving back to a system that has brought them unimaginable wealth.
It is here where the differences between Obama and Romney are important.
The sooner the campaign debate pivots to this, the greater the probability that Americans will make a more informed choice and, thus, buy into the collective effort needed to escape national malaise.
America’s Crony Capitalism
Buenos Aires – For 20 years, Americans have denounced the “crony capitalism” of Third World countries, especially in Asia.
But, just as those regions have been improving their public and corporate governance – Hong Kong just witnessed a breakthrough court decision against a telecom tycoon who is the son of the province’s richest and most powerful man – crony capitalism is taking root in the United States, a country that the world long considered the gold standard of a level playing field in business.
The recently completed “stress tests” of US banks are but the latest indication that crony capitalists have now captured Washington, DC.  
It is no surprise that stock markets liked the results of the stress tests that US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner administered to America’s big banks, for the general outcome had been leaked weeks before.
Indeed, most professional investors trashed the tests as dishonest even as their holdings benefited from a rising market.
Even The Wall Street Journal , usually financial markets’ loudest cheerleader, openly disparaged the tests’ integrity. The government had allowed bankers to “negotiate” the results, like a student taking a final examination and then negotiating her grade.
The tests were supposed to reveal the true conditions of banks saddled with unaudited toxic assets in housing loans and financial derivatives. The reasoning behind the tests seemed unimpeachable.
But was it?
As any seasoned banker knows, a well-managed bank should undertake internal “stress tests” regularly as a matter of good housekeeping.
The financial crisis should have mandated a running stress test to keep senior management up to date daily. Why, then, did the US need the government to conduct a financial exercise that bankers themselves could and should have done far better and faster?
The truth is that the tests were not designed to find answers.
Both Wall Street’s chieftains and the Obama administration already knew the truth.
They knew that if the true conditions at many big banks were publicly revealed, many would have been immediately declared bankrupt, necessitating government receivership to stop a tsunami of bank runs.
But the Obama administration did not want to be tagged as “socialist” for nationalizing banks, however temporarily, even though experts such as former US Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker had recommended just that.
Moreover, nationalizing banks would have required dismissing Wall Street captains and their boards for grossly mismanaging their firms.
Wall Street’s titans, however, had convinced Obama and his team that their continued stewardship was essential to getting the world out of its crisis.
They successfully portrayed themselves as victims of a firestorm, rather than as accessories to arson.
Geithner and Larry Summers, Obama’s chief economic advisor, share Wall Street’s culture as protégés of Robert Rubin, the former treasury secretary who went on to serve as a director and senior counselor at Citigroup. Neither man found it difficult to accept the bankers’ absurd logic.
The stress tests were meant to signal to the public that there was no immediate threat of bank failures.
This message, it was hoped, would stabilize the market so that prices for “toxic” assets could rise to a level at which bankers might feel comfortable selling them.
After all, senior bankers had been claiming that these assets were “mispriced,” and that pricing them at market levels would penalize the banks unnecessarily.
So far, Geithner seems to have succeeded in his “tests,” as the stock market has indeed more than stabilized, with prices of bank shares such as Citigroup and Bank of America quadrupling from their lows.
The feared implosion of Wall Street seems to have been avoided.
But no one ever seriously thought that the US would allow Citigroup and Bank of America, to name just two, to fail.
In fact, the stock market bottomed out last winter.
Markets had factored into share prices the belief that the US government would not allow any more banks to collapse.
What the world wanted was an accurate picture of what the banks were worth and “mark-to-market” valuations to guide investors as to how much new capital they needed.
The world also wanted to see the US retaking the high road in reinforcing business ethics and integrity – so lacking under the last administration.
As taxpayers had already put huge sums into rescuing failing banks, with the prospect of more to come, a transparent process to reveal how the money was being used was imperative.
Substantial public rescue funds have reportedly been siphoned off to foreign banks, Goldman Sachs, and staff bonuses for purposes unrelated to protecting public interests.
None of this was either revealed or debunked by Geithner’s tests.
Instead, public servants now appear to be in cahoots with Wall Street to engineer an artificial aura of profitability.
Moreover, the value of toxic assets remains as murky as ever.
Once sacrosanct accounting principles have been amended at Wall Street’s behest in order to allow banks to report essentially whatever they want.
And now negotiated stress test results have been released to “prove” that the banks are a lot healthier.
Calling this a Ponzi scheme might be too harsh.
But few financial professionals have been fooled.
Meanwhile, Wall Street chieftains and their boards of directors have nothing to fear from government. On the contrary, they are now the government’s partners in a joint venture to manage this dishonest scheme.
Like swine flu, crony capitalism has migrated from corrupt Third World countries to America, once the citadel of sound public and private governance.
Is it any wonder that China is perceived as an increasingly credible model for much of the developing world, while the US is now viewed as a symbol of hypocrisy and double standards?
America’s Dangerous Debt Ceiling Debate
NEWPORT BEACH – It has been raised more than 70 times in the last 50 years, mostly without commotion.
It must be raised again this summer if the United States government is to continue paying its bills on time.
But now America’s debt ceiling has become the subject of intense political posturing and touch-and-go negotiations behind closed doors. And, obviously, the outcome has implications that go well beyond the US.
As part of America’s system of checks and balances, Congress gets to do more than just approve the annual federal budget. It also sets a limit on how much debt the US Treasury is allowed to issue.
Beyond this ceiling, the government can spend only from current revenues.
US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner recently informed members of Congress that the government will be in this situation on or around August 2.
Having already officially hit the ceiling, the Treasury is moving money around and tapping various pots of unused funds to pay its bills.
In a few weeks, this “flexibility” will be used up.
With the US government now borrowing around 40% of every dollar it spends, a truly binding debt ceiling would immediately force the government to reduce spending radically and in a disorderly fashion.
Politicians across the political spectrum know that such a situation would unsettle an already fragile US economy, severely weaken the dollar, and raise serious concerns about the country's ability to meet its debt-service obligations, including to the many foreign creditors that the US will need in the future.
Yet, in today’s polarized environment in Washington, Republicans and Democrats are unwilling to compromise – or at least to compromise “too early.”
By holding out, Republicans wish to force President Barack Obama’s administration into massive spending cuts.
Democrats respond that such a one-sided approach would be economically harmful and socially unjust.
In the meantime, both sides risk disrupting transfer payments (including to the elderly) and the provision of public services, as well as eroding further America’s global credit standing.
The overwhelming – and sensible – expectation is that the two parties will compromise and raise the debt ceiling before inflicting serious economic and financial dislocations.
The most recent precedent was the bipartisan agreement reached earlier this year on another fiscal issue that threatened to disrupt the normal functioning of government: the absence of a formally approved budget for this year.
A compromise would allow both parties to declare partial victory, for it would likely entail commitments to cut spending and some steps to make taxation more socially just.
But, like many last-minute agreements, it would have little durable impact.
In effect, the political system would again be kicking the can down the road, with real progress on necessary fiscal reforms expected only after the November 2012 presidential election.
Two scenarios for the timing of an interim compromise are possible, depending on whether it is a one- or two-step process. Most observers expect a one-step process for bipartisan agreement before August 2.
But politicians may need two steps: an initial failure to agree, and then a quick deal in response to the resulting financial-market convulsions.
In the meantime, the Treasury would temporarily re-prioritize and slow outgoing payments.
This two-step process would be similar to what happened in 2008, when Congress was confronted with another cliffhanger: the Bush administration’s request for $700 billion to prevent a financial-market collapse and an economic depression.
Congress initially rejected the measure, but a dramatic 770-point drop in the stock market focused politicians’ minds, bringing them back to the table – and to agreement.
But the two-step scenario involves incremental risks to the US economy, and to its standing in the global system. And the longer America’s politicians take to resolve the debt-ceiling issue, the greater the risk of an inadvertent accident.
This brings us to a third, and even more unsettling possibility: a longer and more protracted negotiation, resulting in greater disruptions to government entitlement payments, other contractual obligations, and public services.
Creditors would then ask many more questions before adding to their already-considerable holdings of US government debt, generating still more headwinds in a US economy that already faces an unemployment crisis and uneven growth.
The next few weeks will provide plenty of political drama.
The baseline expectation, albeit subject to risk, is that Democrats and Republicans will find a way to avoid disruptions that would damage the fragile US economy, but that the compromise will not meaningfully address the need for sensible medium-term fiscal reforms.
Such political paralysis on key economic issues is increasingly unsettling for the US private sector, and for other countries that rely on a strong US at the core of the global economy.
This helps to explain why so many companies continue to hoard cash, rather than investing domestically, and why a growing number of countries want to diversify gradually away from dependence on the dollar as the reserve currency and on US financial markets for intermediation of their hard-earned savings.
The world economy is hard-wired to the assumption of a strong America, and Americans benefit from this.
But the more their politicians argue over the debt ceiling, the greater the risk that the wiring will become irreparably frayed.
America’s Deepening Moral Crisis
NEW YORK – America’s political and economic crisis is set to worsen following the upcoming November elections.
President Barack Obama will lose any hope for passing progressive legislation aimed at helping the poor or the environment.
Indeed, all major legislation and reforms are likely to be stalemated until 2013, following a new presidential election.
An already bad situation marked by deadlock and vitriol is likely to worsen, and the world should not expect much leadership from a bitterly divided United States.
Much of America is in a nasty mood, and the language of compassion has more or less been abandoned.
Both political parties serve their rich campaign contributors, while proclaiming that they defend the middle class.
Neither party even mentions the poor, who now officially make up 15% of the population but in fact are even more numerous, when we count all those households struggling with health care, housing, jobs, and other needs.
The Republican Party recently issued a “Pledge to America” to explain its beliefs and campaign promises.
The document is filled with nonsense, such as the fatuous claim that high taxes and over-regulation explain America’s high unemployment.
It is also filled with propaganda. A quotation by President John F. Kennedy states that high tax rates can strangle the economy, but Kennedy’s was speaking a half-century ago, when the top marginal tax rates were twice what they are today.
Most of all, the Republican platform is devoid of compassion. 
America today presents the paradox of a rich country falling apart because of the collapse of its core values.
American productivity is among the highest in the world.
Average national income per person is about $46,000 – enough not only to live on, but to prosper.
Yet the country is in the throes of an ugly moral crisis.
Income inequality is at historic highs, but the rich claim that they have no responsibility to the rest of society.
They refuse to come to the aid of the destitute, and defend tax cuts at every opportunity.
Almost everybody complains, almost everybody aggressively defends their own narrow and short-term interests, and almost everybody abandons any pretense of looking ahead or addressing the needs of others.
What passes for American political debate is a contest between the parties to give bigger promises to the middle class, mainly in the form of budget-busting tax cuts at a time when the fiscal deficit is already more than 10% of GDP.
Americans seem to believe that they have a natural right to government services without paying taxes.
In the American political lexicon, taxes are defined as a denial of liberty.
There was a time, not long ago, when Americans talked of ending poverty at home and abroad.
Lyndon Johnson’s War on Poverty in the mid-1960’s reflected an era of national optimism and the belief that society should make collective efforts to solve common problems, such as poverty, pollution, and health care. America in the 1960’s enacted programs to rebuild poor communities, to fight air and water pollution, and to ensure health care for the elderly.
Then the deep divisions over Vietnam and civil rights, combined with a surge of consumerism and advertising, seemed to end an era of shared sacrifice for the common good.
For 40 years, compassion in politics receded.
Ronald Reagan gained popularity by cutting social benefits for the poor (claiming that the poor cheated to receive extra payments).
Bill Clinton continued those cuts in the 1990’s.
Today, no politician even dares to mention help for poor people.
The big campaign contributors to both parties pay to ensure that their vested interests dominate political debates.
That means that both parties increasingly defend the interests of the rich, though Republicans do so slightly more than Democrats.
Even a modest tax increase on the rich is unlikely to find support in American politics.
The result of all of this is likely to be a long-term decline of US power and prosperity, because Americans no longer invest collectively in their common future.
America will remain a rich society for a long time to come, but one that is increasingly divided and unstable.
Fear and propaganda may lead to more US-led international wars, as in the past decade.
And what is happening in America is likely to be repeated elsewhere.
America is vulnerable to social breakdown because it is a highly diverse society.
Racism and anti-immigrant sentiments are an important part of the attack on the poor, or at least the reason why so many are willing to heed the propaganda against helping the poor.
As other societies grapple with their own increasing diversity, they may follow the US into crisis.
Swedes recently gave enough votes to a right-wing, anti-immigrant party to give it representation in parliament, reflecting a growing backlash against the rising number of immigrants in Swedish society.
In France, Nicolas Sarkozy’s government has tried to regain popularity with the working class by deporting Roma migrants, a target of widespread hatred and ethnic attacks.
Both examples show that Europe, like the US, is vulnerable to the politics of division, as our societies become more ethnically diverse.
The lesson from America is that economic growth is no guarantee of wellbeing or political stability.
American society has become increasingly harsh, where the richest Americans buy their way to political power, and the poor are abandoned to their fate.
In their private lives, Americans have become addicted to consumerism, which drains their time, savings, attention, and inclination to engage in acts of collective compassion.
The world should beware.
Unless we break the ugly trends of big money in politics and rampant consumerism, we risk winning economic productivity at the price of our humanity.
America’s Economic Stalemate
CAMBRIDGE – The United States appears trapped in a dangerous economic stalemate.&#160; The refusal by both Republicans and Democrats to give ground on the budget is preventing the government from dealing with its massive fiscal deficit and rapidly rising national debt.
Indeed, the Congressional Budget Office projects that the national debt could increase to 82% of GDP over the next ten years – more than double the debt ratio as recently as 2008.
That forecast, moreover, is based on quite optimistic assumptions of strong economic growth and low interest rates.
With slower growth and more normal interest rates, the debt ratio could easily rise to more than 100% in 2021, and exceed 150% by 2030.
A major reason for the accelerating growth in government debt is America’s rapidly aging population and the resulting increase in the cost of the universal pension and health-care programs – Social Security and Medicare.
Most experts believe that limiting the rise in debt will require slowing the growth of these “entitlement” programs and increasing taxes as a share of GDP.
But President Barack Obama and the congressional Democrats oppose any reduction in future entitlement programs, while the Republican presidential candidates and their party’s congressional delegation oppose any increase in tax revenues.
The result is the current stalemate in reducing the fiscal deficit and reversing the growth of the national debt.
Republicans argue that the national debt’s growth should be limited only by cutting government spending.
Although some cuts in traditional outlays should be part of efforts to rein in spending, this approach should be supplemented by reducing “tax expenditures” – the special features of the tax code that subsidize health care, mortgage borrowing, local-government taxes, etc..
Limiting tax expenditures could reduce the annual deficit by as much as 2% of GDP, thereby reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2021 by more than 25 percentage points.
Republicans generally reject this form of spending reduction, because it results in additional tax revenue.
While this method does indeed increase total revenue, the economic effect of limiting tax expenditures is the same as it is under any other method of cutting spending on those programs.
But the Republicans’ opposition to anything that raises revenue means that this key to breaking the budget stalemate won’t be implemented.
The budget cost of Social Security pensions could be gradually reduced by substituting annuities generated by investment-based personal retirement accounts for part of the current tax-financed benefits.
But even though such a reform could maintain income levels for retirees, Democrats oppose it, because it lowers traditional government benefits.
This reinforces the stalemate.
The two parties’ hardline stances anticipate the upcoming congressional and presidential elections in November 2012.
The Republicans, in effect, face the voters with a sign that says, “We won’t raise your taxes, but the Democrats will.”
The Democrats’ sign, by contrast, says, “We won’t reduce your pension or health benefits, but the Republicans will.”
Neither side wants any ambiguity in their message before the election, thus ruling out the possibility of any immediate changes in tax expenditures or future Social Security pensions.
But, for the same reason, I am optimistic that the stalemate will end after the election.
At that point, both Republicans and Democrats will be able to accept reforms that they must reject now.
Another post-election route to deficit reduction would be to lower marginal tax rates and balance that revenue loss with cuts in tax expenditures.
Official analyses downplay the effect of lower marginal tax rates on taxable income, but experience shows that taxable income rises substantially as taxpayers respond to lower marginal rates by working more, taking more of their compensation in taxable cash than in fringe benefits, and reducing their tax-deductible consumption.
Reducing tax expenditures while lowering marginal tax rates can produce substantial revenue by increasing the level of taxable income.&#160;
The current economic stalemate is troubling, because financial markets could react adversely, and because delays in addressing the fiscal deficit means a higher national debt.
I may be too optimistic, but I think there is good reason to believe that the current budget stalemate reflects election posturing, and that the US political system will prove more effective at making progress on fiscal consolidation once the election is past.
America’s Election and the Global Economy
STANFORD – As America’s elections approach, with President Barack Obama slightly in front of his Republican challenger, former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, pollsters still rate the races for control of the presidency and the United States Senate too close to call, with the House of Representatives likely to remain in Republican hands.
The differences between the candidates are considerable, and highly consequential for American economic policy and the global economy, although enactment of their programs will depend on the makeup of Congress.
The most important differences between the two candidates can be summarized as follows:
Spending.
Democrats oppose most nondefense spending cuts, arguing that reductions would cause the economy to contract.
That case is strongest if the spending reductions are large and abrupt in a weak economy.
If phased in over a multi-year period as the economy recovers, as Romney proposes, thrift would likely be expansionary.
For example, federal spending relative to GDP fell by five percentage points from the mid-1980’s to the late 1990’s in the US, and by an even larger margin in recent decades in Canada – that is, through periods of strong economic growth.
Taxes.
Obama would raise the top marginal tax rates on wages, capital gains, dividends, interest, and estates, especially on higher-income individuals and small businesses.
Yet he has never proposed comprehensive reform of either the personal or corporate income tax.
By contrast, Romney would reduce America’s corporate tax rate (the highest in the OECD) to 25% and tax American multinationals on a territorial, rather than a worldwide, basis in order to increase their tax competitiveness.
He would also lower personal tax rates by 20%, and make up lost revenue by limiting tax deductions and credits, particularly at the upper end, thereby raising about 18.5% of GDP, just above the historical average, at full employment. Romney’s fiscal plan thus reduces deficits sufficiently to decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio.
He favors a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, and hopes to balance the budget over eight years.
Obama, by contrast, would run larger deficits – his spending increase is much larger than his tax increase – which imply large tax hikes in the future.
Moreover, he would run far larger debt ratios than Romney, because the main driver of the debt is entitlement spending.
Entitlements.
Obama has remained silent about reform of Medicare and Social Security, whose long-run deficits are several times the national debt.
Vice President Joe Biden has even said that “no changes” to Social Security are to be made.
Romney supports gradually increasing retirement ages, a premium-support model for Medicare, and shifting Medicaid (health insurance for the poor) to the states via block grants.
The Obama campaign is pummeling Romney on Medicare, and the Romney campaign is hammering Obama for his refusal to negotiate or even propose a solution.
The Obama policy would thus lead to ever-higher deficits and debt ratios well over 100% of GDP, a level that numerous studies imply would reduce US economic growth by one-third or more and might induce a sovereign-debt crisis.
Some observers suggest that Obama’s unspoken plan is ever-growing entitlements eventually paid for by a European-style value-added tax.
Trade.
Obama is the first US president in a long time who has not played a leading role on global trade liberalization.
The Doha Round of global trade talks remains stalled, and Obama delayed the three bilateral free-trade agreements that awaited approval when he came into office.
Romney is a proponent of free trade, but has said that he would be tougher on China’s trade practices and currency policies.
Regulation.
Obama wants to expand federal command-and-control regulation further (though the courts have stopped his extension of some regulatory powers).
Romney vows an economically balanced approach that would reform Obama’s major health-care, environmental, and financial-services regulations.
Appointments.
Every US president appoints thousands of officials, many with considerable power.
Romney has said that he would not reappoint Ben Bernanke as Fed Chairman (likely candidates: economists Glenn Hubbard, Greg Mankiw, John Taylor, and Martin Feldstein).
Other presidential appointees exert considerable influence on firms, industries, or the entire economy.
For example, Obama’s appointees to the obscure National Labor Relations Board tried to prevent Boeing from expanding in South Carolina, despite the state’s anti-union “right to work” legislation.
These policies would affect US economic growth, the budget deficit, national saving, and hence global trade and capital flows.
With larger deficits under Obama than under Romney, America would need more capital from Europe, Latin America, and Asia, while higher taxes and debt would impede US growth and thus undermine these regions’ exports.
Obama would steer America in the direction of European social-welfare states; Romney’s agenda is designed to prevent that.
Whoever wins, a fiscal cliff looms at the end of 2012.
Previous legislation, if not reversed, will lead to large abrupt tax hikes and spending cuts, which the Congressional Budget Office forecasts would likely cause a recession in 2013.
While a post-election, lame-duck session of Congress will address the fiscal cliff, the deep differences between Republicans and Democrats on taxes and spending remain wide and difficult to bridge.
With uncertainty plaguing Europe’s finances and China slowing, the last thing the global economy needs is a stagnant or shrinking US economy.
But it will take strong leadership by the president-elect to avoid it.
America’s Exceptional Fiscal Conservatism
WASHINGTON, DC – In most countries, to be “fiscally conservative” means to worry a great deal about the budget deficit and debt levels – and to push these issues to the top of the policy agenda.
In many eurozone countries today, “fiscal conservatives” are a powerful group, insisting on the need to boost government revenue while bringing spending under control.
In Great Britain, too, leading Conservatives have recently proved willing to raise taxes and attempted to limit future spending.
The United States is very different in this respect.
There, leading politicians who choose to call themselves “fiscal conservatives” – such as Paul Ryan, now the Republican Party’s presumptive vice-presidential nominee to run alongside presidential candidate Mitt Romney in November’s election – care more about cutting taxes, regardless of the effect on the federal deficit and total outstanding debt.
Why do US fiscal conservatives care so little about government debt, relative to their counterparts in other countries?
It has not always been this way.
For example, in 1960, President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s advisers suggested that he should cut taxes in order to pave the way for his vice president, Richard Nixon, to be elected to the presidency.
Eisenhower declined, partly because he did not particularly like or trust Nixon, but mostly because he thought it was important to hand over a more nearly balanced budget to his successor.
The framework for US macroeconomic policy changed dramatically when the international monetary system broke down in 1971.
The US could no longer maintain a fixed exchange rate between the dollar and gold – the cornerstone of the postwar Bretton Woods system.
The arrangement collapsed because the US did not want to tighten monetary policy and run more restrictive fiscal policy: keeping US voters happy was understandably more important to President Nixon than maintaining a global system of fixed exchange rates.
Ironically, however, rather than undermining the predominant international role of the US dollar, the end of Bretton Woods actually boosted its use around the world.
Much has been written, and many hands wrung, about the dollar’s decline over the last four decades, but the fact remains that holdings of US dollar assets by foreigners today are vastly greater than they were in 1971.
This turns out to be a mixed blessing, because it has allowed the US to become less careful about its fiscal accounts.
Foreigners now hold roughly half of all US federal government debt, and they are willing to hold it when it yields a very low return in dollars (and even when the dollar depreciates).
In fact, whenever the world looks unstable, investors want to hold more dollar assets – even when the US is the cause of the instability.
When big US banks are in trouble or Americans are having another debilitating political fight over their public finances, global investors scramble into US Treasuries.
Last year’s congressional showdown over the federal debt ceiling may have cost the US its AAA sovereign rating with Standard &amp; Poor’s, but the federal government’s borrowing costs are actually lower now than they were then.
What has America done with this opportunity – arguably the lowest-cost funding in the history of humankind?
Not much, in terms of productive investment, strengthening education, or maintaining essential infrastructure.
But the US has done a great deal in terms of adopting tax cuts that boost consumption relative to income and lower government revenue relative to expenditure.
This is the lasting legacy of the “temporary” tax cuts adopted by George W. Bush’s administration in the early 2000’s.
And Americans have shifted greatly toward political philosophies – on the right and on the left – that regard public debt merely as a distraction. Or, as former vice president Dick Cheney put it, “Reagan taught us that deficits do not matter” – meaning that Ronald Reagan cut taxes, ran bigger deficits, and did not suffer any adverse political consequences.
Ryan and members of the Tea Party wing of the Republican Party undoubtedly want to cut the size of the federal government, and they have articulated plans to do this over several decades.
But, in the near term, what they promise is primarily tax cuts: their entire practical program is front-loaded in that direction.
The calculation is that this will prove politically popular (probably true) while making it easier to implement spending cuts down the road (less obvious).
The vulnerability caused by higher public debt over the next few decades is simply ignored.
For example, Ryan supported George W. Bush’s spending spree.
He also supports maintaining defense spending at or near its current level – resisting the cuts that were put in place under the Budget Control Act of 2011.
The assumption here – unstated and highly questionable – is that the US will be able to sell an unlimited amount of government debt at low interest rates for the foreseeable future.
There is no other country in the world where fiscal conservatives would want to be associated with such a high-stakes gamble.
America’s Failed Militarized Foreign Policy
Many of today’s war zones – including Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia, and Sudan – share basic problems that lie at the root of their conflicts.
They are all poor, buffeted by natural disasters – especially floods, droughts, and earthquakes – and have rapidly growing populations that are pressing on the capacity of the land to feed them.
And the proportion of youth is very high, with a bulging population of young men of military age (15-24 years).
All of these problems can be solved only through long-term sustainable economic development.
Yet the United States persists in responding to symptoms rather than to underlying conditions by trying to address every conflict by military means.
It backs the Ethiopian army in Somalia.
It occupies Iraq and Afghanistan.
It threatens to bomb Iran.