Saudi Arabia is doing what it can to help.
The Kingdom is providing financial aid to Lebanon in an effort to rebuild a stronger, more stable country, and to roll back the influence of Iran.
We have long pushed for the disarming of Hezbollah, and we have assisted the government with nearly $1 billion in financial support and credit to purchase weapons for the Lebanese Army, and we will continue to do so in the coming decade.
But, unless the international community –particularly the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council – begins to fulfill its obligations in Syria, money will not be enough to prevent further chaos and destruction.
The Business of Business is More Than Business
BERKELEY – Earlier this year, Robert Simons of Harvard Business School fired off a blistering indictment of American businesses and business schools.
American companies, he charged, have become softheaded, unfocused, and uncompetitive, in part because business schools are persuading them to embrace a long list of gauzy, feel-good values, such as social responsibility, environmental sustainability, and inclusiveness.
Reviving a famous broadside by Milton Friedman back in 1970, Simons argued that a company’s only mission is to “compete and win.”
Friedman, too, maintained that anything except making money is a distraction.
It is difficult to deny the appealing simplicity of this argument.
Who would deny that companies have a clear responsibility to earn profits for their shareholders, or that most shareholders invest primarily to make money, not to make the world a better place?
Why make things more complicated?
Because they are.
First, most references to Friedman’s argument overlook his recognition of constraints on business behavior.
In his words, companies should “make as much money as possible while conforming to the basic rules of the society, both those embodied in law and those embodied in ethical custom.”
In other words, compliance with the law is not enough.
Some ethical constraints, such as basic human rights, reflect universal values; others vary across time, location, and situations.
Second, not all shareholders are alike.
As Lynn Stout of Cornell Law School has put it, they are “human beings with differing investment time frames, different interests ex ante and ex post, different degrees of diversification, and different attitudes toward sacrificing personal wealth to follow ethical rules and avoid harming others.”
They also differ in their attitudes toward risk.
Maximizing shareholder value over a particular time period may satisfy the interests of some shareholders but violate the interests of others.
The simple theory of profit maximization assumes away the conflicting interests of diverse shareholders.
In reality, when businesses make decisions, they have to balance these interests.
Third, businesses can also affect shareholders’ interests over time.
Individuals gravitate to organizations that are compatible with their personal preferences.
So companies can attract like-minded shareholders by espousing distinctive values, missions, and cultures.
A recent study found that patient shareholders account for a larger portion of the shares of companies that espouse a long-term sustainability agenda relative to companies committed to share-price maximization.
A growing number of investors are looking for responsible investment or “impact investment” opportunities that promise a mix of both financial and social returns.
Fourth, every company both depends on and affects the societies in which it functions.
The larger and more global the company, the larger and more global are its societal effects.
Companies need customers who can afford their products, which means that businesses benefit from social stability and broad prosperity.
Companies also need educated, hard-working, ethical employees and reliable, efficient suppliers.
And companies need public infrastructure – not only physical infrastructure like highways and airports, but also social infrastructure like good schools, safe neighborhoods, and effective legal systems.
Businesses that ignore the broader social and environmental context in which they operate are likely to pay a price: reputational damage and loss of brand value, falling sales, difficulties in recruiting talent, lower worker productivity, corruption, tougher government regulation, or an increase in climate-change-related costs.
There are now mobile phone apps that assess and grade large multinational companies’ supply chains for customers, investors, and public officials.
Companies that score poorly risk losing sales and investors and triggering official regulatory or legal action.
For example, Apple’s brand was recently shaken by revelations about brutal workplace conditions at Foxconn factories in China, where most of its iPhones and iPads are assembled.
In response to concerns among customers, employees, and shareholders, Apple has improved working conditions and agreed to regular reviews by an independent observer.
Similarly, American and European clothing companies have been struggling to contain the reputational damage caused by lethal working conditions in Bangladeshi garment factories.
The Friedman-Simons view that businesses’ sole social responsibility is to increase profits assumes that competent, non-corrupt governments both provide the public goods necessary for a prosperous economy and contain the negative externalities, like pollution and climate change, that result from private economic activities.
But, in the actual societies in which businesses function, governments are often unable or unwilling to provide required public goods or curb negative externalities.
In response to “government failures,” companies face pressure from a variety of stakeholders – including incompetent and corrupt governments themselves – to address broad social and environmental problems.
But businesses cannot solve such problems by themselves.
Solutions depend on innovative collaboration among private companies, non-profit organizations, and governments.
This is already happening.
For example, Walmart has teamed up with the Environmental Defense Fund to devise a strategy to eliminate 20 million tons of embedded carbon in the products on its shelves.
Likewise, the European Union, the International Labor Organization, and the government of Bangladesh have cooperated with global companies on a pact to improve conditions for Bangladeshi garment workers.
Companies have a responsibility to their shareholders, but they also have a responsibility to the societies that grant them the right to operate.
And they can fulfill both responsibilities profitably.
There is no evidence for Simon’s assertion that a commitment to social or environmental values is undermining US companies’ competitiveness.
In fact, recent evidence suggests the opposite: social and environmental responsibility can be a source of long-term competitive advantage.
The Death of OPEC
IRVING, TEXAS – The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries is dead.
Saudi Arabia killed it.
Now, OPEC is just a toothless zombie, attracting attention, but without having any impact on the living.
Few have noticed OPEC’s demise for a simple reason: it never really had the impact that it was widely perceived to have.
It was never actually a cartel, possessing monopolistic market power.
Anyone who thought otherwise was mistakenly attributing to it Saudi Arabia’s market power.
And Saudi Arabia’s power is expansive.
It remains the dominant producer in world oil markets, and its political and economic decisions shape global energy economics.
This impact will be intensified if the Kingdom resurrects Arab Light as the global benchmark crude.
Of course, new players in the energy-production game could conceivably deal a blow to Saudi Arabia.
But, so far, the Kingdom has managed to avoid serious injury.
The shale-energy revolution in the United States, for example, has had a far-reaching international impact – far greater than expected.
The Atlantic Basin ran an oil surplus – producing more than it consumed – for the first time in a half-century, while the Pacific Basin became the only dumping ground for crude.
The surge in domestically produced shale oil caused OPEC members Algeria, Angola, and Nigeria to lose significant market share in the US.
Yet that revolution has had little impact on Saudi Arabia, Iraq, or Kuwait, owing to crude quality.
Algeria, Angola, and Nigeria were exporting to the US a kind of light sweet crude that is comparable to shale oil.
Yet many US refineries are still geared toward the heavier and more sour types of crude that the country imports from the Middle East.
As a result, Saudi Arabia’s market share in the US seems relatively secure.
This is not to suggest that Saudi Arabia is invincible.
On the contrary, it has lost market share among the largest oil importers in Asia, which have increased their purchases of West African crude (diverted from the US).
Perhaps most painful, the Kingdom has lost substantial market share in China to Russia.
Russian penetration of the Chinese market was spurred by the imposition of Western sanctions after Russia invaded Ukraine and annexed Crimea in 2014.
China took full advantage of the Kremlin’s desperation, securing rock-bottom rates for Russian energy resources.
Once the door to Asia was open, however, Russian companies seized the opportunity to enter the downstream markets of India and Indonesia – two countries that are critical to the Saudis’ own strategy.
Over the last two years or so, Saudi Arabia has made starkly clear that it will not easily give up its market share – to anyone.
It has pursued a campaign to recover its former position not just in crude, but also in petroleum products, natural gas liquids, and petrochemicals.
To this end, it has sustained a price war, supported by a boost in production, aimed at pushing out weaker competitors.
At first, Saudi Arabia took aim at the shale industry.
But its strategy for asserting its dominance over global energy markets evolved over time, adapting to new economic information and political circumstances.
Ultimately, Saudi Arabia dragged all of OPEC into the price war.
Countries increased their production for as long as they could, causing prices naturally to drop.
When production peaked, the bottom fell out of the market, because OPEC members were forced to enter into direct price competition with one another.
The permanent internal rifts that all of this has produced were painfully apparent at this April’s OPEC meeting in Doha, where a deal to freeze output fell apart.
Saudi Arabia refused to cut production unless Iran would do likewise.
But Iran – which, like Russia, had lost considerable market share as a result of Western sanctions – refused to cut production outright.
Producers that lost market share in the US will not cut production, either.
By now, Saudi Arabia recognizes that low oil prices will not fully restore its market share in Asia and Europe.
But it also sees that it has no more use for OPEC, an organization that it foisted on the world with the first Arab oil embargo in 1973 and has since used as a shield for its oil policies.
With the US shale revolution having rendered OPEC useless, Saudi Arabia has decided that its creature is not worth keeping alive.
But this does not mean that there is no hope for energy cooperation.
Saudi Arabia is now pursuing a major shift in its foreign, economic, and energy policies, exemplified by the impending privatization of a portion of Aramco, its national petroleum company, which is set to expand its refining capacity.
All of this suggests that competition in energy markets may shift from crude oil to refined products.
That would create new opportunities for cooperation: producers with large refining and storage capacity could purchase surplus oil from producers lacking such capacities.
A shift from competition in crude to competition in petroleum products would have a profound effect on global oil markets and related industries, like shipping.
Ultimately, it would most likely boost the overall efficiency of the oil market and strengthen producers’ capacity to weather market volatility.
The producers and refiners with the most sophisticated technologies would dominate – beginning with Saudi Arabia.
Opening Up Japan
After a dozen years of stagnation, Japan's economy seems to be looking up.
But appearances can deceive.
Despite improvements and reforms, many of Japan's fundamentals remain woeful.
Japan's decline has been palpable.
In the late 1980's, it was fashionable in some Japanese policy circles to argue that the Pax Americana was over, to be replaced in Asia by Pax Japonica.
America's economy seemed to be tanking, Japan's was soaring, and projections favored 2005 as the date when it would overtake the United States.
That things have turned out far differently reflects Japan's inertia.
The problems underlying Japan's decline are legion.
Japanese policymakers and business leaders do not understand the concept of "creative destruction." Too many industrial dinosaurs are kept on life support.
So, although some firms do extremely well - say, Toyota and Canon - there is little space for new ventures and entrepreneurs.
If Japan's economy were a computer, it would have a hard disk full of obsolescent programs and a "delete" button that doesn't work.
No matter what criterion one uses, Japan's economy remains the most closed among OECD countries and one of the most closed in the world.
Not only is foreign capital conspicuously absent, but so are foreign managers, workers, intellectuals, and ideas.
Universities, think tanks, and the media are for the most part insular institutions.
Similarly, while non-government organizations (NGO's) are a dynamic component in most societies nowadays, Japan has few, and major international NGO's are nonexistent or have only a weak presence.
Oxfam, one of the world's leading NGOs, with offices and branches all over the world, is absent altogether.
The closed nature of Japanese society and the dearth of ideas are partly attributable to the linguistic barrier.
Where Japan really falls short is in English - the global language, and thus the main purveyor of global ideas.
In Asia, Japan ranks above only North Korea in scores on the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) examination.
Moreover, Japan's demographics are among the worst in the world.
In this respect, Europe is not much better, although its current restrictive immigration policies will likely be eased over the next decade or so.
No such assumption can be made about Japan, where an aging population will intensify the closed and intellectually arid nature of its society.
As one of the world's major trading powers, Japan should be a leading player in the World Trade Organization and in trade policy forums. Yet despite being one of the main beneficiaries of the post-World War II open and multilateral trading system, Japan stands out as a retrograde mercantilist state.
Isolation has brought confusion about Japan's place in the world.
While Japan's government lobbies hard to get a permanent seat on the UN Security Council, its Prime Minister regularly flouts Asian opinion by paying his respects to war criminals at the Yasukuni Shrine.
Apart from the immorality of such public behavior (imagine a German chancellor paying his respects at Goebbels' grave!), the fact that both China and the US have veto power at the UN suggests that it is stupid even from the standpoint of Realpolitik .
Indeed, relations with China are Japan's most profound problem.
Japan's emergence as East Asia's leading power in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries involved three brutal wars in China, in which the Japanese army committed dreadful atrocities.
The 1949 communist takeover in China, the Cold War, America's adoption of Japan as its pampered protégé, and the failure to prosecute Emperor Hirohito for war crimes, allowed Japan to avoid a moral reckoning.
Now, as China rises and Japan declines, the old, deep-seated suspicions, tensions, and distrust are resurfacing.
Japan's grim outlook is bad news for the world because it is the globe's second leading economic power.
Prospects for Japan acting as a global economic locomotive and of playing a role in poverty reduction and economic development are, for now, almost nil.
Indeed, Japan's current growth is being driven overwhelmingly by trade with China - a country with only one-thirtieth of Japan per capita GDP!
From a broader geopolitical perspective, the situation becomes alarming.
Despite its frequent economic booms, Asia is also a strategic and security minefield.
A sclerotic, atavistic, nationalist, and inward-looking Japan can only aggravate the situation.
What should Japan do?
The only solution for Japan is to open up - not only its economy, but its society, its universities, its media, its think tanks, and, indeed, its bars and bathhouses.
Many young Japanese - often the brightest and most entrepreneurial - demand to live in an open society, but the option they are choosing now is emigration.
An open Japan would, by definition, be more outward-looking, would speak better English so that it could communicate across Asia and the world, would be more influenced by foreign ideas - including ideas concerning war guilt.
It has been 150 years since the "black ships" of America's Navy forcibly opened up Japan.
Today, the Japanese must open up their country themselves.
Open-Source Pharmaceuticals?
LONDON – Much attention has been focused in recent years on the pharmaceutical industry’s slowness to develop new drugs and lack of productivity. But this crisis of innovation is also affecting the biotechnology firms upon which the large pharmaceutical companies now rely as the pipeline for developing new drugs.
This has prompted an examination of all aspects of the biomedical research and development process, as companies try to cut costs and improve efficiency and productivity.
The result has been corporate mergers, reorganizations, and tens of thousands of job losses in the industry. None of this change, however, seems to have led to the radical shift required for companies to survive and thrive.
Both approaches need strong senior management support, because they can succeed only in a culture very different from the more controlling, hierarchical R&amp;D environment that remains prevalent today.
They also require much more active management of, and communication about, a company’s unused intellectual property (IP).
Few companies, however, have demonstrated that they are prepared to commit the time, effort, and resources to embrace a radically different way of operating.
Yet the tangible and intangible benefits of adopting new forms of collaboration – reducing the cost of failure, leveraging unused IP and external funding mechanisms, increasing access to networks of talent, and establishing greater trust among patients and other stakeholders – could be extensive.
Moreover, these benefits would be realized not only by pharmaceutical companies, but also by academics and other collaborators.
One way to experiment with these new approaches is to try them out internally first.
The challenge for large organizations is to harness their employees’ knowledge by breaking down barriers and bringing people together to share insights and information.
The advent of computing platforms such as Microsoft’s SharePoint have facilitated data-sharing and exchange, and pharmaceutical companies would do well to emulate companies from other sectors, such as Arup, which has developed excellent systems for accessing knowledge across its entire organization.
Some pharmaceutical companies like Lilly and Pfizer have demonstrated the power of this approach by implementing internal systems to seek solutions to problems organization-wide.
But it is clear that many of the challenges of the drug-development process are too large and complex for a single company or institution to solve internally.
This has led to an increase in pre-competitive and other forms of collaboration to access external innovation and tackle the bottlenecks in drug discovery and development.
But pharmaceutical companies continue to hold assumptions about the boundaries of pre-competitive collaboration that need to be challenged.
At first sight, it seems counterintuitive that companies would want to share data and potentially give away competitive advantages.
But this presupposes that the possession of such data does indeed imply a competitive advantage, and that a closed operating model is financially sustainable.
Drugs that make it to market have to fund the cost of failure of those that did not make it to the market.
As a recent Morgan Stanley report pointed out, the pharmaceutical industry’s current success rates are not sufficient to sustain large internal R&amp;D organizations, making the industry’s current operating model financially non-viable. Thus, companies must either improve success rates or decrease the cost of failure.
The two major causes of drug failure are lack of efficacy in humans and unexpected toxicity.
So it is not surprising that the main areas of collaboration have been in the development of tools and technologies for target validation and the discovery and validation of biomarkers for efficacy and toxicity.
Many large public-private consortia have been formed, including the Innovative Medicines Initiative and the Serious Adverse Events Consortium, but these efforts need to be coordinated and integrated in order to obtain the greatest possible benefit.
In the future, the most effective pharmaceutical companies will be hubs at the center of a network of collaborators and suppliers, focusing internally on their core competencies, which might include medicinal chemistry, execution of clinical trials, or sales and marketing.
They will facilitate interactions across their network to stimulate the development of innovation ecosystems.
The resulting opportunities to expand beyond traditional products and markets will enable pharmaceutical companies to evolve into companies that offer a range of health-care solutions.
These will include not only prescription medicines, but also diagnostics, branded generics, and technologies that support personalized medicine, as well as so-called “neutraceuticals” and other “wellness options.”
Although the size of many R&amp;D organizations is bound to be reduced by such reforms, the complexities of managing and maximizing the impact of this external web of relationships will demand new skills and capabilities over and above those of excellent science.
Developing and rewarding employees who possess such skills will be an additional, but welcome, challenge. By doing this the pharmaceutical industry might not become open source, but will become more open for innovation.
Why Corruption Matters
WASHINGTON, DC – Pope Francis has called corruption “the gangrene of a people.”
US Secretary of State John Kerry has labeled it a “radicalizer,” because it “destroys faith in legitimate authority.”
And British Prime Minister David Cameron has described it as “one of the greatest enemies of progress in our time.”
Corruption, put simply, is the abuse of public office for personal gain.
As leaders increasingly recognize, it is a menace to development, human dignity, and global security.
At the anti-corruption summit in London on May 12, world leaders – together with representatives from business and civil society – will have a critical opportunity to act on this recognition.
Corruption is decried across cultures and throughout history.
It has existed as long as government has; but, like other crimes, it has grown increasingly sophisticated over the last several decades, with devastating effects on the wellbeing and dignity of countless innocent citizens.
For starters, corruption cripples prospects for development.
When, say, public-procurement fraud is rampant, or royalties for natural resources are stolen at the source, or the private sector is monopolized by a narrow network of cronies, populations are unable to realize their potential.
But corruption also has another, less-recognized impact.
As citizens watch their leaders enrich themselves at the expense of the population, they become increasingly frustrated and angry – sentiments that can lead to civil unrest and violent conflict.
Many current international security crises are rooted in this dynamic.
Indignation at the highhanded behavior of a corrupt police officer helped to drive a Tunisian fruit seller to set himself on fire in 2010, touching off revolutions across the Arab world.
Protesters demanded that specific ministers be arrested and put on trial, and they called for the return of pilfered assets – demands that were rarely met.
In places where government officials enjoy (and often flaunt) their enrichment and impunity, extremist movements – including the Taliban, Boko Haram, and the Islamic State – exploit citizens’ outrage.
The only way to restore public integrity, these groups assert, is by means of a rigidly applied code of personal conduct.
With no viable recourse – and no avenue for peaceful appeal – such language has grown increasingly persuasive.
It is clear that corruption must be combated.
What is less clear is how to do it.
In a world of competing demands, corrupt governments may seem to serve vital purposes.
One deploys soldiers to the fight against terrorism; another provides critical energy supplies or access to raw materials.
Leaders must inevitably contend with difficult tradeoffs.
To determine the best approach in each specific case, governments must analyze the problem more effectively, which means improving the collection of intelligence and data.
As security expert Sarah Chayes argues in Against Corruption, the volume of essays that the British government will publish to accompany the summit, corruption today is structured practice.
It is the work of sophisticated networks, not unlike organized crime (with which corrupt agents are often integrated).
Governments must study these activities and their consequences the same way they study transnational criminal or terrorist organizations.
Armed with such assessments, donor countries must structure assistance in a way that mitigates corruption risks.
Military or development assistance is not apolitical.
Programs must be tailored to ensure that funds are not captured by kleptocratic elites.
This means that anti-corruption efforts can no longer be shunted off to under-resourced specialists; they must be central to the planning of major development initiatives or the sale of costly weapons systems.
Recipient governments must understand that funding will dry up if they continue to squander or steal it.
In fact, corruption and its implications must inform the way Western officials interact with their counterparts in the developing world.
The departments that we spent our careers serving – the US State Department and the US Department of Defense – set great store by building relationships.
Diplomats depend on these relationships to advance their national interests, and professional ties between military officers are sometimes the only channels that weather political storms.
But diplomats and military brass alike should be willing to take a step back when appropriate, condition their interactions, and make use of available leverage – even at the risk of a counterpart’s wrath.
But, as recent revelations about purveyors of shell companies or bribery by intermediaries demonstrate, much of the real leverage is to be found at home – in the domestic financial and property industries, in public relations and law firms that burnish kleptocrats’ images, and in universities that educate corrupt officials’ children and solicit their donations.
The application of the US Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act to indict officers of FIFA, soccer’s international governing body, shows how focusing on Western service providers can curb corruption among foreign officials.
Another important tool in the fight against corruption will be technological innovation, which can reduce opportunities for wrongdoing, empower citizens to highlight illegal practices, and enhance government transparency and accountability.
Strides have already been made in a number of areas, from electronic voter registration to electronic payments for civil servants.
While technology is no panacea, when paired with wise policy reforms, it can make a meaningful contribution to the fight for good governance.
None of these suggestions will be easy to implement. But, to address many of the crises currently besetting the world, a strong focus on combating corruption is vital.
Our hope is that the upcoming conference in London demonstrates the unity of purpose and commitment to action that is so badly needed.
Standing Up to Illiberalism
LONDON – It is a rare political speech that stops me in my tracks.
But that is exactly what happened this summer when I read a remarkable address by Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s increasingly authoritarian prime minister.
Orbán rarely commands attention outside of his country.
The last time he gave a speech as noteworthy as this summer’s was 25 years ago, when, as a young man, he helped break the back of communism in Europe.
Speaking in June 1989 at the reburial of Imre Nagy – who led Hungary during its 1956 anti-Soviet uprising – Orbán angrily demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops from Hungarian territory.
This summer, however, Orbán struck an entirely different note.
He delivered a speech in favor of what he called the “illiberal state,” offering five examples of successful “systems that are not Western, not liberal, not liberal democracies, and perhaps not even democracies.”
Russia and China were among them.
It was as though the Iron Curtain and the tanks that crushed Nagy’s government – let alone Orbán’s younger self – had never existed.
Russia and China may no longer be communist, but they certainly are illiberal and definitely not democratic.
Russia is poised somewhere between authoritarianism and totalitarianism; and, for all of China’s recent economic progress, the rising Asian power remains squarely in the same camp.
Orbán’s remarks, and his subsequent announcement of plans to implement his vision of “an illiberal state,” were greeted with shock.
How could he profess such views as the leader of a European Union member state, even as he stuffed his government’s coffers with EU subsidies?
The truth is that Orbán was merely echoing an increasingly widespread argument (though one that usually is expressed more delicately).
Six years after the start of the global financial crisis, many are beginning to ask uncomfortable questions.
How can liberal democracies remain globally competitive?
Have Western democracies lost their self-confidence and their ability to deliver a better life for their citizens?
Are America and Europe in decline, haggard and living on past glories?
What Orbán would describe as the “liberal democracies” in the United States and Europe are indeed weighed down by internal problems.
In the US, polarized politics, gerrymandered Congressional districts, and a constitution that seems to check more than it balances, have obstructed reforms and left the country seemingly adrift in choppy waters.
The middle class is being hollowed out, and failed overseas adventures have discouraged the once “indispensable nation” from bearing the burden of global leadership.
America remains indispensable; alas, it has allowed the notion that it is unavailable for duty to take root.
At the same time, Europe seems incapable of upholding the social contract that underpinned its post-war economic boom.
The continent’s most successful economy, Germany, insists that its partners follow its brand of fiscal conservatism, choking off the growth that would make painful reforms easier to implement.
With the world’s most successful democracies obsessed with recent failures, international politics has drifted toward more dangerous potential outcomes.
Sensible deterrence, bold efforts to reform international institutions, and a readiness to fulfill responsibilities have all fallen victim to the West’s exaggerated sense of failure and political stalemate.
And yet, even as Western democracies seem least able to act, more will be required of them.
None of the countries that Orbán cited in his speech has offered an alternative vision of world order.
On the contrary, their domestic problems threaten to turn uncertainty into peril.
Russia will have to confront the impact of a collapse in oil prices on its petro-economy.
Major firms are begging for government handouts to tide them over.
The ruble is falling like a stone.
It will be a tough winter in Moscow and St. Petersburg.
Even China’s supersonic growth is beginning to slow; some economists, including Larry Summers, are predicting that it could grind suddenly to a halt.
Either way, the road ahead is likely to be bumpy, with increasing friction where politics rubs against economics.
At home (most notably in Hong Kong) and abroad, China gives the impression that the word “compromise” does not exist in Mandarin.
Orbán’s putative political role models are likely to become even more shrill and nationalist in foreign policy as they attempt to retain domestic support.
In order to secure peace on the home front, leaders will point to the enemies – real or imaginary – at the gate.
The world’s liberal democracies must start believing in themselves again.
They must prove that Orbán’s remarks were nothing more than bombastic nonsense.
If we want the “peace on earth and mercy mild” promised in our Christmas carols, we will need to work much harder and more confidently to secure them.
Gays on the Front Line
PARIS – The mass shooting in Orlando, Florida, last weekend has so far claimed 50 lives (including the killer), with more than 50 others wounded – some seriously. It has also left at least three questions to be answered.
First, there is the issue of the easy availability of weapons of war across most of the United States.
It is estimated that several million AR-15 semiautomatic rifles (the type used in the Orlando killings and by US soldiers in the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq) are in circulation in the US.
In most US states, the criteria for obtaining one are to be at least 18 years of age (three years lower than the drinking age) and have no criminal record or obvious manifestation of mental illness.
A majority of Americans consider possession of such weapons a basic right, defined and codified by the Second Amendment to the US Constitution.
Indeed, Americans, having been told for decades by Charlton Heston, Wayne LaPierre, and other leaders of the all-powerful National Rifle Association that there is no better way to protect oneself and one’s family, now own more than 300 million firearms.
President Barack Obama has said and repeated what reasonable Americans understand: the stockpile of assault weapons – small in size but massive in their destructiveness – in private hands constitutes an invisible but legal arsenal.
It is a time bomb of which everyone is aware.
Given its ubiquity, the question is not whether there will be other killings similar to the one in Orlando.
That there will be is a foregone conclusion.
The question, alas, is when and where.
Second, there is the question of radical Islam and the borderless war that it has declared on the world.
One can hold forth on the theme of the “lone wolf” who falls into terrorism the way others fall into bed.
One can listen repeatedly to the inevitable testimony of friends and family that they did not see this coming, no sign whatsoever, that the killer had been a good son, polite to his neighbors, with no particular story that would raise suspicions.
One can also dismiss the killer’s connection to terror groups; the Islamic State (ISIS) did not own the incident until after the killer himself, in the midst of the attack, pledged his allegiance and thus put a label on his actions.
(This is not so novel as many think: Italy’s Red Brigades sometimes worked in the same manner.)
The fact remains that the killer frequented the Fort Pierce mosque, which has produced at least one other American who went to fight in Syria.
And here we have another confirmation of something that I have maintained since my book about the Wall Street Journal journalist Daniel Pearl and the implantation in the US of Pakistani-directed cells, which Pearl was investigating when he was abducted and murdered.
It is a disquieting fact: The United States is no better protected against jihadism than other countries.
No less than Europe, the US is a prime target for fanatical Islam and its assassins.
Instead of repeating like a broken record that “this has nothing to do with Islam,” it is time to admit that the US has become yet another theater in the battle between the Islam of the radicals and the Islam of enlightenment and the rule of law.
Finally, there is the question of homophobia and anti-gay violence.
I have lost track of the number of US states that are suing the Obama administration over executive orders viewed as excessively “gay-friendly.”
And Sunday’s bloodbath can be seen as the latest episode in a series of lethal attacks dating back at least to 1973, when 32 men whose only crime was being gay were burned alive in the UpStairs Lounge in New Orleans.
In Europe, same-sex marriage laws and antidiscrimination measures have not been able to prevent exhortations to “kick some faggot ass,” to “shove them in the oven,” or, when the writer is in a good mood, to subject gays to compulsory psychiatric treatment.
These are just a few of the more popular affirmations of our common humanity to be found on online social networks and, often enough, in offline settings as well.
Then there is Russia, where, under Vladimir Putin’s autocratic regime, it has never been so hard to be LGBT.
Encouraged by the Kremlin’s anti-gay stance (the Russian minister of health has described gays as mentally ill) and alliance with the Orthodox Church, groups of citizens trap gays, humiliate them, force them to drink urine, openly beat them, and sometimes kill them.
What the Orlando slaughter reminds us is that gays, as a group, are among the targets – along with Jews, Christians, blasphemers, and apostates – considered legitimate by worldwide jihadism.
ISIS’s manuals of inquisition have added gays to the political hit list, declaring against them the same war without mercy.
Under the regime of the self-described Caliphate, gays are to be thrown from rooftops, buried alive, stoned, tortured, and mutilated.
We now know that in Europe and the US, they are to be placed before a one-man firing squad.
Orphan Ideas
CHICAGO – Since the United States Supreme Court’s “Citizens United” decision, which prohibited the government from restricting independent political expenditures by corporations and unions, concern about business interests’ influence over US elections has been growing.
But political contributions are only one reason why business interests have so much power.
When it comes to lobbying, money is not everything: ideas play a big role, too.
Unfortunately, rather than leveling the playing field, the battle of ideas may skew US politics even further in favor of big business.
The importance of ideas can be seen from the simplest things.
Congressional bills aimed at benefiting powerful constituencies are generally given appealing (and misleading) names.
For example, a tax holiday to repatriate foreign earnings was called the “American Job Creation Act.”
It is easier to sell a bill that (allegedly) benefits everyone in society, not just a small group of its most privileged members.
More importantly, the lobbying of the quasi-governmental mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would not have been so successful without the idea of the “ownership society.”
How could anyone oppose turning every American into an owner?
It is precisely the appeal of such ideas that can make them so dangerous politically.
If ideas are like weapons in lobbying, it is important to appreciate the possible distortions in the market for their creation and diffusion.
New ideas are like new drugs.
While some pharmacologists dedicate their lives to searching for the cure for cancer, regardless of any monetary incentives, many are driven by the hope of securing a lucrative patent.
Even if researchers themselves are motivated by only the noblest of goals, their need for funding forces them to take into account profitability.
That is why we have so-called “orphan drugs,” from which not enough money can be made because they cure rare diseases or diseases (like malaria) that affect people who cannot afford to pay for them.
The process of creating new economic ideas (or new evidence about old ideas) is not that different.
Researchers do not get patents, but they get citations, recognition, and promotions.
While some researchers dedicate their lives to the search for truth, regardless of any personal gain, many are driven by the hope of academic stardom and the money that comes with it.
Even if researchers themselves are motivated by only the noblest of goals, their need for funding forces them to take into account the demand for ideas.
And, if funding is not a major issue, the mechanism of amplification of an idea (and thus its ultimate diffusion) nonetheless depends upon how appealing it is to some lobbying effort.
Consider a great researcher in my field, Michael Jensen.
In 1990, he co-wrote a paper about executive pay, arguing that it was not sufficiently linked to performance.
Although the authors used an untenable benchmark to determine that the sensitivity of pay to performance was too low, the article was published in a top economic journal, prominently discussed in the Harvard Business Review, and is one of the most cited papers in economics.
Fifteen years later, Jensen wrote a paper about the costs of excessive sensitivity of pay to performance.
The paper was published in a minor journal and is not very well cited.
Why?
Business loved the first paper, because it shifted the conversation from how much executives were paid (a very controversial topic) to how they should be paid (a more technical and less contentious issue).
And, since companies cannot make executives pay out of their pockets for bad performance, the shift in focus ended up justifying an increase in pay.
There was no similar love for the second paper, which languishes almost unknown, despite its important insights.
Jensen, a researcher of the highest integrity and fame, is free to write on both sides of this issue.
But the two papers’ asymmetric citation payoff is a warning for young scholars: if they want to get ahead professionally, the position that they should take is clear.
From venture capital to telecommunications, from the construction industry to teachers’ unions, there is plenty of demand for evidence that celebrates the benefits of these industries and justifies (implicitly or explicitly) government subsidies to them.
There is no equally organized and active demand for evidence that all of these subsidies are distortionary, waste money, and make companies less rather than more competitive.
Here is perhaps the biggest orphan idea: pro-market does not necessarily mean pro-business.
A pro-business agenda aims at maximizing the profits of existing firms; a pro-market agenda, by contrast, seeks to encourage the best business conditions for everyone.
Who benefits from evidence that an industry is too concentrated, its profit margins are too high, and consumers are being ripped off?
As with malaria drugs, millions of people would benefit from such an idea, but their ability to pay is limited.
And, sure enough, in most of what we economists write – and, more important, in what we teach in business schools – it is hard to tell the difference between being pro-market and being pro-business.
The battle against crony capitalism starts in the classroom, and we professors are inevitably implicated.
If we are not part of the solution, we are part of the problem.
Osama bin Laden, Bard of Terror
PRINCETON – In Riyadh last March, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia decorated American Vice President Dick Cheney with the Kingdom’s Order of Merit.
This gesture elicited hundreds of Internet postings from Arabs condemning the award as treachery and lamenting the pitiful state of leadership in the Arab world.
To cite only one comment, addressed to the King: “Shame on you for claiming to be Custodian of the Two Holy Sanctuaries” in Mecca and Medina.
At the same time, Osama bin Laden released two audio statements condemning Western and Israeli attacks on Muslims and reiterating the need for violent warfare to liberate occupied Muslim territories from the infidels.
In terms of media strategy, the contrast between the leaders of the Arab countries and bin Laden could not be starker.
On the one hand, Arab kings and presidents lack charisma, seem politically impotent and are rarely, if ever, on message with respect to the “big issue” concerns of the peoples of the Middle East.
Bin Laden, however, is mesmerizing, framing the perceived frustrations of many Arabs in his use of classical Arabic, including the recitation of medieval-style poetry.
He deliberately projects an image of himself as a leader who speaks truthfully, conveying a muscular ideology that articulates the sense of humiliation that Muslims feel today and offers a plan of action to remedy the situation.
Arab culture places a high value on poetic expression, so it is no coincidence that it appears repeatedly in Al Qaeda’s propaganda.
Bin Laden often recites poetry to underscore a point and to associate himself with chivalrous and learned warriors who were willing to become martyrs for Islam’s honor and glory.
Here are a few lines of the kind of poetry that Al Qaeda uses:
I do not sell our honor like a pimp
that I should lower my eyes, or surrender.
I see the army of the Cross in our land,
            invading Iraq and rubbing our face in the dirt.
You who ask me to give up our jihad,
            and to live a life of comfort and happiness,
Don’t waste your breath.
I will not give up the jihad while our community
            is gored with a poisoned knife;
No indeed, I will not give up the jihad
            while their Crosses attack in the dark of night,
Pollute Sacred Arabia, and proclaim
the establishment of “security” while chaining my wrists.
It is difficult to know what to make of this literary material, and at times to understand it because of its archaic style, allusions and metaphors.
But Al Qaeda’s poetry deserves closer attention, because it is a medium of communication between members of the movement.
Indeed, through poetry, Al Qaeda defines what it means to be a member of the movement and commemorates the big episodes in the group’s history by glorifying the exploits of “martyrs.”
Although much of this poetry is not necessarily of high quality, it nonetheless underscores the image that Al Qaeda’s leadership wishes to project, namely that Al Qaeda’s message is authentic and reflects “real Islam.”
Moreover, Al Qaeda uses poetry to address the challenges that it faces.
Contrasting its fighters’ bravery and commitment with the “comfort” of Muslim bystanders, Al Qaeda tries to rally more fighters to its cause in Iraq.
Its dilemma is stark.
The Shia of the Mahdi Army defeated Iraq’s Sunnis in the last bout of fighting, and thousands of Iraqi Sunnis, under the so-called Awakening Movement, have rallied to the side of the United States forces and have fought against Al Qaeda.
In addition, many Sunni scholars have argued that Al Qaeda’s ideology and tactics are illegitimate, and that Muslims should refrain from jihad and remain obedient to their rulers.
The term for those who have not joined Al Qaeda’s jihad is the “sitters” or the “immobile ones” ( qaaidun ).
Bin Laden wants these people to feel like sinners.
Poetically, he attacks Muslim men’s masculinity and sense of honor for not defending Islam.
This is the core of bin Laden’s appeal: the ability to articulate the profound sense of injustice and humiliation that many Arabs and Muslims feel today.
For all the violence perpetrated by Al Qaeda, bin Laden also relies on “soft” power, using arguments about injustice that resonate with his audience.
A path between the extremes of jihad and blind obedience to the Middle East’s authoritarian rulers must be found before Al Qaeda’s message begins to lose some of its luster.
Britain’s Closet Keynesian
LONDON – There is a growing apprehension among Britain’s financial pundits that Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne is not nearly as determined to cut public spending as he pretends to be.
He sets himself deadlines to balance the books, but when the date arrives, with the books still unbalanced, he simply sets another.
Consider some fiscal arithmetic.
When Osborne became Chancellor in 2010, the budget deficit – spending minus revenue – was £153 billion ($239 billion), or 10.2% of GDP.
He promised that by 2015 the deficit would stand at only £37 billion, or 2.1% of GDP – equivalent to balancing current&nbsp;spending and revenue.
Instead, the deficit for 2014-2015 is expected to be £97 billion.
The conclusion of Osborne’s balancing act has been postponed until the 2019-2020 budget.
Osborne talks about the need to cut spending, but his actions say otherwise.
Though he vowed to reduce spending by more than £100 billion by now, he has cut less than half of that, simply extending his five-year rolling program of cuts for another few years.
As a result, Osborne, the poster child for British austerity, is starting to look like a closet Keynesian.
There is a school of thought that holds that commitment, not achievement, gives a policy credibility.
For example, the Bank of England is committed to achieve 2% inflation “in the medium term.”
Annual inflation has not been 2% at any time in the last six years, but it is possible that the BoE’s commitment has had some effect in lowering interest rates.
Osborne’s defenders might make the same argument for his fiscal policy.
A credible policy of fiscal consolidation, they might say, will have the same exhilarating effect on confidence as fiscal consolidation itself.
Economists call this the “signaling effect.”
If you announce that you intend to balance the books over five years and pencil in a lot of spending cuts, consumers, relieved of their fears of future tax increases, will start spending more freely.
This will cause national income to rise, and, with luck, the budget deficit will start shrinking, more or less according to plan, without requiring any, or much, retrenchment.
In its emphasis on the importance of the signal, economics enters postmodernist territory.
The signal – in this case the promise to balance the books – creates the reality.
People start behaving as though the books were balanced, ignoring the fact that they are not.
When one believes the narrative, one acts in ways that make it come true.
In fact, I do not believe that Osborne himself ever attached importance to the signaling effects of his pronouncements.
He really did want to balance the budget by making the spending cuts that he promised.
If he turned out to be more Keynesian than he intended to be, it was for pragmatic reasons.
What free-market ideologues often fail to grasp is that politics eventually makes all policymakers Keynesian to some degree.
No matter how much a politician advocates short-term pain for long-term benefits, voters will stomach only a certain amount of suffering.
So sensible politicians slow down the cuts that markets demand, and take loans that they know they will be unable to pay, in order to keep public services going.
To be sure, Osborne must not be given too much credit for his closet Keynesianism.
A true Keynesian would have said that what was needed in 2010 was fiscal expansion, not consolidation.
Osborne believed, or appeared to believe, that austerity would speed up economic recovery, by restoring confidence in government finance.
But there is a strong case to be made that the cuts that Osborne did make impeded recovery, by removing spending power from an economy already suffering from a deficiency of aggregate demand.
The result was economic stagnation from 2010 to 2013, undermining Osborne’s ability to meet his deficit-reduction targets.
Now that Osborne has once again promised new cuts and a new five-year timetable for balancing the books, the question is whether he will keep his word this time.
Yes, the British economy has finally started to grow; and, yes, growth is expected to continue.
But is there any reason to believe that the recovery will not be undermined by another five years of austerity, leading Osborne (or his successor) to postpone the deadline once again?
We can all agree that what happens to the budget affects the economy.
But I would argue, as Keynes did, that “the boom, not the slump, is the time for austerity at the Treasury.”
To try to cut spending in a slump, as Osborne is doing, is to prolong the slump.
And, as he is learning, to his displeasure, that means postponing the day when the books will be balanced.
Knowledge for Progress
LONDON – Some 236 years ago, a young governor from the American state of Virginia broke the mold on education reform.
In his Bill for the More General Diffusion of Knowledge, Thomas Jefferson called for “a system of general instruction” that would reach all citizens, “from the richest to poorest.”
It was the first step in the creation of the American system of public education – an institution that helped to propel the country’s rise to global prominence.
By the early twentieth century, the United States was a global leader in public schooling.
Investments in education provided a catalyst for economic growth, job creation, and increased social mobility.
As Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz have shown, it was American “exceptionalism” in education that enabled the country to steal a march on European countries that were under-investing in human capital.
As world leaders gather this week for the Oslo Summit on Education for Development, the lessons from this experience could not be more relevant.
In fact, with the global economy becoming increasingly knowledge-based, the education and skills of a country’s people are more important than ever in securing its future.
Countries that fail to build inclusive education systems face the prospect of sluggish growth, rising inequality, and lost opportunities in world trade.
In this context, some of today’s discussions on education sound curiously anachronistic.
Harvard economist Ricardo Hausmann recently berated what he describes as the “education, education, education crowd” for advocating an “education-only” strategy for growth.
It was an impressive attack on a view that, to the best of my knowledge, nobody holds.
Of course education is not an automatic route to growth.
Expanding education in countries where institutional failure, poor governance, and macro-economic mismanagement stymie investment is a prescription for low productivity and high unemployment.
In North Africa, the disharmony between the education system and the job market left young, educated people without decent opportunities – a situation that contributed to the revolutions of the Arab Spring.
None of this detracts from the vital role of education – not just years of schooling, but genuine learning – as an essential component of growth.
Extensive research – from the work of Adam Smith to Robert Solow and Gary Becker and, most recently, Eric Hanushek – confirms the importance of learning in building productive human capital.
One step up the standard deviation score on the OECD’s Program for International Student Assessment is associated with a 2% increase in a country’s long-run per capita growth rate.
Education may not be a quick fix for slow growth.
But try naming a country that has sustained an economic transformation without advances in education.
Economists at the World Bank have contributed a few straw men of their own to the education debate.
In one contribution, Shanta Devarajan criticizes the view that education is an essential public good that governments should finance and deliver, arguing that it should instead be considered a private good, delivered through markets to customers – that is, parents and children – seeking private returns.
The problem is that education is self-evidently not a public good – in the real world, few things are.
It is, however, a “merit” good, something that governments should offer for free, because of the wide-ranging private and social returns that might be lost if parents underinvest, or if the poor are excluded.
For example, progress in education – especially girls’ education – is closely associated with improvements in child survival and nutrition, and maternal health, as well as higher wages.
It is time to move beyond futile discussions based on flawed logic to focus on the real challenges in education – challenges that must be addressed, if we are to meet the Sustainable Development Goal of delivering high-quality primary and secondary education to all by 2030.
The Oslo summit presents an important opportunity to lay the groundwork for success.
With 59 million primary school-age children and 65 million adolescents out of school, that opportunity should be seized with both hands.
A successful summit would advance four key imperatives.
First, governments must commit more domestic funds to education.
One background paper for the summit highlights the failure of successive governments in Pakistan, which now has the world’s second-largest out-of-school population, to invest in education.
At the heart of the problem are politicians who are more interested in facilitating tax evasion by the wealthy than improving learning opportunities for the poor.
Second, international donors must reverse the downward trend in aid for education.
Even with an enhanced resource-mobilization effort, roughly $22 billion annually in aid will be needed to achieve universal lower-secondary education.
That is around five times current levels.
Beyond closing the aid gap, United Nations Special Envoy on Education Gordon Brown has rightly called for financing mechanisms to deliver education to children affected by conflict and humanitarian emergencies.
Third, world leaders must get serious about inequality.
Every government should be setting targets aimed explicitly at narrowing education disparities – linked to gender, wealth, and the rural-urban divide – and aligning their budgets with those targets.
As it stands, the disparities are huge.
In Nigeria, for example, urban boys from the wealthiest 20% of households average ten years of schooling, while poor rural girls in northern areas can expect less than two years.
Yet, as another Oslo summit background paper shows, education finance is skewed toward the wealthy in most countries.
Finally, governments and aid agencies must abandon market-based experiments, and commit to genuine system-wide reform.
One key priority area is teachers, who need strong incentives, effective training, and dependable support systems to deliver real learning.
After all, an education system is only as good as its educators.
As world leaders gather in Oslo, millions of parents will be struggling to ensure that their children receive the education they deserve – one that will enable them to build better lives for themselves and their families.
For these parents, schooling is a source of hope.
We owe them and their children our best efforts.
Lost in Transition
WASHINGTON, DC – Financial markets and the news media have one thing in common: they tend to oscillate rapidly between hype and gloom.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in analyses of emerging economies’ prospects.
In the last few months, enthusiasm about these countries’ post-2008 economic resilience and growth potential has given way to bleak forecasts, with economists like Ricardo Hausmann declaring that “the emerging-market party” is coming to an end.
Many now believe that the recent broad-based growth slowdown in emerging economies is not cyclical, but a reflection of underlying structural flaws.
That interpretation contradicts those (including me) who, not long ago, were anticipating a switchover in the engines of the global economy, with autonomous sources of growth in emerging and developing economies compensating for the drag of struggling advanced economies.
To be sure, the baseline scenario for the post-crisis “new normal” has always entailed slower global economic growth than during the pre-2008 boom.
For major advanced economies, the financial crisis five years ago marked the end of a prolonged period of debt-financed domestic consumption, based on wealth effects derived from unsustainable asset-price overvaluation.
The crisis thus led to the demise of China’s export-led growth model, which had helped to buoy commodity prices and, in turn, bolster GDP growth in commodity-exporting developing countries.
Against this background, a return to pre-crisis growth patterns could not reasonably be expected, even after advanced economies completed the deleveraging process and repaired their balance sheets.
But developing countries’ economic performance was still expected to decouple from that of developed countries and drive global output by finding new, relatively autonomous sources of growth.
According to this view, healthy public and private balance sheets and existing infrastructure bottlenecks would provide room for increased investment and higher total factor productivity in many developing countries.
Technological convergence and the transfer of surplus labor to more productive tradable activities would continue, despite the advanced economies’ anemic growth.
At the same time, rapidly growing middle classes across the developing world would constitute a new source of demand.
With their share of global GDP increasing, developing countries would sustain relative demand for commodities, thereby preventing prices from reverting to the low levels that prevailed in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
Improvements in the quality of developing countries’ economic policies in the decade preceding the global financial crisis – reflected in the broad scope available to them in responding to it – reinforced this optimism.
Indeed, emerging countries have largely recognized the need for a comprehensive strategy, comprising targeted policies and deep structural reforms, to develop new sources of growth.
It has become apparent, however, that emerging-market enthusiasts underestimated at least two critical factors.
First, emerging economies’ motivation to transform their growth models was weaker than expected.
The global economic environment – characterized by massive amounts of liquidity and low interest rates stemming from unconventional monetary policy in advanced economies – led most emerging economies to use their policy space to build up existing drivers of growth, rather than develop new ones.
But the growth returns have dwindled, while imbalances have worsened.
Countries like Russia, India, Brazil, South Africa, and Turkey used the space available for credit expansion to support consumption, without a corresponding increase in investment.
China’s non-financial corporate debt increased dramatically, partly owing to dubious real-estate investments.
Moreover, nothing was done in anticipation of the end of terms-of-trade gains in resource-rich countries like Russia, Brazil, Indonesia, and South Africa, which have been facing rising wage costs and supply-capacity limits.
And fiscal weakness and balance-of-payments fragility have become more acute in India, Indonesia, South Africa, and Turkey.
The second problem with emerging-economy forecasts was their failure to account for the vigor with which vested interests and other political forces would resist reform – a major oversight, given how uneven these countries’ reform efforts had been prior to 2008.
The inevitable time lag between reforms and results has not helped matters.
Nonetheless, while emerging economies’ prospects were clearly over-hyped in the wake of the crisis, the bleak forecasts that dominate today’s headlines are similarly exaggerated.
There are still a number of factors indicating that emerging economies’ role in the global economy will continue to grow – just not as rapidly or dramatically as previously thought.
This summer, the mere suggestion of a monetary-policy reversal in the United States sparked a surge in bond yields, which triggered an asset sell-off in several major emerging economies.
Perhaps that experience will serve as a wake-up call for these countries’ leaders.
Only by recognizing the weaknesses of old growth patterns and pursuing the needed structural reforms can emerging economies achieve strong, stable, and sustainable GDP growth – and fulfill their potential as the global economy’s main engines.
The German Leadership Question
FRANKFURT – Many in the eurozone’s crisis countries complain that the source of their suffering is a rigid economic-austerity regime – including reductions in wages and pensions, tax increases, and soaring unemployment – imposed on them by Germany.
Hostility against Germany has reached a level unseen in Europe since the end of World War II.
And yet, despite this antagonism, loud calls for Germany to assume “leadership” in Europe can also be heard.
Germany is undoubtedly Europe’s most important economy; and, with low unemployment and relatively sound public finances, it is also the best-performing one – at least for the time being.
So Germany is asked to take the lead in saving the eurozone, an outcome that is in the interest not only of the entire European community, but also of Germany, which is widely seen as having gained the greatest advantage from the single currency.
Complaints about the imposition of a “teutonic regime” and appeals for German leadership seem to contradict each other – a kind of continent-wide cognitive dissonance.
In fact, the complaints and calls for leadership are mutually reinforcing.