China has chosen a high-risk path – ignoring human rights and violating UN sanctions – to secure the energy and other resources needed to sustain its economy’s rapid growth.
It is a choice that neither befits one of the permanent members of the Security Council, nor demonstrates China’s readiness to be a responsible stakeholder in the international community.
China’s willingness to arm and defend African dictators, even in the teeth of UN sanctions, as in Libya, undermines its claim to a “peaceful rise.”
Given China’s Libyan duplicity, the world should now determine whether it is a country that obeys international rules only when doing so suits its interests.
China’s AIDS Crisis
It is rare for a foreign doctor to get to China’s rural areas, where its AIDS epidemic was born and takes a horrible toll.
But recently, two nurses and I ventured into a poor farming area, Nizui in Hubei Province, as part of a Medecins Sans Frontières (MSF) team to visit the Liu family and evaluate their 7-month-old baby.
The child was the size of a two month old, but his eyes held the gaze of an 80-year-old man long acquainted with extreme suffering.
The baby was dying of AIDS.
His parents, aunts, and uncles were also HIV-positive.
The Liu family is one of thousands of poor farming families in China’s interior who contracted HIV through contaminated blood donations during the 1990’s, when under-regulated for-profit blood banking companies reused needles and transferred blood from infected donors to clean donors after extracting the plasma.
The Chinese Health Ministry recently put the total number of HIV/AIDS cases at 840,000, although most experts believe that the true number is much higher.
Some believe that by 2010, the number of infected Chinese may reach 10 million.
After years of taking a passive, low-profile approach to the epidemic, health officials have stepped up their anti-HIV campaign.
Since 80% of HIV/AIDS patients reside in the countryside, greater access to health care in these areas has become a priority.
This past July, during the highly publicized 15th International AIDS Conference in Bangkok, Premier Wen Jiabao declared all-out war against the burgeoning epidemic.
Earlier this year, the government promised blood-products screening, free voluntary HIV testing, and free medicine for the poor.
This new anti-HIV/AIDS campaign, which the international community has lauded, is more open and proactive than before.
But it must still operate in the context of a closed society, where government control over the media limits the flow of information necessary to deal with any public health epidemic.
Moreover, it is unclear how care will be delivered to the rural front lines, where the old system of clinics based in Peoples’ Communes collapsed with the de-collectivization of agriculture.
To be effective, clinics in areas where HIV/AIDS is prevalent must provide patients with the same standard of care that is offered for other health conditions.
Unfortunately, the door to such access remains largely closed, partly because China was initially reluctant to allow overseas groups into their hinterlands to assist.
Nonetheless, local and foreign NGO’s are now starting to play a role in filling the gap between government policies and front-line healthcare delivery.
In May 2003, MSF was authorized to set up an HIV/AIDS clinic in Xiangfan, Hubei Province.
On my recent visit, I met Mr. Du, a thin-framed, HIV-positive farmer who lost his wife to AIDS last year and was desperate to prevent his infected 7-year-old son from meeting the same fate.
He had been taking the boy all over China by train, bus, and truck in search of help.
Last month alone, they visited five large cities without success.
The chance that Mr. Du, and those like him, will find help in China is slim; at present, most clinics and hospitals are not adequately prepared to treat HIV-infected patients.
Treatment is extremely limited where it is available.
For example, Xiangfan’s Infectious Diseases Hospital is the prefecture’s only health facility where HIV/AIDS patients can be admitted.
On paper, the hospital appears well staffed and adequately equipped, but on my rounds there, I found the halls and wards deserted and barren.
Few therapeutic and diagnostic options were available.
Even a basic test like a CAT scan would require transport to another regional hospital.
But under-equipped hospitals may not be the greatest obstacle to controlling China's AIDS crisis.
Equally harmful are the government’s sensitivity to its own policy failures and the stigma attached to a disease that is often sexually transmitted.
Indeed, information is so limited and the stigma so strong that ordinary people – and sometimes medical personnel – often ostracize AIDS patients.
Patients who do receive care are often treated with substandard, even harmful, medicine.
According to the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Associations, patients in China can have a 40-50% chance of being sold fake over-the-counter remedies and an even higher chance of being sold fake prescription drugs.
Some of these counterfeit products contain toxic ingredients.
Foreign NGOs such as MSF insist on using medications that are up to World Health Organization standards, but the Chinese government insists that such restrictive measures are excessive.
Although MSF uses its own drug supply, Chinese patients still often buy medicine with unknown ingredients and efficacy on the street.
Safety regulations must, at a minimum, be applied to the prescription of the anti-retroviral medications that fight HIV, because such drugs are extremely sensitive to dosage changes and interactions with other medicines.
Improper use of these medicines fosters HIV resistance and provides little therapeutic value for patients.
There is no quick-fix solution to ending China’s AIDS crisis.
Officials there must focus not only on developing a pragmatic, realistic healthcare infrastructure in rural areas, but also on bringing about greater openness in China’s media in order to spread life-saving public information.
Like all epidemics, HIV/AIDS in China is a public health crisis that can only be solved with the mass dissemination of accurate information.
Transforming promises and policies into patient rights, awareness, and effective health care will undoubtedly take time, especially for a country as massive and lacking in transparency as China.
For the hundreds of thousands of HIV sufferers, this is likely to be more time than they have left.
Kowtow or Cooperation in Asia?
TOKYO – When an American president’s first overseas trip following his re-election is to Asia, one can be sure that something big is afoot in the region.
Indeed, Barack Obama’s decision to go first to impoverished and long-isolated Myanmar (Burma) attests to the potency of the changes underway in that country – and to US awareness of China’s efforts to shape an Asia that kowtows to its economic and foreign-policy interests.
Events at the ASEAN and East Asian leadership summits in Phnom Penh, the other key stop on Obama’s tour, confirmed this.
At the ASEAN summit’s conclusion, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge commander who has ruled his country with an iron fist for three decades, closed the meeting by proclaiming that all of the leaders had agreed not to “internationalize” sovereignty disputes over islands in the South China Sea.
Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, present at the summit to sign new multi-million-dollar aid agreements with Cambodia, smiled and nodded in agreement at this apparent acceptance of Chinese wishes.
Not so fast, said Filipino President Benigno S. Aquino III.
No such agreement had been made.
Hun Sen had mischaracterized the discussions among ASEAN’s leaders.
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda, who was also present in Phnom Penh, agreed with Aquino.
At the summit’s end, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei and Singapore joined with Aquino in demanding that Hun Sen’s statement be amended.
All six of these states have been pushing China to negotiate with ASEAN a multilateral process to resolve the South China Sea territorial disputes.
China, dwarfing all of them, prefers bilateral talks.
As Hun Sen’s behavior demonstrates, countries that are overly dependent on Chinese aid and diplomatic backing will harmonize their policies accordingly.
For two decades, Myanmar behaved likewise, until Chinese overreach, particularly the now-abandoned Myitsone dam project, revealed in full the subservient relationship that China envisioned.
Indeed, China’s arrogance – 100% of the power from the proposed dam was to be exported to China – was probably the key factor in precipitating Myanmar’s democratic political transition and new openness to the world.
But Asians must not misconstrue Obama’s visit.
Although the US is certainly undertaking a strategic “pivot” to Asia, America alone cannot construct a viable security structure for the region.
From India to Japan, every Asian country must play its part.
There is no alternative to this approach, because China’s rise has been accompanied by massive social and economic changes – in some instances dislocation – across the entire region.
Asia’s economies have, of course, become much more integrated in recent decades, particularly through production for global supply chains.
But economic integration has not been matched diplomatically.
Even two of the region’s great democracies, Japan and South Korea, which have nearly identical strategic interests, have allowed an old territorial dispute – itself reflecting older unresolved animosities – to block closer cooperation.
China’s prolonged – and apparently contentious – leadership transition, punctuated by the purge of Bo Xilai, suggests that its leaders’ ability to continue to manage the country’s emergence as a great power is not entirely certain.
That makes the absence of a widely accepted regional structure of peace all the more dangerous.
International orders emerge either by consensus or through force.
The great task for Obama, incoming Chinese President, Xi Jinping, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, the new Japanese and South Korean leaders who will come to power following elections in December, and all ASEAN members is to ensure that consensus prevails in Asia without stoking China’s greatest strategic fear – encirclement.
As everyone in Asia should recognize, whenever communist China has deemed that it faced such a threat, it has resorted to war – in Korea in 1950, India in 1962, the Soviet Union in 1969, and Vietnam in 1979.
But fear of provoking China should not stop Asia’s leaders from seeking a regional security consensus, such as the proposed code of conduct for disputes in the South China Sea.
Only the weakest of Asian states will submit willingly to Chinese hegemony – or, for that matter, to a Cold War-style US-led containment strategy.
Indeed, the idea that Asian countries must choose between a Chinese or American future is false.
But can Asia’s fear of hegemony and China’s fear of military encirclement be reconciled?
Only a shared sense of common purpose can prevent regional militarization.
Some early steps in the right direction are visible.
The United States has joined several other countries in embracing a Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade pact linking the Americas with Asia.
Japan’s ruling party and leading opposition party are coming around to support the idea, and Obama’s invitation to China to join suggests that the US is trying to forge regional consensus where it can.
For now, however, China has other ideas.
It has pressed ASEAN to establish a trade zone that would include China but exclude the US and Japan.
In any case, trade agreements, however beneficial, can do little to defuse Asia’s sovereignty disputes, and it is here – the greatest current source of regional tensions – that a shared common enterprise is not only possible, but also necessary if peace is to be preserved.
After all, no government in the region – whether a democracy like Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the Philippines, a one-party state like China and Vietnam, or a tiny monarchy like Brunei – can acquiesce on such issues and hope to survive.
Such diplomatic realism need not lead to zero-sum outcomes, as the example of European integration demonstrates.
Just as the European Coal and Steel Community preceded today’s European Union, all of Asia would benefit from embracing shared development (without any renunciation of sovereignty claims) of the rich maritime resources that, in several cases, are fueling the sovereignty disputes.
China’s Antifragile Ambitions
HONG KONG – China has once again reached a crossroads on its journey toward inclusive, sustainable prosperity.
Within the next decade, China’s leaders must design and implement reforms to combat corruption; support migration to cities (such as liberalizing the house-registration system); promote technological innovation; rebalance sources of economic growth; raise environmental and labor standards; and build the country’s social-welfare system, including health care, education, and social security.
To ensure a system’s sustainability, its design must account for what Nassim N. Taleb called rare “black swan” events – which, as the global economic crisis demonstrated, do occur, with devastating consequences.
But measures to make systems more “resilient” or “robust” would be incomplete.
They should not only be able to withstand volatility; they should be primed to profit from stress and chaos.
Recently, Taleb coined the term “antifragile” to describe a system that benefits from inherent uncertainty, volatility, and disorder.
He pointed out that, while rigid systems may seem more stable, they are not equipped to cope with unexpected shocks, making them fragile in the long run.
By contrast, frequent exposure to localized, temporary volatility forces systems to become more dynamic and flexible, enhancing their capacity to thrive under pressure.
Given this, rather than allowing demands for maximum efficiency to push structures to their limits, redundancies (equivalent capabilities implemented in multiple ways) should be built into systems.
These low-cost measures nurture long-term antifragility, while capturing future upside gains that could compensate for black swan events.
Antifragility is crucial in large economies like China, where administration is largely centralized, but activities are dispersed among families, civil society, markets, and the various levels of government.
China’s greatest challenge lies in balancing its decentralized, family-based traditions with its centralized governance, thereby developing in its institutions the kind of antifragility that is already present in its culture.
China has been struggling to balance centralization and fragmentation – that is, control and uncertainty – throughout its long history of rising and falling dynasties, domestic decay, and foreign invasion.
While the open, meritocratic selection of “scholar-officials” helped to sustain China’s closed dynastic governance structure for more than 2,000 years, it could not offset the system’s growing fragility under the Qing Dynasty, as territorial gains increased the empire’s population from 150 million to 450 million.
Rampant corruption, rising social unrest, and the inability to resist modern Western powers ultimately caused the dynasty, and the world’s longest-lasting bureaucracy, to crumble in 1912.
The nationalist government that followed, which established the Republic of China, also failed to address the tension between centralization and fragmentation – what the macro-historian Ray Huang called China’s “mathematical unmanageability.”
Indeed, it never developed the property-rights infrastructure or the monetary and fiscal policies needed in a family-dominated agrarian economy with an elite-run government.
By effectively enforcing property rights and implementing national policy, the Chinese Communist Party became the institutional mechanism that bridged the divide between the elites (the Party) and the masses.
But, in 1958-1961, excessive central planning to support the Great Leap Forward (Mao Zedong’s intensive campaign to industrialize and collectivize China’s economy) generated systemic fragility.
The situation began to improve in 1978, when Deng Xiaoping began to implement market-oriented reforms and open up the economy, giving China access to new opportunities for economic growth and employment. Through the so-called Four Modernizations, the crucial sectors of agriculture, industry, national defense, and science and technology were strengthened.
At the same time, China was slow to open up its financial system – even as other East Asian economies pursued efficiency by liberalizing their capital accounts in the 1990’s.
As a result, when the Asian financial crisis struck in 1997, China was insulated from the volatility that ravaged its fragile neighbors.
In fact, the crisis became an opportunity, prompting China to join the World Trade Organization, implement reforms of its financial system and state-owned enterprises (SOEs), list major banks publicly, and privatize civil-service housing.
But many of China’s antifragile measures have been piecemeal and incomplete.
The need to overhaul SOEs, for example, remains on the agenda, owing to the power of vested interests that oppose further privatization and market-based reforms.
China’s leaders now must identify the specific areas in which to build antifragility, and approach the required reforms prudently.
While they must ensure that reforms are comprehensive, they also must avoid attempting too much too fast, which could trigger resistance from deeply entrenched players or unintentionally trigger dangerous chain reactions.
Fortunately, China’s relatively strong fiscal and foreign-exchange positions can cushion the economy against short-term shocks.
And, notwithstanding corruption-induced fragility, the bureaucracy’s capacity to implement policy is sound.
A major challenge will be delineating the roles and responsibilities of the Party, the state, the market, and civil society.
Given the government’s proven capacity to intervene, the default option during a crisis has been to rely on administrative measures rather than on market forces.
To allow disorderly self-correction by markets would require confidence at all levels of governance, from the central government to village administrations, and among SOEs.
Moreover, China’s leaders must build sufficient institutional power within the judiciary, civil society, and the media to implement the rule of law and enhance long-term antifragility.
This entails preventing administrative abuses, establishing a level playing field for SOEs and other companies, and divorcing regulators from regulated entities.
As they undertake structural reforms across multiple sectors, China’s leaders have the opportunity to bolster their country’s long-term prosperity.
But success will require striking a balance between maintaining systemic stability and allowing the country’s massive economy to adapt and grow – a challenge with which China has struggled for centuries.
China\u0027s Anti-Secession Law Boomerangs
The passage of any law by China’s rubber-stamp National People’s Congress is always a mere formality.
But the controversial legislation to outlaw Taiwanese secession has proved anything but routine.
It raised the stakes for the island’s pro-independence camp and increased the risk of a cross-Strait military conflict.
The anti-secession law’s vague language and attempt at softened wording – perhaps geared toward mollifying foreign critics – paradoxically increases rather than decreases the likelihood that China and the United States could be unwittingly and unwillingly drawn into an avoidable military conflict.
By failing to clearly delineate presumed or potential “red lines” for Taiwan, the law leaves open the possibility of substantial miscalculation or misinterpretation.
Despite several weeks of intense US pressure to soften - or even retract - the proposed law, China’s leaders did little more than attempt to reinforce their position that “non-peaceful” (i.e., military) measures would serve strictly as a last resort - which had already been assumed anyway.
The Bush administration’s reaction was uncharacteristically blunt, with its call for “Beijing to reconsider the passage of the law'” – a rather directly worded intrusion into what China considers to be an internal matter.
Taiwan’s December 2004 legislative elections had delivered an unexpected defeat for Chen and his ruling Democratic Progressive Party, or DPP, and the pro-independence camp’s failure to secure a legislative majority was seen as a positive development for relations with the mainland.
Indeed, the start of 2005 saw some movement on improved ties, with the introduction of a hugely successful lunar new year charter-flights program.
This gave rise to serious discussion about instituting permanent direct air links to aid bilateral trade flow.
Now, in the aftermath of the anti-secession law, the future of the charter-flights scheme looks bleak.
Opinion polls in Taiwan reflect public dismay over the Chinese legislation, and this negative sentiment will raise the pressure on President Chen, who recently antagonized some of his more ardent pro-independence supporters by reaching out to the pro-unification opposition People First Party.
A survey by Taiwan’s China Times found that 56% of those polled resented the anti-secession law, with 47% saying that Taiwan should retaliate by either holding a public referendum on the issue or introducing counter-legislation of its own.
There are now serious concerns that the so-called dark greens – the harder-line faction in Taiwan’s pro-independence pan-green political camp – will seize this issue as a stick with which to beat President Chen.
As DPP legislator Hsiao Bi-khim recently said, the anti-secession law “will make it very hard for us to be moderates”.
One of the more frustrating elements of the anti-secession law is the fact that it is an entirely unnecessary provocation.
The absence of laws mandating force to block separatist activity has never stopped Chinese authorities from brutally persecuting individuals and groups who have called for an independent Tibet or Xinjiang.
There is thus little reason to believe that a more explicitly assertive stance is necessary for dealing with the “splittist” government in Taipei.
Missile tests, PLA military exercises and threatening rhetoric have been sufficient deterrents until now.
Mainland officials justify the law in terms of clarifying their policy and establishing a legal premise for invading the island.
In practice, however, the construction of legal foundations could weaken the Chinese government’s operational flexibility when responding to a Taiwanese move toward independence.
The law of unintended consequences dictates that this effort to deny ambiguity to Taiwanese activists could backfire, and instead leave mainland leaders without room to maneuver if Taiwan does attempt to revise the status quo.
This means that the Hu Jintao administration could well have its hands tied, and find itself unable to pursue some kind of compromise solution to a situation that is already fraught with nuance and complexity, and which shows no sign of getting easier to manage with the passage of time.
While outright military conflict is still considered unlikely, the combination of China’s vague “red lines” and non-specific threats will certainly raise the likelihood of miscalculation and misinterpretation on both sides.
More broadly, the fact that the anti-secession law was introduced at all comes as a major disappointment to those who had been impressed by the apparent sophistication and skillfulness of recent Chinese diplomacy.
Coming in the same week as China’s poorly handled removal of Tung Chee-hwa as Hong Kong’s Chief Executive, the anti-secession law episode illustrates that the mainland’s PR savvy has its limits and that Taiwan will remain an emotional and divisive thorn in the side of Sino-US relations.
China’s Baby Step
Whatever the ultimate economic effects of China’s first modest step towards floating its currency, one has to admire its strategic brilliance.
The genius of China’s mini-move (allowing the Yuan to rise 2% against the dollar) is that no one can tell when or what is going to happen next.
Protectionists in the United States and Europe, itching to slap huge punitive tariffs on Chinese goods, have been caught flat-footed.
They want to keep bathing in press coverage, but if they push their China-bashing too far and too fast, the protectionists will be seen as hindering delicate behind-the-scenes negotiations.
But no one knows whether China’s baby step is the start of something much bigger, as China’s authorities hint one day and deny the next.
By relenting just a little to intense global pressure to revalue its exchange rate, the Chinese leadership has masterfully stifled the growing chorus of demands to rein in its growing trade surplus.
The key question, however, remains whether China is defying market forces at its own risk.
On the surface, at least, the mini-revaluation hardly seems to have compromised China’s ability to bend exchange markets to its will.
Foreign experts had warned that a small Yuan appreciation might be worse than none.
While hardly denting global trade imbalances, a small move would bring in a flood of foreign capital, overwhelming China’s currency defenses and leading to chaos.
So far, that has not happened and, China once again seems to have gone its own way and proved the experts wrong.
But hold the applause.
Perhaps the speculative-inflow scenario will play out, but in slow motion.
After all, China is not a country where investors can just take their money in a heartbeat.
It can hold the fort because it maintains one of the world’s strictest regimes of exchange and capital controls.
Unlike many Latin American and former Soviet-bloc countries, where similar controls are honored mainly in the breach, violating capital controls in China is virtually a capital offense.
But, over the past fifty years, when many other countries, including France and Italy, implemented draconian controls, the result was always the same: eventually, the private sector adapted and eroded the controls’ effectiveness.
Whether by misreporting imports and exports or exploiting corrupt government officials (which China has in ample supply), private capital eventually starts finding its way around the controls if the incentives are strong enough.
Thus, even if the Chinese authorities can somehow keep their capital controls from hemorrhaging as the country’s financial system becomes more sophisticated and decentralized, they will not be able to stop the controls from dying a death of a thousand cuts.
After that, China will be able to keep its exchange rate pegged only by slavishly following US interest-rate policy, which makes no sense for such a large and diverse region.
Indeed, over the longer term, the biggest concern for China is that some day money will be trying to get out.
Even China’s vast reserves will not be enough to stave off a painful devaluation.
It is a lot easier to exit from a fixed exchange rate regime when the pressures on the currency are upwards.
While it may seem hard to imagine that the speculative tide might ever turn against China, exchange-rate pressures can turn in an instant.
Today’s darling currency can be tomorrow’s dog.
Considering China’s huge and growing income inequalities, and its massive disguised rural unemployment, it is easy to imagine a period of political instability that sends investors heading for the exits.
Mix in China’s shaky financial system and the prospect of trade sanctions after an altercation over, say, Taiwan, and it is clear that the Yuan might not always be a one-way bet.
Last but not least, the Chinese authorities desperately need to maintain the country’s breakneck economic growth in order to preserve the Communist Party’s legitimacy.
But, as the economy becomes richer and more complex, there will be no escaping the market imperative in internal credit allocation.
Every other emerging market, even in Asia, has eventually had to cross this bridge.
Indeed, the need to pursue financial liberalization to maintain growth is a central reason why middle-income countries are so prone to financial crises.
That’s why Chinese authorities should move to greater flexibility now, and not wait until it is too late.
So should we expect to see much bigger currency moves in China anytime soon?
Should we ever expect to see wild gyrations in China’s exchange rate of the sort one routinely sees in, say, the Australian dollar or the South African rand?
Neither scenario is very likely.
Only fire-breathing free-market advocates, seemingly oblivious to the fact that China’s shaky financial system cannot survive liberalization overnight, are calling for an extreme version of floating.
But there may well be a lot more to come over the next 12-18 months.
The first round of Yuan revaluation won’t be over until the currency is up against the dollar by at least 10%, and probably more.
China’s first currency move was brilliant only if it is not the last.
China’s Bad Debtor
BEIJING – Before the global financial crisis hit, critics of China’s economic imbalances – its twin fiscal and trade surpluses – mainly concentrated on the misallocation of resources that occurs when poor countries borrow from rich countries at high interest rates and lend the money to them at low interest rates.
The great irony of the financial crisis is that the situation has become worse, not better.
China ’s foreign-exchange reserves, indeed, are facing a triple whammy: a decline in the US dollar’s purchasing power, a fall in the prices of US government securities, and possible inflation in the longer run.
The bulk of China’s $2.3 trillion in foreign reserves are held not for the purpose of protection against negative external shocks, but as savings in the form of US Treasury notes.
China thus needs to preserve the value of its savings.
But there is no question whatsoever that the US dollar will go south in the long run – a depreciation that started in April 2002 and, after a short interval, resumed in March 2009.
Unless the US economy improves its trade balance, the dollar will fall.
But the US cannot improve its trade balance unless the dollar falls.
Measured by the dollar index, therefore, capital losses on China’s foreign exchange reserves are inevitable.
Due to the huge US budget deficit, the supply of American government bonds will increase astronomically in the years ahead.
But there is no guarantee that demand for these Treasury notes among foreign investors – including foreign governments – will be sufficient.
So it is very likely that when the global economy has returned to a sort of normality and safe-haven demand has declined, the prices of US government securities will fall and their yields will rise.
As a result, China’s dollar-denominated foreign-exchange reserves, which account for the largest share of all the foreign holdings of US government securities, will suffer interest-rate losses.
Moreover, the US Federal Reserve is targeting a 4% annual inflation rate.
This alone means that under normal circumstances the purchasing power of China’s foreign-exchange reserves will automatically depreciate by 4% each year.
Due to the extremely expansive US monetary policy that has been in place since the sub-prime crisis began two years ago, the real value of China’s foreign-exchange reserves has already been eroded, with or without inflation.
China is like the shareholders of a company that has increased the supply of its shares in a stealthy way: the share price may not have fallen yet, but it will.
Unless the Fed successfully implements an exit strategy from monetary expansion, which is doubtful, China will not be able to recover its losses.
A less likely but more damaging scenario is that all the money dropped on the economy by US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke will eventually stoke a bout of serious inflation.
If this nightmare comes true, China’s packed savings in the form of US government securities (which now amounts to some $900 million in Treasury bills alone) will simply go down the drain.
Despite China’s limited room for maneuver with regard to its stocks of foreign-exchange reserves, it should never give up its efforts to safeguard the value of its hard-earned wealth, which has been entrusted to the good will and supposedly responsible hands of the US government.
As the stronger and more experienced party, the US can help to allay China’s fears about the safety of its national savings.
For example, the US government should offer more financial instruments like Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), thereby allowing China to convert some of its holdings of US government securities into similar but safer assets.
Furthermore, China should be allowed to convert part of its foreign-exchange reserves into assets denominated in the International Monetary Fund’s special drawing rights (SDRs).
Of course, China should not rule out the possibility of adjusting the composition of its foreign-exchange reserves to mimic the composition of the SDR.
Finally, if the US government cannot safeguard the value its securities, it should compensate China in one way or another.
Only then can China and the world be certain that America’s irresponsible attitude – “the dollar is our currency, but your problem” – has become a thing of the past.
China’s Bad Growth Bet
LONDON – I recently took two trips to China just as the government launched its 12th Five-Year Plan to rebalance the country’s long-term growth model.
My visits deepened my view that there is a potentially destabilizing contradiction between China’s short- and medium-term economic performance.
China’s economy is overheating now, but, over time, its current overinvestment will prove deflationary both domestically and globally.
Once increasing fixed investment becomes impossible – most likely after 2013 – China is poised for a sharp slowdown.
Instead of focusing on securing a soft landing today, Chinese policymakers should be worrying about the brick wall that economic growth may hit in the second half of the quinquennium.
Despite the rhetoric of the new Five-Year Plan – which, like the previous one, aims to increase the share of consumption in GDP – the path of least resistance is the status quo.
The new plan’s details reveal continued reliance on investment, including public housing, to support growth, rather than faster currency appreciation, substantial fiscal transfers to households, taxation and/or privatization of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), liberalization of the household registration (hukou) system, or an easing of financial repression.
China has grown for the last few decades on the back of export-led industrialization and a weak currency, which have resulted in high corporate and household savings rates and reliance on net exports and fixed investment (infrastructure, real estate, and industrial capacity for import-competing and export sectors).
When net exports collapsed in 2008-2009 from 11% of GDP to 5%, China’s leader reacted by further increasing the fixed-investment share of GDP from 42% to 47%.
Thus, China did not suffer a severe recession – as occurred in Japan, Germany, and elsewhere in emerging Asia in 2009 – only because fixed investment exploded.
And the fixed-investment share of GDP has increased further in 2010-2011, to almost 50%.
The problem, of course, is that no country can be productive enough to reinvest 50% of GDP in new capital stock without eventually facing immense overcapacity and a staggering non-performing loan problem.
China is rife with overinvestment in physical capital, infrastructure, and property.
To a visitor, this is evident in sleek but empty airports and bullet trains (which will reduce the need for the 45 planned airports), highways to nowhere, thousands of colossal new central and provincial government buildings, ghost towns, and brand-new aluminum smelters kept closed to prevent global prices from plunging.
Commercial and high-end residential investment has been excessive, automobile capacity has outstripped even the recent surge in sales, and overcapacity in steel, cement, and other manufacturing sectors is increasing further.
In the short run, the investment boom will fuel inflation, owing to the highly resource-intensive character of growth.
But overcapacity will lead inevitably to serious deflationary pressures, starting with the manufacturing and real-estate sectors.
Eventually, most likely after 2013, China will suffer a hard landing.
All historical episodes of excessive investment – including East Asia in the 1990’s – have ended with a financial crisis and/or a long period of slow growth.
To avoid this fate, China needs to save less, reduce fixed investment, cut net exports as a share of GDP, and boost the share of consumption.
The trouble is that the reasons the Chinese save so much and consume so little are structural.
It will take two decades of reforms to change the incentive to overinvest.
Traditional explanations for the high savings rate (lack of a social safety net, limited public services, aging of the population, underdevelopment of consumer finance, etc.) are only part of the puzzle.
Chinese consumers do not have a greater propensity to save than Chinese in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan; they all save about 30% of disposable income.
The big difference is that the share of China’s GDP going to the household sector is below 50%, leaving little for consumption.
Several Chinese policies have led to a massive transfer of income from politically weak households to politically powerful companies.
A weak currency reduces household purchasing power by making imports expensive, thereby protecting import-competing SOEs and boosting exporters’ profits.
Low interest rates on deposits and low lending rates for firms and developers mean that the household sector’s massive savings receive negative rates of return, while the real cost of borrowing for SOEs is also negative.
This creates a powerful incentive to overinvest and implies enormous redistribution from households to SOEs, most of which would be losing money if they had to borrow at market-equilibrium interest rates.
Moreover, labor repression has caused wages to grow much more slowly than productivity.
To ease the constraints on household income, China needs more rapid exchange-rate appreciation, liberalization of interest rates, and a much sharper increase in wage growth.
More importantly, China needs either to privatize its SOEs, so that their profits become income for households, or to tax their profits at a far higher rate and transfer the fiscal gains to households.
Instead, on top of household savings, the savings – or retained earnings – of the corporate sector, mostly SOEs, tie up another 25% of GDP.
But boosting the share of income that goes to the household sector could be hugely disruptive, as it could bankrupt a large number of SOEs, export-oriented firms, and provincial governments, all of which are politically powerful.
As a result, China will invest even more under the current Five-Year Plan.
Continuing down the investment-led growth path will exacerbate the visible glut of capacity in manufacturing, real estate, and infrastructure, and thus will intensify the coming economic slowdown once further fixed-investment growth becomes impossible.
Until the change of political leadership in 2012-2013, China’s policymakers may be able to maintain high growth rates, but at a very high foreseeable cost.
China’s Banking Revolution
One of the greatest challenges China must confront before the WTO treaty enters into force in 2007 is to prepare the country’s banking system for privatization and competition with foreign banks.
The government has established a new agency, Central Hujin Investment Company, to manage and re-capitalize big state-owned banks before they are sold.
Hujin has already injected $60 billion of China’s foreign-exchange reserves into the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank, and the Industrial and Commercial Bank.
The Agricultural Bank will also require new capital, although the government is not yet preparing it for privatization.
The government’s rescue policies appear to be working.
During the past two months, Bank of America has announced a $2.5 billion investment in return for a 9% stake in the China Construction Bank, and The Singapore-based holding company Temasek paid $1.4bn for a 5.1% stake in China Construction Bank.
The Royal Bank of Scotland is leading an investment group that will invest $3.1 billion more in the Bank of China, while Goldman Sachs and Germany’s Allianz are close to an agreement to acquire a 9.9% stake in the Industrial and Commercial Bank for a similar sum.
The government hopes that these foreign investments will set the stage for the banks to go public on stock exchanges in Hong Kong and elsewhere during 2006, whereas foreign banks are investing with an eye to penetrating the enormous Chinese market.
The big three state-owned banks have vast branch networks and employ hundreds of thousands of people.
Foreign banks could never hope to achieve such comprehensive coverage without a local partner.
They will focus initially on sectors such as credit cards but could develop other joint ventures.
HSBC also announced a major investment in Ping An Insurance, which could set the stage for experiments with Bancassurance in the future. 
The Bank of Communications listed on the Hong Kong stock market shortly after the HSBC investment, so it has been able to provide the market with more information than have the banks that are still awaiting privatization.
Goldman Sachs is bullish, believing that the bank can record 17% loan growth this year, a 20-basis-point improvement in margins, and significant growth in fee income.
The major concern, however, is evidence of a growing volume of non-performing loans.
The Bank of Communications’ performance suggests that China’s lending boom of 2003 and 2004 could lead to another wave of defaults this year and next.
In 2004, the investment share of GDP rose to 45%—one of the highest levels in recorded financial history—as banks financed a huge expansion of property development and manufacturing capacity.
Now, the largest banks are claiming significant increases in non-performing property loans, while the glut of new industrial capacity implies that some firms may not have adequate profits to service their debts. 
Alhough the Bank of China curtailed its lending growth to only 6% last year because of concerns about credit quality, many new local banks have expanded their lending aggressively, and could now suffer huge losses as the economy slows and firms’ solvency weakens.
In these circumstances, privatization will have profound consequences for China’s economy.
The recent capital-spending boom produced a burst of speculative lending in 2003 and 2004 because the banking system was still state-owned and responsive to political pressure—until the government itself imposed credit controls in April 2004 to prevent a sharp upsurge in non-performing loans.
In the next business cycle, China’s banks will be privately owned for the first time since 1949.
They will make loans on the basis of commercial criteria rather than relations with big state-owned companies.
They will be less vulnerable to political pressure from local governments to finance development projects.
They are likely to place much greater emphasis on consumer lending, especially mortgages and credit cards.
With China’s mortgage lending equal to only 10% of GDP, compared to 60-70% in the Anglo-Saxon countries, there is huge opportunity for growth.
The transformation in China’s banking system, coupled with the recent decision to revalue China’s currency, will require major changes in the conduct of monetary policy.
Until recently, an exchange-rate peg dominated China’s monetary policy, with interest rates unchanged for nine years until October 2004, as the government attempted to manage lending through administrative guidance and credit controls.
In the future, China will have to rely more heavily on interest rates to manage monetary policy, using the price of capital, not political considerations, to influence how firms make investment decisions.
The transformation in China’s banking system is complex and difficult because it involves a change in its fundamental nature.
However, barring any major economic bumps, the changes will have a positive impact, as capital allocation becomes more efficient.
Increased emphasis on household lending should also create a better balance in the economy between capital spending and consumer spending than was possible during the expansion of 2002-2004.
China’s Best Hope
2008 will not be remembered chiefly for noble or heroic acts.
Yet, amidst the news reports over the past few months of financial fraud, bloodshed in India and Gaza, and global economic disasters, one item stood out for its bravery and nobility.
On December 10, the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, more than 300 Chinese citizens, ranging from law professors to businessmen, farmers, and even some government officials, put their names to a remarkable document, entitled Charter 08.
The signatories, later joined by thousands more, asked where China was heading in the twenty-first century: “Will it continue with ‘modernization’ under authoritarian rule, or will it embrace universal human values, join the mainstream of civilized nations, and build a democratic system?” 
There is nothing incendiary about Charter 08, no call for violent rebellion, no thirst for revenge or retribution.
It merely asks for what citizens of all liberal democracies take for granted: the right to question government policies, protection of human rights, an independent judiciary, and multi-party elections.
The model for Charter 08 was Czechoslovakia’s Charter 77.
In 1977, several prominent signatories, such as Václav Havel, were arrested as a result.
Likewise, one of the bravest, most lucid Chinese intellectuals, Liu Xiaobo, was arrested in December for signing Charter 08, and has yet to be released.
Other signers have been interrogated and harassed.
Charter 08 has not received the attention it deserves, perhaps because most people have other, more pressing concerns.
But there is also a tendency, not only in China, to dismiss such calls for democracy as irrelevant, even misguided.
Recent American policies have given the promotion of democracy a bad name.
In China, and other remaining areas of Asian authoritarianism, it has become customary, even among some self-professed “liberals,” to argue that democracy may be fine for Europeans and Americans, but is unsuited to Asian conditions.
China is too big, its culture too different, and its population still too poor and uneducated to support a democratic system.
An alternative to this line of argument is to claim that China has its own kind of democracy, based on a Confucian idea of government benevolence and the Chinese people’s cultural propensity to sacrifice individual rights to collective goods.
To those who take this view – and on this point many Western businessmen are in complete agreement with the Chinese Communist Party – the signatories of Charter 08 are simply out of touch with their own culture.
In terms of its immediate impact, it is true that Charter 08 will hardly make a ripple in the pond of Chinese politics.
The government will not even discuss the Charter’s ideas, let alone do anything to implement them.
But this is no reason to call it irrelevant.
In 1977, few people would have predicted that Havel would one day preside over a Czech democracy.
He and his fellow dissidents were a tiny minority, too.
A liberal-democratic China may not come soon, but after Charter 08 no one can deny that many Chinese desperately want it.
The expression of this desire is especially important now that the world is gripped by a terrifying economic crisis.
Widespread economic distress is never without political consequences.
Xenophobic populism is on the rise in Europe.
President Barack Obama will have a difficult time curbing resentful protectionism in the United States.
Japanese might revert to angry nationalism. Nowhere, however, are the political and social consequences of an economic slump more potentially destabilizing than in China.
This is because the Chinese Communist Party’s monopoly on power can be justified only by continued rapid economic growth, without which workers and farmers will lose their jobs, and the urban middle classes their chance of increasing prosperity.
The economic boom is the only source of legitimacy that the one-party state has left.
Few people, even Party members, still believe in Marxism-Leninism, let alone Maoism.
And the general discontent with official corruption and political oppression was amply demonstrated in all regions of China in 1989.
The Communist government managed to stay in power after Tiananmen not just through brute force.
A semblance of political legitimacy, especially among the educated middle class, was purchased with the promise of greater wealth.
As long as people felt that they were getting richer, demands for more freedom of speech, better protection of human rights, and the right to vote could be postponed.
But if this arrangement collapses, and increasing material prosperity can no longer be taken for granted, many things could happen – few of them pleasant.
Rural areas and industrial cities might explode in massive riots.
While the government might be able to crush such disturbances with force, a loss of confidence among the middle class would be more serious.
Militant nationalism, partly encouraged by nervous rulers, might be one consequence.
Attempts by the military to stem unrest by taking control of government might be another.
If there were no alternative ideas to one-party authoritarianism, military rule, or nationwide chaos, the future of China would be very bleak indeed.
But there is an alternative.
It has been set out eloquently and persuasively in Charter 08.
If China manages one day to follow the example of South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan, and join the “mainstream of civilized nations” by establishing a liberal democracy, then December 10, 2008, will go down in history as one of the key dates of its conception.
China’s Blackstone Coup
When China National Offshore Oil Company tried to buy America’s UNOCAL two years ago, it set off a political firestorm in the United States.
When Dubai Ports World bought Britain’s P&amp;O Steam Navigation Company, the fact that P&amp;O operated ports inside the US led to more controversy in America.
One would think that a country like the US, with a current account deficit of roughly $800 billion a year, would realize that such a yawning external gap is inevitably financed only by selling off assets, which means that foreigners with money acquire ownership and control of US-based businesses.
But the US – or at least Congress and the media – doesn’t get it.
Americans evidently hope for a world in which they can have feckless deficit-generating fiscal policies, a very low private savings rate, and a moderate rate of investment, all financed by foreign capital whose owners are happy to bear the risks yet have no control over their assets.
One might think that foreign investors would quake in terror at these terms and shy away from dollar-denominated assets.
But this has not been the case.
High oil prices have created huge export revenues for Middle Eastern governments, which still want to park their earnings in American assets.
The same is true of Russia, whose oligarchs, as well as the huge state investment fund that finance minister Alexi Kudrin has created, also want to invest their oil revenues in the US.
As for Asia’s governments, with China in the lead, the US remains the importer of last resort.
The key to their development strategy is to put migrants from the countryside to work making exports destined for the US market.
They doubt that an alternative development strategy based on boosting domestic demand would succeed.
Thus, the real values of their currencies must be kept low relative to the dollar, which means that their reserves now invested in the US must continue to grow.
Someday, of course, this will come to an end.
Perhaps Asian real currency values will rise sharply as a result of a burst of inflation in Asia.
Perhaps the dollar will collapse and there will be a burst of inflation in the US as the Federal Reserve Board decides that temporarily abandoning its price-level peg is a lesser evil than the unemployment fallout that will result from a dollar collapse and interest rate spike.
A government that buys political risk insurance by placing an ever-growing stock of reserve assets in dollar securities guards against some dangers.
But it is exposed to other risks, especially if it confines its investments to that slice of the asset pool, US Treasury and high-grade corporate bonds, that American politicians are comfortable having foreigners own.
Nominal bonds are not well hedged against inflation, and, over the long run, assets that are claims to cash without effective control are highly vulnerable to financial vultures.
Prudent foreign government and private investors would find some way to diversify.
But how?
Buying other countries’ bonds would mean abandoning the goal of keeping real currency values low against the dollar.
Buying up whole enterprises triggers angry speeches in the US Congress.
What are needed are intermediary organizations that will grant a measure of control to foreigners, allow diversification across a wider range of US-located assets, and yet still appear 100% American to US politicians.
Enter the Blackstone Group.
China’s $3 billion investment in Blackstone, while insignificant relative to China’s $1.3 trillion of reserve assets – a sum headed for $1.5 trillion by the end of this year and likely to hit $2 trillion sometime in 2009 – is but a toe dipped in the water, a test run.
At the start of the process, China will have small and indirect ownership stakes in a great many US enterprises, and the odds are that the usual objections will be absent.
China will gain a measure of risk diversification, reduce the price pressure that has kept earnings on its foreign exchange reserves low, and avoid running into political trouble.
Blackstone will gain extra cash to deploy and extra fees.
Some observers think that the US political backlash against foreigners “buying up America” is what will bring the current configuration of global imbalances to an end.
Deals like China’s investment in Blackstone postpone that backlash, but not for long: $3 billion is equivalent to what China accumulates in reserve in less than three working days.
The question following China’s Blackstone investment is this: how far can this process go?
And how much control will US investors ultimately find that they have given up?
China’s Burma Test
Burma’s peaceful protests are nearing their tipping point, with the military junta weighing the potential costs of a full military crackdown.
But Burma’s generals will have little incentive to opt for an alternative to bloodshed and repression if China continues to provide them with support and protection against sanctions at the UN Security Council.
China has more influence over Burma’s ruling generals than any other country.
Indeed, without Chinese support, it is debatable whether the Burmese regime could sustain itself.
So, while the current crisis in Burma is not of China’s making, any peaceful settlement may be possible only if China acts to support it.
China is thus facing an unwanted test of its claim to be a responsible stakeholder in the international community.
With 3,000 villages destroyed and 1.5 million people already displaced in eastern Burma, a humanitarian disaster has been unfolding for some time now.
Throughout these troubles, China has held its tongue, sticking to its policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of any nation.
But that policy may no longer be tenable, because it is in China’s interest to find an effective alternative to a brutal crackdown, which would only remind the world vividly of the massacres in Rangoon in 1988 and in Tiananmen Square the following year.
With some international celebrities already keen to start a campaign to boycott the Beijing Olympics because of China’s support for some of the world’s most repressive and incompetent regimes, a military crackdown in Burma is the last thing the Chinese authorities can afford.
Moreover, China’s rulers are focused on the looming 17th Congress of the Communist Party, which could likewise be spoiled by a bloody confrontation in Burma.
Yet China may be able to pre-empt such an outcome by making the option of a brutal crackdown prohibitively high to the Burmese regime.
It should privately threaten to cut off all aid and trade links, and to end its protection of the regime within the United Nations from any additional international sanctions.
As an inducement to peaceful change, China can also guarantee the personal safety and wealth of the military junta should its members have to leave Burma suddenly.
But China should make it clear that such protection requires the Burmese generals to cooperate in finding a peaceful solution.
China should also publicly work within the UN and with ASEAN to find a way in which the international community can help to resolve the crisis peacefully.
Ultimately, a solution can be found only within Burma itself.
The junta can do worse than releasing and working with Aung San Suu Kyi, who still has sufficient status and appeal to rally public support for a peaceful transfer of power to civilian rule and, in due course, to a democratic government.
It may be morally repulsive to allow the junta’s members to retire with their ill-gotten gains, but any alternative will exact a dramatically higher price from Burma’s people.
China’s national interest does not require it to prop up the Burmese junta forever.
Of course, China benefits greatly from access to Burma’s energy and other natural resources.
But, by playing a positive role in bringing about a successful and peaceful transfer of power, China can secure a friendly neighbor in Burma more effectively than with its current policy, which merely incurs the hatred of the Burmese people.
As a matter of geo-political strategy, taking a positive lead in Burma can help China reassure its neighbors that its policy of a “peaceful rise” is real and beneficial.
Whatever ASEAN governments say in public welcoming that rise, their lingering doubts and suspicions will not be erased unless they see China actively playing a positive role in assuring regional stability.
The current crisis in Burma offers China a rare opportunity to do so.
The international community, too, has a vested interest in seeing that China rises peacefully.
It should encourage and support China in taking the lead over Burma, so long as China commits itself to finding a peaceful solution.
The international community’s objective should be restricted to a peaceful outcome that allows Burma’s people to work out their own solution.
Any change of regime in Burma will not be the result of international intervention, but of political negotiations between the junta and its domestic opponents.
China should thus recognize that using its influence would not imply accepting as a matter of principle intervention in other countries’ domestic affairs.
China’s Scientific Revolution
BEIJING – The Chinese economy has undergone radical transformation in recent years and is now laying the groundwork for impressive advances in science and technology.
In particular, China is setting itself up to be a major player in the fight against disease, and there are many reasons to believe that the country will play a central role in the life-sciences research of the future.
For starters, according to a report in McKinsey Quarterly, China spends more than $200 billion on research annually, a level of investment that is second only to the United States.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has positioned science-based innovation near the top of the national agenda, with the government’s 13th Five-Year Plan prioritizing complex projects in emerging fields like brain research, gene science, big data, and medical robotics.
China is devoting so much to medical research in part because the country has significant unmet medical needs.
By 2050, the Chinese population over age 65 is expected to increase by about 190 million.
Meanwhile, chronic illnesses now account for more than 80% of China’s disease burden.
So it is no surprise that China is already the world’s second largest pharmaceutical market, or that its innovation expenditure, according to the McKinsey Quarterly report, is expected to reach $1 trillion by 2020.
Another reason to expect a Chinese research revolution is that China now graduates more university students in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics than any other country – about 2.5 million students per year, or about five times more than the US.
In science and engineering alone, China generates nearly 30,000 PhDs annually.
At the same time, government incentives are luring Chinese scientists who have been working abroad – many with top-tier Western institutions – back home.
From its inception in 2008 through mid-2014, this “Thousand Talents” program has attracted more than 4,000 returnees.
These trends clearly indicate that China has a real opportunity to become a major force in global pharmaceuticals research, and that there will soon come a time when breakthrough innovation occurs in China on a regular basis.
Global pharmaceutical companies have taken notice.
My own company has been working in research and development in China for ten years.
Back in 2006, we opened the first integrated R&D facility in the country, and the largest among international firms.
And we recently opened a new R&D center in Shanghai’s Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park.
In Shanghai, premier scientists – many having returned to China from major research centers like Harvard Medical School and MIT – will focus on diseases that are endemic to the Chinese population.
These include lung, liver, and gastric cancers, as well as other liver diseases, such as chronic hepatitis B, liver fibrosis, and cirrhosis.
These diseases disproportionately affect people in China.
For example, the incidence of hepatitis B in China is nearly 30 times higher than in the US; stomach and liver cancer rates are 11-18 times higher than in the US or Europe.
Thanks to advances in recent years, scientists can now identify epigenetic modification enzymes that regulate gene activities.
This area of research is especially promising in the search for effective new oncological therapies.
And by better understanding how these diseases manifest in Chinese patients, the industry is honing targeted therapies that can then be introduced in other settings worldwide.
China could very well set the global standard for using epigenetics to gain a better understanding of the underlying causes of diseases.
In China, Novartis scientists alone are already running 15 drug discovery projects at different stages, and this pace of development will only accelerate.
I am inspired by China’s potential for making landmark scientific discoveries.
As the country becomes increasingly important to global R&D, its contributions will be a boon for the fight against disease, both in China and worldwide.
China’s Connectivity Revolution
NEW HAVEN – Long the most fragmented nation on earth, China is being brought together like never before by a new connectivity.
Its Internet community is expanding at hyper speed, with profound implications for the Chinese economy, to say nothing of the country’s social norms and political system.
This genie cannot be stuffed back in the bottle. Once connected, there is no turning back.
The pace of transformation is breathtaking.
According to Internet World Stats, the number of Internet users in China has more than tripled since 2006, soaring to 485 million in mid-2011 – more than three times that in 2006.
Moreover, China’s rush to connectivity is far from over. As of mid-2011, only 36% of its 1.3 billion people were connected – far short of the nearly 80% penetration rates seen in South Korea, Japan, and the United States.
Indeed, with the cost of connectivity falling sharply – China’s mobile users are expected to surpass PC users by 2013 – and, with urbanization and per capita incomes also rising sharply, it is not unreasonable to expect China’s Internet penetration rate to cross the 50% threshold by 2015. That would be the functional equivalent of adding about three-fourths of all existing Internet users in the US.
Nor are the Chinese casual and infrequent Internet users.
Consistent with what the social-network theorist Clay Shirky has dubbed a society’s penchant for unlocking the “cognitive surplus” embedded in net-based activities, survey data from the China Internet Network Information Center suggest that Chinese netizens log an average of 2.6 hours per day online – a full hour longer than the average 15-49-year-old Chinese citizen spends watching television.&#160;
China’s microblogs, or social networks, where usage tends be most intense, were estimated to have approximately 270 million users as of late 2011.
And there is plenty of upside.
Worldwide, about 70% of all Internet users currently engage in some form of microblogging, which is the fastest-growing segment of the Internet.
In China, this share is just 55%.
When it comes to analyzing China, it is always easy to get carried away with numbers – especially those driven by the country’s sheer size.
But the real message here concerns the implications of connectivity, not just its scale.
A key implication is the Internet’s potential to play a significant role in the emergence of China’s consumer society – a critical structural imperative for a long-unbalanced Chinese economy.
With connectivity comes a national awareness of spending habits, tastes, and brands – essential characteristics of any consumer culture.
The consumption share of China’s economy, at less than 35% of GDP, is the lowest of any major country.
Surging Chinese Internet usage could well facilitate the pro-consumption initiatives of the recently enacted 12th Five-Year Plan.
The Internet could also enable freer and more open communications, upward mobility, transparent and rapid dissemination of information, and, yes, individuality.
China’s leadership has been increasingly vocal in raising concerns about growing inequalities that might otherwise hinder the development of what they call a more “harmonious society.”
Online connectivity could be a powerful means to help China come together and achieve this goal.
Finally, there is the Internet’s potential as an instrument of political change.
That is hardly an inconsequential consideration for any country in the aftermath of last year’s Arab Spring, which was facilitated in many countries (especially Tunisia and Egypt) by network-enabled mobilization.
While reform of China’s single-party state has always been viewed as an important objective in modern China – from the so-called Fifth Modernization of Wei Jinsheng in the late 1970’s to recent speeches by Premier Wen Jiabao – meaningful progress has been limited.
Is this likely to change as China embraces the Internet?
China is no exception in requiring leadership, accountability, and responsiveness as conditions of political stability.
Its rapidly expanding Internet community has repeatedly raised national awareness of tough local issues.
This was especially evident in the aftermath of the Sichuan earthquake of 2008, ethnic violence in Xinjiang in 2009, and the high-speed rail crash in Wenzhou in 2011.
As the Arab Spring demonstrated, the Internet can quickly transform local incidents into national flashpoints – turning the new connectivity into a potential source of political instability and turmoil.
But that has been the case only in countries ruled by highly unpopular autocratic regimes.
By contrast, China’s leadership is viewed with a much greater degree of public sympathy.
Their quick and direct response to the recent incidents in Sichuan, Xinjiang, and Wenzhou are important cases in point.
Senior Party leaders – especially Premier Wen – were quick to lead an empathetic national response that was largely effective in countering the outpouring of concern expressed on the Internet.
None of this is to deny the dark side of the Chinese Internet explosion – namely, widespread censorship and constraints on individual freedom of expression.
China’s “SkyNet” team (rumored to be greater than 30,000) is the largest cyber police force in the world.
Moreover, while China is not alone in censoring the Internet, self-policing by many of the nation’s largest portals amplifies official oversight and surveillance.
Recent restrictions on microbloggers – especially denial of access to those who use untraceable aliases – have heightened concerns over Chinese Internet freedom.
Such restrictions, of course, cut both ways – potentially limiting personal expression, but also constraining disguised and reckless vigilante attacks.
Filtered or not, a long-fragmented China now has a viable and rapidly expanding network.
The power of that network – especially insofar as economic, social, and political change is concerned – is hard to predict.
But connectivity adds a new dimension of cohesion to modern China. That can only accelerate the speed of its extraordinary development journey.
China’s Construction Fetish
NEW HAVEN – As we digest the implications of China’s $586 billion stimulus plan, it is intriguing to ponder why China chooses infrastructure, buildings, and big projects every time growth needs a boost.
Should, or can, China achieve long-term growth only by adding physical structures?
But, whenever the government has extra money, President Lula likes to give tax rebates and subsidies to people, instead of using it on the roads.
Why?”
“Well,” I said, “Brazil is a democracy.
Imagine you were Lula and had $18 billion at your disposal.
Would you rather spend it on highways, or give each Brazilian $100?”
“Yes, give it to the people, just to win more votes.”
In China, the government is not elected, so winning more votes is not part of the calculation, and returning money to the people is never the choice.
The government doesn’t just spend it, but seems always to favor tangible things like skyscrapers, fancy government buildings, highways, and big industrial projects.
This partly explains not only why democracies such as India and Brazil lag behind China in infrastructure, but also why China is focusing its new stimulus package on transport systems (railroad projects alone will receive more than half of the $586 billion stimulus).
In a non-democracy, officials are held accountable to their superiors, not to voters.
And for one’s superiors, tangible projects are the easiest to recognize.
Indeed, while China’s new stimulus plan overwhelmingly emphasizes infrastructure, it gives short shrift to social programs, such as health care and education, even though they can reduce household saving pressure and increase private consumption.
This type of spending structure is nothing new to China.
In 2007, government expenditure on health care, social security, and unemployment welfare programs totaled about $88 billion, or 15% of the fiscal budget and 2.4% of GDP (far below the typical percentage in both developed and developing democracies).
Brazil’s government spends 4.7% of GDP on health care alone.
China’s government expenditure on education is approximately 3% of GDP, compared to 5.4% in Brazil.
Due to the lack of public oversight on government budgeting, China’s political system is especially biased to favor big physical projects, and, through taxation and state ownership, the government maintains almost full control over much national income and wealth, maximizing the impact of this bias.
The wonderful Olympics sites in Beijing were no accident, but rather a result of the system.
Taxation power is hardly checked by the National People’s Congress or the media.
As a result, from 1995 to 2007, inflation-adjusted government fiscal revenue increased 5.7 times.
In contrast, over the same period, the cumulative increase was 1.6 times for urban residents’ per capita disposable income and 1.2 times for rural peasants’ per capita income.
So, China’s “socialism with Chinese characteristics” is an economy where an increasing share of national income goes to the state.