Iran’s involvement reflects a different, much older struggle – that between Sunni and Shia for control of the Middle East.
With Shia-dominated Iran providing weapons, money, troops, and training for Assad’s forces, the conflict’s sectarian dimension has taken on greater significance.
Indeed, government forces have devolved into a sectarian army, motivated by the fear that, if the largely Sunni rebels are victorious, they will annihilate the Shia-affiliated Alawite minority that has ruled Syria for decades.
As it stands, Assad’s regime possesses an overwhelming military advantage, with an air force, tanks, missiles, and chemical and biological weapons.
In order to defeat them, the opposition needs more sophisticated weapons – and its backers are ready to oblige.
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Qatar – all Sunni-led countries – have sharply increased their military aid to the Syrian rebels in recent months.
Even the United States, which has so far refused to provide lethal aid for fear of arming global jihadis, recently announced that it is working on a plan to deliver weapons to opposition forces.
Sunni-Shia tensions tend to rise sharply during geopolitical power struggles, such as in Iraq in 2006-2008.
Prior to that, the last great Sunni-Shia battle in the Middle East involved near-constant war between the Sunni Ottoman Empire and Iran’s Shia Safavid Empire during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The Ottomans won by a small margin, ultimately securing control over Iraq.
But the protracted conflict contributed to the decline of both empires and devastated Iraq, leaving behind a deep sectarian cleavage.
This does not bode well for Syria.
Since the 1970’s, the Assads have failed to foster Arab nationalism in order to unite the religiously divided population, resorting instead to divisive sectarian politics to control Syria’s population.
While ensuring that their Alawite allies filled key positions in the military and intelligence services helped the Assads to retain their grip on the country, it was a strategy that widened and reinforced the Sunni-Shia rift among the population.
When the Arab Spring began to unfold, Assad adopted the same approach, hoping that it would rally his Alawite supporters and scare the rest of the public into submission.
This time, however, the plan backfired.
Syria’s Sunni population, inspired by the revolutions in other Arab countries and outraged by the regime’s brutality, simply stopped being afraid –&#160;a potentially game-changing development for Arab authoritarianism.
Now, the consequences of the Assads’ failure to promote a shared national ideology are becoming fully exposed.
Syria’s Sunnis are increasingly invoking theology to justify hatred of the Shia minority, and forms of Sunni exclusivism, similar to Al Qaeda’s ideology and worldview, are becoming the norm.
While Assad has secured the Alawite community’s renewed support, he has done so at the cost of increasing the very real danger that the rebels will punish all Alawites for the regime’s crimes.
As the war grinds on, prospects for a negotiated solution are diminishing.
As Iran throws its weight – and billions of dollars – behind the Alawites, and the Gulf States do likewise in support of the Sunnis, Syria is being torn apart.
Soon, it will be too far gone for either side to be able to claim victory.
Uniting Syria
BERLIN – Syrian opposition activists regularly express disappointment with the level of international support that they receive.
Although the last meeting of the so-called “Friends of Syria” (a group of countries that convenes periodically to discuss Syria’s situation outside of the United Nations Security Council) brought more financial aid, the degree of genuine outside commitment to their cause remains questionable.
The United States, the European Union, Turkey, and most Arab countries agree that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime is no longer legitimate.
They have intensified sanctions against the government, and have provided different kinds of support to opposition groups.
Some states have delivered automatic weapons, ammunition, and rocket-propelled grenades.
But arms deliveries have dried up, and the rebels’ pleas for anti-aircraft weapons remain unanswered.
Moreover, neither Syria’s neighbors nor Western governments are willing to intervene militarily.
Indeed, despite expressions of solidarity, they have refused to establish a protection zone for Syrian civilians along the border of neighboring states, or to impose a no-fly zone for Syrian military aircraft.
As a result, Syrian opposition groups believe that they have been left to confront Assad’s brutal regime alone.
But Syrian oppositionists must recognize that the lack of decisive international action is not only the result of Russia and China vetoing any meaningful action in the Security Council, or NATO countries’ unwillingness to enter into another war in the region.
In fact, the international community is waiting for Syria’s disorganized opposition to transform itself into a coherent, effective force as much as the opposition is waiting for the international community.
This entails forming a common platform that represents all relevant groups, including the Local Coordination Committees, the Syrian Revolution Coordinators Union, and the Free Syrian Army’s military councils.
To be sure, the rebels have made some progress.
They have created four regional military councils, which have helped to consolidate leadership and solidify their control over significant areas of the country, particularly near the Turkish border.
Yet the Syrian opposition has so far failed to present itself as a unified actor.
This is astonishing, given that highly respected, influential figures and political parties have been speaking for the opposition at international gatherings.
The Syrian National Council (SNC), for example, includes many such figures, and has managed to gain material support from several countries.
But it is not inclusive enough to serve as the Syrian opposition’s sole representative.
Attempts to enlarge the SNC have been unsuccessful, owing to reservations expressed by some important groups, such as the Democratic Forum, about joining an organization that relies on foreign sponsors.
The Syrian opposition needs to establish an umbrella organization accepted by all, including the de facto civilian and military leaders who have emerged locally over the last year and a half.
These groups already share a common goal – to bring down Assad’s regime – and most of them (with a few ultra-militant exceptions) hope to build a peaceful, inclusive, and democratic state.
Influential opposition figures – such as former parliamentarian and political prisoner Riad Seif and the SNC’s former leader, Burhan Ghalioun – have proposed promising strategies for forming such an umbrella organization.
For example, a “group of wise persons” who do not seek political positions could oversee the creation of a provisional council that includes all relevant political groups and coalitions, the military councils, the business community, and religious leaders.
But such plans have not been realized, owing to the absence of a cooperative culture.
Given that Syrians were socialized in a deeply authoritarian system, even those who are fighting for a democratic system are inexperienced in the art of coalition building.
Also, potential politicians have never been able really to measure their popularity in democratic contests.
As a result, not a few of them overestimate their actual influence and tend to compete for leadership rather than cooperate.
Syria’s opposition leaders do not need to sweep their political differences under the rug in order to gain the international community’s support.
They simply need to create a common body that all relevant groups on the ground can accept, as the Libyan opposition did when it set up the National Transitional Council.
After that, they should establish a legitimate authority inside Syria that can administer liberated areas, distribute aid, and provide services to civilians.
Such a transitional authority could call upon the international community for needed support more easily than an exiled rebel group could.
The Syrian revolution is essentially a civilian and political rebellion against dictatorship – one that is gradually unraveling Assad’s regime.
The opposition must begin to lay the groundwork for a new order based on unity and cooperation.
Otherwise, smaller groups of armed militants – supported, or even manipulated, by external actors – will dictate Syria’s future.
Syria’s Darkest Hour
MADRID – The conflict in Syria becomes more complex every day that it continues, and the country’s prospects have gotten only worse.
The daily horrors that Aleppo’s besieged citizens are now experiencing mark a new low point, following the collapse of the latest ceasefire, brokered by the United States and Russia, which disturbingly fell apart precisely at the same time that world leaders were gathered together for the United Nations General Assembly.
When the Syrian conflict finally ends, three of its defining features will complicate reconstruction efforts.
For starters, parties on all sides of the fight have disregarded international human-rights law and violated basic humanitarian norms.
In fact, blocking humanitarian aid, attacking civilians, and targeting sites specially protected by international law have become strategies of war.
Just since April, Syrian hospitals have suffered dozens of attacks, and aid has been withheld from some of the most devastated villages.
Many hospitals in Aleppo have had to close after being targeted during the siege.
These actions may constitute war crimes, and they are sadly not new.
In 2015 alone, medical installations in Syria affiliated with Doctors Without Borders incurred 94 attacks, leaving 23 of the organization’s workers dead and another 58 wounded.
Last May, the UN Security Council adopted a resolution calling for all parties involved in Syria to respect international humanitarian law; now, Security Council members are accusing one another other of violating their own resolution.
A second dynamic that could frustrate any peace effort is the conflict’s complex map of players, all of which will have to be accounted for in a final accord.
While this map has changed significantly since the war began, the level of fragmentation within the groups on either side has become increasingly evident lately.
Now that the jihadist group Jabhat al-Nusra has changed its name to Jabhat Fatah al-Sham and reportedly dissociated itself from al-Qaeda, it is better positioned to ally with other rebel factions that have also rejected al-Qaeda.
But while this rapprochement strengthens the fighting groups militarily, it also blurs the lines between rebels and Islamist radicals.
This has occurred while rebel groups not closely aligned with al-Nusra have become weaker, allowing the Syrian regime to insist that it is not suppressing a rebellion, but fighting a war against terrorism.
Thus, at the UN General Assembly, Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem recently accused the US-led coalition in Syria of abetting terrorist organizations, including the Islamic State.
Some months ago, discussions about a peace process centered on the question of whether Assad should go immediately, or remain during a transitional government; now, the question is whether the former al-Nusra is a viable partner.
But the pro-Assad side has divisions of its own.
In addition to the Russian army, Syrian, Iraqi, Iranian, and Afghan groups are also fighting for the regime, and each of these actors has its own interests.
Some parties’ interests in the war are well known: Assad wants to remain in power; Russia wants to demonstrate its status as a great power capable of resisting the US; and Iran wants to increase its regional influence and secure access to the Mediterranean.
When the fighting ends, these positions will only become more entrenched.
A third obstacle in the path toward Syrian peace is the US-Russia stalemate.
After so many broken ceasefires, the two countries clearly lack mutual trust.
And as Dmitri Trenin of the Carnegie Moscow Center has pointed out, the latest failure could have far more worrying consequences than past diplomatic impasses.
So far, the US and Russia have not only broken off bilateral negotiations; mutual nuclear agreements have also come under threat.
After the US accused Russia of committing war crimes in Syria, Russia declared that it was suspending an agreement to dispose of surplus plutonium unless the US meets certain conditions, including compensating Russia for the costs of Western sanctions imposed after Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014.
For its part, the US is in an uncertain position now that rebel factions have regrouped and its direct cooperation with Russia is on hold.
President Barack Obama has only a short time left in office, which makes any major foreign-policy shift under his administration almost impossible.
As the battle for Aleppo rages on, so, too, does the US presidential election campaign that will determine his successor.
After more than five years of conflict in Syria, retreating without having found a solution is not an option.
Although the new map of players complicates things, there is no doubt that they must all participate in a peace deal; otherwise, any agreement will prove ephemeral.
Likewise, in order to rebuild Syrian civil society for the long term, all of the warring parties will have to take responsibility for their crimes.
The issue of responsibility will be one of the most difficult challenges in the effort to achieve lasting peace.
We will need committed leaders both inside and outside Syria.
Although the US presidential election will be consequential, it has also become clear that peace cannot be delivered by the US and Russia on their own.
European leaders should step in to restart negotiations.
The European Union has mistakenly sat on the sidelines of these talks for too long, despite Syria’s importance to its own security and interests, and despite its responsibility to Syria’s citizens.
The EU should make every diplomatic and humanitarian effort to bring together all participating parties and end the violence as soon as possible.
Only then can Syria’s reconstruction begin.
Why Syriza Will Blink
LONDON – Once again, Greece seems to have slipped the financial noose.
By drawing on its holdings in an International Monetary Fund reserve account, it was able to repay €750 million ($851 million) – ironically to the IMF itself – just as the payment was falling due.
This brinkmanship is no accident.
Since coming to power in January, the Greek government, led by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s Syriza party, has believed that the threat of default – and thus of a financial crisis that might break up the euro – provides negotiating leverage to offset Greece’s lack of economic and political power.
Months later, Tsipras and his finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, an academic expert in game theory, still seem committed to this view, despite the lack of any evidence to support it.
But their calculation is based on a false premise.
Tsipras and Varoufakis assume that a default would force Europe to choose between just two alternatives: expel Greece from the eurozone or offer it unconditional debt relief.
But the European authorities have a third option in the event of a Greek default.
Instead of forcing a “Grexit,” the EU could trap Greece inside the eurozone and starve it of money, then simply sit back and watch the Tsipras government’s domestic political support collapse.
Such a siege strategy – waiting for Greece to run out of the money it needs to maintain the normal functions of government – now looks like the EU’s most promising technique to break Greek resistance.
It is likely to work because the Greek government finds it increasingly difficult to scrape together enough money to pay wages and pensions at the end of each month.
To do so, Varoufakis has been resorting to increasingly desperate measures, such as seizing the cash in municipal and hospital bank accounts.
The implication is that tax collections have been so badly hit by the economic chaos since January’s election that government revenues are no longer sufficient to cover day-to-day costs.
If this is true – nobody can say for sure because of the unreliability of Greek financial statistics (another of the EU authorities’ complaints) – the Greek government’s negotiating strategy is doomed.
The Tsipras-Varoufakis strategy assumed that Greece could credibly threaten to default, because the government, if forced to follow through, would still have more than enough money to pay for wages, pensions, and public services.
That was a reasonable assumption back in January.
The government had budgeted for a large primary surplus (which excludes interest payments), which was projected at 4% of GDP.
If Greece had defaulted in January, this primary surplus could (in theory) have been redirected from interest payments to finance the higher wages, pensions, and public spending that Syriza had promised in its election campaign.
Given this possibility, Varoufakis may have believed that he was making other EU finance ministers a generous offer by proposing to cut the primary surplus from 4% to 1% of GDP, rather than all the way to zero.
If the EU refused, his implied threat was simply to stop paying interest and make the entire primary surplus available for extra public spending.
But what if the primary surplus – the Greek government’s trump card in its confrontational negotiating strategy – has now disappeared?
In that case, the threat of default is no longer credible.
With the primary surplus gone, a default would no longer permit Tsipras to fulfill Syriza’s campaign promises; on the contrary, it would imply even bigger cutbacks in wages, pensions, and public spending than the “troika” – the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the IMF – is now demanding.
For the EU authorities, by contrast, a Greek default would now be much less problematic than previously assumed.
They no longer need to deter a default by threatening Greece with expulsion from the euro.
Instead, the EU can now rely on the Greek government itself to punish its people by failing to pay wages and pensions and honor bank guarantees.
Tsipras and Varoufakis should have seen this coming, because the same thing happened two years ago, when Cyprus, in the throes of a banking crisis, attempted to defy the EU.
The Cyprus experience suggests that, with the credibility of the government’s default threat in tatters, the EU is likely to force Greece to stay in the euro and put it through an American-style municipal bankruptcy, like that of Detroit.
The legal and political mechanisms for treating Greece like a municipal bankruptcy are clear.
The European treaties state unequivocally that euro membership is irreversible unless a country decides to exit not just from the single currency but from the entire EU.
That is also the political message that EU governments want to instill in their own citizens and financial investors.
If Greece defaults, the EU will be legally justified and politically motivated to insist that the euro remains its only legal tender.
Even if the Greek government decides to pay wages and pensions by printing its own IOUs or “new drachmas,” the European Court of Justice will rule that all domestic debts and bank deposits must be repaid in euros.
That, in turn, will force a default against Greek citizens, as well as foreign creditors, because the government will be unable to honor the euro value of insured deposits in Greek banks.
So a Greek default within the euro, far from allowing Syriza to honor its election promises, would inflict even greater austerity on Greek voters than they endured under the troika program.
At that point, the government’s collapse would become inevitable.
Instead of Greece exiting the eurozone, Syriza would exit the Greek government.
As soon as Tsipras realizes that the rules of the game between Greece and Europe have changed, his capitulation will be just a matter of time.
The Greek Austerity Myth
BRUSSELS – Since the anti-austerity Syriza party's victory in Greece's recent general election, the “Greek problem" is again preoccupying markets and policymakers throughout Europe.
Some fear a return to the uncertainty of 2012, when many thought that a Greek default and exit from the eurozone were imminent.
Then as now, many worry that a Greek debt crisis could destabilize – and perhaps even bring down – Europe's monetary union.
But this time really is different.
One critical difference lies in economic fundamentals.
Over the last two years, the eurozone's other peripheral countries have proven their capacity for adjustment, by reducing their fiscal deficits, expanding exports, and moving to current-account surpluses, thereby negating the need for financing.
Indeed, Greece is the only one that has consistently dragged its feet on reforms and sustained abysmal export performance.
Providing an additional shield to the peripheral countries is the European Central Bank's plan to begin purchasing sovereign bonds.
Though the German government does not officially support quantitative easing, it should be grateful to the ECB for calming financial markets.
Now Germany can take a tough stance on the new Greek government's demands for a large-scale debt write-off and an end to austerity, without fearing the kind of financial-market turbulence that in 2012 left the eurozone with little choice but to bail out Greece.
In fact, both of the Greek government's demands are based on a misunderstanding.
For starters, Syriza and others argue that Greece's public debt, at a massive 170% of GDP, is unsustainable and must be cut.
Given that the country's official debt constitutes the bulk of its overall public debt, the government wants it reduced.
In fact, Greece's official creditors have granted it long enough grace periods and low enough interest rates that the burden is bearable.
Greece actually spends less on debt service than Italy or Ireland, both of which have much lower (gross) debt-to-GDP ratios.
With payments on Greece's official foreign debt amounting to only 1.5% of GDP, debt service is not the country's problem.
The relatively low debt-service cost also removes the justification for Syriza's demands for an end to austerity.
The last bailout program from the “troika" (the International Monetary Fund, the ECB, and the European Commission), initiated in 2010, foresees a primary budget surplus (which excludes interest payments) of 4% of GDP this year.
That would be slightly more than is needed to cover interest payments, and would thus allow Greece finally to begin to reduce its debt.
The new Greek government's argument that this is an unreasonable target fails to withstand scrutiny.
After all, when faced with excessively high debt, other European countries – including Belgium (from 1995), Ireland (from 1991), and Norway (from 1999) – maintained similar surpluses for at least ten years each, typically in the aftermath of a financial crisis.
To be sure, one can reasonably argue that austerity in the eurozone has been excessive, and that fiscal deficits should have been much larger to sustain demand.
But only governments with access to market finance can use expansionary fiscal policy to boost demand.
For Greece, higher spending would have to be financed by lending from one or more official institutions.
For the same reason, it is disingenuous to claim that the troika forced Greece into excessive austerity.
Had Greece not received financial support in 2010, it would have had to cut its fiscal deficit from more than 10% of GDP to zero immediately.
By financing continued deficits until 2013, the troika actually enabled Greece to delay austerity.
Of course, Greece is not the first country to request emergency financing to delay budget cuts, and then complain that the cuts are excessive once the worst is over.
This typically happens when the government runs a primary surplus.
When the government can finance its current spending through taxes – and might even be able to increase expenditure, if it does not have to pay interest – the temptation to renege on debt intensifies.
It was widely anticipated that Greece would be tempted to follow this route when the troika program was initiated.
Last year, the new Greek finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, confirmed the prediction, arguing that a primary surplus would give Greece the upper hand in any negotiations on debt restructuring, because it could just suspend repayments to the troika, without incurring any financing problems.
That approach would be a mistake.
The practical problem for Greece now is not the sustainability of a debt that matures in 20-30 years and carries very low interest rates; the real issue is the few payments to the IMF and the ECB that fall due this year – payments that the new government has promised to make.
But, to follow through on this promise (and hire more employees), Greece will need more financial support from its eurozone partners.
Moreover, the country's financial system will need continuing support from the ECB.
In other words, Greece's new government must now try to convince its European partners that it deserves more financial support, while pushing for a reduction of its existing debt and resisting the austerity policies on which previous lending was conditioned.
For Syriza and its voters, the political honeymoon could be short.
Tabloid Climate Science
NEW DELHI
 – The scientists whose research has revealed the extent of global climate change are now getting the tabloid treatment.
First came the scandal of leaked (actually hacked) e-mails at the climate institute of Britain’s East Anglia University.
Now comes the supposed news that the Himalayan glaciers are not, in fact, retreating, and will therefore not disappear by 2035.
The first story was timed to appear just before December’s COP15 climate-change summit in Copenhagen.
There is also the unholy glee with which they have set about destroying an icon of the anti-global warming movement, the Nobel Laureate R.K Pachauri, by
 attributing financial motives to his research. 
Hasnain, who 
 is currently conducting a study of the accumulation of black carbon on snow at high altitudes in the Himalayas,
 is not some egotistical scientist seeking the limelight.
He 
 was Professor of Glaciology at 
 Jawaharlal
 Nehru University’s 
 School
 of Environmental Sciences
 and a fellow of the Indian Institute of Technology 
 and of 
 Delft
 Technical University
 in the Netherlands.
Between 1995 and 1999, he
 chaired a working group on Himalayan Glaciology within the
 International Commission
 on Snow and Ice.
But, the retreat of a glacier’s “snout” is only one of three measures of how glaciers can change.
The other two are its “mass balance” and the rate at which melt-water is discharged.
Applying the overall ratio of mass lost to area covered, this means that the smallest (and most numerous) Himalayan glaciers lost up to 57% of their mass between 1960 and 2004.
What could have caused the glacier snouts to have stopped retreating?
Only more research focused on the differences between glaciers in heavily populated areas and those in uninhabited ones like Siachen will answer this question definitively.
But relying upon population growth and desertification to prolong their lives would be robbing Peter to pay Paul.
What needs to be explored is not the validity of the secular trend, but the nature of the local influences working against it.
By rushing to apologize for a statement they clearly did not understand, British Secretary for Energy and Climate Change Ed Miliband and others have impugned not only the honesty of scientists like Hasnain, but also the credibility of science itself.
Pemberantasan Penyakit Tidak Menular
SEATTLE – Selama 25 tahun terakhir, berkat upaya global terkoordinasi untuk melawan penyakit-penyakit menular, termasuk malaria, tuberkolosis (TB), HIV/AIDS, dan polio, angka kematian balita dan anak-anak berkurang 50% dan rata-rata usia harapan hidup meningkat lebih dari enam tahun.
Selain itu, jumlah penduduk hidup yang hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem sudah berkurang setengahnya.
Akan tetapi, kematian akibat TB telah berkurang setengahnya sejak tahun 1990, sementara efek diabetes naik dengan cepatnya.
Pada tahun 1980, 108 juta orang menderita diabetes, atau 1 dari 20 orang; kini, lebih dari 400 juta orang, atau 1 dari 12 orang mengidap diabetes.
Walaupun diyakini oleh masyarakat umum bahwa PTM adalah penyakit orang kaya, justru penyakit-penyakit ini jauh lebih banyak diderita oleh penduduk miskin di semua negara, terutama di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah.
Menurut laporan WHO, lebih dari 80% kematian terkait diabetes bukan terjadi di negara-negara berpendapatan tinggi.
Salah satu alasannya ialah diabetes tipe 2, yang lebih umum terjadi dan diderita banyak orang, biasanya disebabkan oleh faktor gaya hidup, seperti kurangnya aktivitas fisik, obesitas, pola makan buruk, dan merokok, yang menunjukkan sejumlah cara hidup yang lebih umum ditemui di kalangan penduduk yang tidak berkecukupan.
Kondisi ini diperparah dengan keterbatasan jumlah dan tingginya harga alat dan terapi untuk mendiagnosis dan mengobati diabetes sehingga tidak mampu dijangkau masyarakat miskin.
Studi terkini yang dilakukan PATH, melalui dukungan Novo Nordisk, menunjukkan bahwa di beberapa kasus, hanya sepertiga fasilitas kesehatan masyarakat yang memiliki stok insulin, dan hanya 1 dari empat yang mempunyai strip uji untuk memonitor diabetes.
Di Ghana, gaji 15 hari hanya membiayai suplai 2 obat untuk 30 hari dari jenis obat-obatan yang diperlukan untuk mencegah komplikasi.
Keterbatasan ini menggambarkan betapa sebagian besar (hampir 50%) kasus diabetes di luar negara-negara berpendapatan tinggi masih tidak terdiagnosis atau tidak diobati.
Dampaknya terhadap kesehatan manusia dan perekonomian sangat besar.
Diabetes memerlukan pengobatan seumur hidup dan semakin cepat penyakit ini terdeteksi dan diobati, lebih baik juga hasilnya.
Jika diabaikan, diabetes akan menimbulkan kondisi-kondisi yang sulit atau tidak bisa diobati dan seringkali menyebabkan kematian dini.
Lalu apa yang harus dilakukan agar setiap warga bisa mendapatkan alat dan terapi untuk mendiagnosis, mengobati, dan memonitor diabetes?
Pertama, pembuat kebijakan dan donor harus mengakui besarnya efek diabetes terhadap masyarakat miskin dan memfokuskan perhatian dan pendanaan lebih besar pada pencegahan dan pengobatan.
Program-program pencegahan yang menggiatkan pola makan sehat dan olahraga bisa menurunkan prevalensi diabetes tipe 2 dan mengurangi komplikasi bagi penderitanya.
Investasi pada sistem pelayanan kesehatan di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah akan membantu mereka beradaptasi dengan kenaikan beban penyakit-penyakit seumur hidup seperti diabetes.
Persoalan mengenai biaya juga mendesak dan perlu diselesaikan segera.
Kita harus mengatasi kelemahan dalam sistem distribusi yang membatasi akses pada obat-obatan dan alat diagnosis, yang berdampak pada kenaikan biaya.
Tindakan ini membutuhkan forecasting (perkiraan), perencanaan, dan distribusi lebih optimal; perundingan harga yang lebih efektif; dan penetapan batas markup.
Selain itu, perlu adanya investasi pada penelitian dan pengembangan obat dan alat diagnosis yang murah, yang lebih tepat untuk negara-negara dengan sumber daya terbatas.
Proyek-proyek gabungan yang inovatif dan menyatukan pemikir mutakhir dari kalangan akademisi, organisasi nirlaba, dan sektor swasta untuk menelurkan solusi-solusi efektif, terjangkau, dan sesuai sangatlah diperlukan.
Diabetes bukan satu-satunya PTM yang urgen.
Terapi dan teknologi yang esensial untuk mendiagnosis dan mengobati penyakit jantung, kanker, dan gangguan pernafasan, juga terbatas jumlahnya dan jauh lebih mahal harganya di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah, dibandingkan di negara-negara maju.
Ketimpangan ini mendorong jurnal medis The Lancet untuk menyebut krisis PTM sebagai “social justice issue of our time”.
Jika kita tidak mengambil tindakan, krisis tersebut akan memburuk. WHO memperkirakan bahwa dalam kurun waktu 2010 hingga 2020, kematian akibat PTM akan naik 15% dan mayoritas akan terjadi di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah.
Sekarang, hanya 1% pembiayaan kesehatan global dikucurkan pada program-program terkait PTM.
Ini harus diubah. Segera.
Apabila dibiarkan begitu saja, capaian-capaian hebat yang diraih dalam perbaikan kesehatan global selama 25 tahun terakhir akan terkalahkan oleh kenaikan jumlah penderita dan angka kematian akibat penyakit-penyakit kronis yang kita ketahui cara pencegahan dan pengobatannya.
Menanggulangi Penyakit-penyakit Langka
STANFORD – Penyakit-penyakit langka sering terabaikan, tidak lain karena penyakit tersebut jarang ditemukan.
Namun secara keseluruhan, kelompok penyakit ini menyerang banyak individu.
Di Amerika Serikat, penyakit-penyakit langka (rare and orphan diseases) didefinisikan sebagai penyakit yang menyerang kurang dari 200.000 orang.
Tapi ada lebih dari 6.800 jenis dan jumlah penderitanya mencapai ratusan juta jiwa di seluruh dunia.
Sayangnya, sampai sekarang baru tersedia 250 pengobatan bagi pengidap penyakit langka.
Salah satu alasannya ialah terbatasnya jumlah pasien sehingga studi atas kelompok penyakit tersebut dan pengujian obat-obatannya menjadi sulit.
Akibatnya, kerap kali para profesional di bidang kesehatan tidak memiliki pengetahuan cukup atas gejala dan penyebab penyakit-penyakit langka.
Di awal tahun ini, saya mengikuti program Rare Disease Day di California.
Topiknya agak kabur tapi mencakup banyak penyakit (lebih dari 70) yang disebabkan oleh kelainan genetika jenis tertentu – yaitu kelainan yang terjadi di sistem sel yang mengikat gula dengan protein dan lipid.
Tidak banyak yang diketahui tentang penyebab mutasi-mutasi yang meningkatkan gangguan kongenital tersebut dan hanya ada sedikit pengobatan yang tersedia.
Kelainan ini bisa mengarah ke spektrum masalah lebih luas, karena proses glikosilasi yang akurat, penting bagi bekerjanya berbagai molekul pengisyarat, seperti hormon dan neurotransmiter, serta reseptor yang mengikat molekul-molekul tersebut.
Selain profesional di bidang kesehatan, peserta konferensi termasuk anak-anak dengan penyakit langka ini beserta keluarga mereka.
Sepanjang sore, para profesional tersebut berdiskusi dalam kelompok kecil dengan keluarga dan anak-anak.
Saat diskusi berlangsung, seorang anak beberapa kali berteriak ketakutan.
Satu orang anak yang lainnya berkali-kali mengerang.
Dan anak-anak lainnya berada di dalam kondisi lain yang memburuk.
Saat itu saya duduk kira-kira setengah meter jauhnya dari seorang anak perempuan  – mungkin berusia dua tahun  – dan dua menit sekali dia kejang-kejang.
Bola matanya memutar ke belakang, dan kepalanya lunglai ke dadanya.
Obat yang dia minum hanya mampu mencegah kejang yang paling parah dan umum.
Kemudian dia akan pulih dan terus menekan layar laptop kecilnya.
Sepanjang sesi sore itu, ayahnya yang merana terus mengelus-elus tangan putri kecilnya itu.
Sedih sekali memandang para orang tua tersebut.
Beberapa dari mereka sangat khawatir dan menanyakan banyak pertanyaan; mereka tampaknya telah mendalami semua makalah ilmiah, blog, dan artikel di surat kabar yang ada.
Yang lainnya tampak kebingungan.
Yang terburuk adalah mereka yang berpandangan kosong dan putus asa.
Untuk sebagian besar orang tua, ketakberuntungan yang entah dari mana datangnya ini, memiliki anak dengan kecacatan genetika telah mencuri hidup mereka, mengubah hari-hari mereka menjadi serangkaian kunjungan tanpa henti ke spesialis medis.
Mayoritas anak-anak tersebut membutuhkan pasokan obat dalam jumlah besar.
Banyak juga harus diberi makan melalui selang gastrik yang dipasangkan melalui operasi insisi di perutnya.
Bahkan ada seorang ibu yang datang bersama putranya yang berusia 32 tahun.
Banyak yang pemerintah dapat lakukan untuk membantu menangani penyakit-penyakit langka.
Pertama, mereka dapat mengganti arah pendanaan dari target yang kurang penting ke proyek genetika molekuler yang dapat menawarkan wawasan tentang gangguan metabolik.
Kedua, mereka dapat mengurangi beban birokrasi regulasi untuk uji coba klinis yang sangat kecil untuk pengobatan penyakit-penyakit langka.
Dan pada akhirnya, pembuat kebijakan dapat menciptakan insentif finansial  – yang mungkin bisa termasuk pembebasan pajak atas penelitian dan pengembangan   – untuk mendorong perusahaan farmasi agar mengembangkan terapi karena tanpa insentif semacam ini, tidak ada daya tarik bagi investasi.
Dalam dunia kedokteran, dokter spesialis yang menguasai bidang-bidang tersulit – menurut saya – adalah orang-orang mulia.
Salah satunya yang saya masukkan di sini adalah ahli onkologi anak, staf unit penanganan luka bakar, para sukarelawan yang merawat pasien dengan penyakit menular seperti Ebola, dan para profesional yang mendiagnosis dan mengobati penyakit yang melemahkan yang diakibatkan karena kelainan genetika dan bekerja dengan keluarga pasien tersebut.
Pahlawan tanpa tanda jasa ini memerlukan dukungan kita dalam bentuk apa pun. 
The Years of Living Tactically
MADRID – We have been living in an illusion.
For years, the world has believed that the transition from a unipolar to a multipolar order would be peaceful, orderly, and steady, with new players like China, Brazil, and Turkey adapting to the existing multilateral framework in a natural, harmonious way.
How wrong we were.
In fact, as the transition toward multipolarity has progressed, the international order has become increasingly unstable and tense.
The 2008 global financial crisis compounded uncertainty and mistrust, disrupting key trends like globalization.
But the biggest problem has been the failure of the developed countries – the architects of the post-World War II international order – to formulate an inclusive strategy to address global challenges and manage the transition to a new international system.
The reason for this failure is simple: the West has allowed short-term tactical concerns to impede the development of a long-term strategic vision.
This obsession with tactics has affected governance at all levels, from local administrations to supranational institutions, allowing major actors to operate within uncoordinated realities, without any shared goals guiding their decision-making.
To be sure, there have been some noteworthy exceptions, owing to concerted efforts to consolidate a constructive strategic vision.
For example, Western policy has yielded some progress toward a resolution regarding Iran’s nuclear program.
But, in other areas, strategic thinking has fallen short.
In Ukraine, for example, the conflict has both exposed and widened the fissure between Russia and the West.
Post-Soviet Russia’s struggle to integrate into the international order, together with its rejection of modernization, has fueled a revisionist nationalism based on spheres of influence.
And it is not just Russia that has turned its back on Western modernity.
The Middle East has been a hotbed of instability fueled by historical tensions since the fall of the Ottoman Empire almost a century ago.
Now it is on fire – not least because the West’s repeated interventions have been guided by shortsighted tactical concerns.
Indeed, Western leaders failed to anticipate the long-term consequences of supporting autocracies, revealed in the Arab Spring revolts, or to foresee the impact of successive military interventions in Iraq, Syria, and Libya.
As a result, nostalgia for the “glorious” past – such as the Islamic State’s caliphate envy – is proliferating in the Middle East, too.
The West was not prepared for global forces to push backward and to seek a future in the past.
In any case, the Middle East must be allowed to take ownership of solutions to the challenges it faces; after all, no externally imposed solution has worked so far.
The responsibility of the rest of the world is to build a stable backdrop for such efforts: an inclusive international system in which countries abide by the same rules and norms.
In managing the transition toward multipolarity, the West’s greatest challenge lies in Asia – a region that is simultaneously dynamic and future-oriented and hampered by historical tensions and divides.
Recognizing Asia’s profound importance to the new world order, US President Barack Obama announced a strategic “pivot” toward the region in 2012.
But Western leaders have hesitated to integrate China, Asia’s most economically formidable actor, into the international system.
Indeed, the last meeting of the International Monetary Fund – which recognized China as the world’s largest economy by purchasing power parity – concluded without increasing China’s share of votes.
To put this in perspective, China was left with a slightly higher proportion of votes than Italy, whose economy is one-fifth the size, and just one-quarter of America’s vote share.
Moreover, the West has relegated support for the creation and strengthening of regional frameworks for cooperation in key areas like security to secondary importance.
Unlike Europe, Asia’s wounds from WWII never healed.
As a result, territorial disputes and nationalist claims remain a potent threat to regional – indeed global – stability.
But, for the West, applying long-term vision requires more than recognizing the imperative of strategic decision-making; it also demands efforts to revitalize polarized and dysfunctional domestic political systems.
In the United States, there is no question that the lack of strategic vision displayed in Obama’s foreign policy is at least partly a result of his need to navigate a defective system.
For its part, the European Union has pursued shortsighted policies to address its economic challenges, without anticipating – or acknowledging – the social and political consequences, including the proliferation of anti-EU sentiment.
Member states’ tactical approach to their particular problems (often defined by their status as creditor or debtor) has left the EU bereft of credible leadership and a unified vision.
A more strategic approach would focus on boosting growth throughout the EU, such as by meeting the Europe 2020 targets for research, development, and innovation, and advancing the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
Tactics are short-term solutions that often have significant unforeseen consequences, making it impossible to predict the kind of world they will generate.
Strategy forms a different axis of action, accounting for the structure of global interdependence and thus how individual changes may affect the entire system.
Only by moving to this axis of strategy can we achieve the world we want: one that is habitable, stable, free, and prosperous.
Taiwan’s New Balancer-in-Chief
TOKYO – Even as many of the world’s electorates – most notably in the United States – are tilting toward the extremes, voters in Taiwan have bucked the trend and chosen the middle road.
The election on January 16 of Tsai Ing-wen, Chair of the Democratic Progressive Party, as President is a signal that, however hesitant Taiwanese voters may be about entering into a deeper embrace with China, they also want to avoid a rupture in the relationship with their powerful neighbor and former antagonist.
Tsai, who will be Taiwan’s first female president, is said to have once supported Taiwanese independence, but she avoided expressing similar sentiments during the campaign, pledging instead to maintain the status quo.
Indeed, she was careful to distance herself from her mentor, former President Lee Teng-hui, an outspoken supporter of a clear break with China.
Tsai’s victory over the China-friendly Kuomintang implies that relations with the mainland – which regards Taiwan as a breakaway province that it will eventually reclaim – will be considerably more measured.
Moreover, as a former law professor, she is likely to be a stickler for details in any negotiations with China.
Ironically, Tsai’s academic background (she studied at Cornell University and the London School of Economics) was probably one of the reasons for her loss to President Ma Ying-jeou in the 2012 election – a campaign in which she appeared stiff and ill at ease with the give-and-take of politics.
But in the last four years, her rhetorical skills and campaign manner have improved dramatically – to the point that her relaxed, animated persona is particularly popular among young voters.
Indeed, Tsai’s greatest ally late in the campaign was Chou Tzuyu, a 16-year-old Taiwanese singer in the popular Korean girl band Twice.
Chou came under fire in China after posing for a picture while holding the Taiwanese flag, and her public apology for doing so – made on YouTube – reminded many on the island of the degree to which China is willing to pressure people into silence.
Many in Taiwan believe that this undermined support for Ma, who had been working to foster closer ties to China.
By failing to defend Chou, the Kuomintang alienated many members of the under-30 generation, who strongly identify with Taiwan.
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s summit with Ma in Singapore in November probably did more harm than good.
Moreover, the announcement in December that the US is to sell $1.83 billion in weapons to the Ma government is also a clear show of support for Taiwan, which already appeared ready to renounce the Kuomintang.
Such a sale early in Tsai’s tenure would have irritated China, complicating relations not only between China and Taiwan, but also between China and the US.
Tsai’s election, with 56.1% of the vote, demonstrates that, while many Taiwanese want good relations with China, they are opposed to the “One China” policy repeatedly asserted in Beijing.
And yet, in her relations with China, Tsai will have to walk a narrow path.
If she explicitly distances herself from One China, she will undermine Xi’s “One Belt, One Road” initiative, a grand vision for linking China to the rest of Asia and to Europe in which Taiwan is clearly expected to play an integral part.
Instead, Tsai is more likely to harden the status quo, which will displease Xi, but not enough for him to seek to undermine her.
Friction with China in economic areas probably cannot be avoided.
But an effort should be made to secure for Taiwan a market that is able to share common rules.
Specifically, this requires finding the means to participate in the Trans-Pacific Partnership and working with other countries in the Pacific to facilitate trade.
Tsai will not be inaugurated for another four months, so how the Ma government behaves in the interim could be decisive – especially if he ignores his electoral rebuke and continues to make overtures to China.
Given China’s claims on Taiwan, any sign of serious political instability could incite a disproportionate response from Xi.
For Taiwan, the next four months could prove to be even more important than the presidential campaign.
Taking August Seriously
TOULOUSE – Europe’s holiday month of August is no time for serious politics.
The world and its worries are meant to close down while Europeans repose.
I usually spend the month with my family at our old converted farmhouse in southwestern France.
It is the deepest countryside. As I write this under a vine in my vegetable garden, I look west across wooded hills and cannot see another building.
In our hamlet, there is one small working farm, a couple of holiday houses and the ruins of seven or eight other houses.
A century ago, this would have been a community of more than 50 people.
Today, there are two full-time residents, the farmer and her elderly mother. Otherwise, the inhabitants are vacation visitors.
Progress in France brought a fairly recent migration from country to town.
“How is it,” a local pig farmer asked me a few a years ago, “that we locals all want to get out of here, and you northern  European city dwellers want to buy up our old farmhouses and move in?”
It is a part, I suppose, of the urban, middle-class northern European dream – the pursuit of the sun by day and silence by night.
Even in the 15 years that we have owned this former tobacco farm, further progress has left its mark.
In our village, there used to be two of every shop – butcher’s shop, bakery, hardware store.
Now, there is only one. Supermarkets in the surrounding towns have driven the smaller shops out of business.
I guess they provide more choice, and they are probably cheaper.
But the commercial life has been squeezed out of local villages.
Another mark of progress is the arrival of a broadband Internet connection.
So now I can use my laptop just as though I was at home in London, and the satellite dish gives us the world’s television and radio stations as well.
This is an advance in many respects.
But I used to be able to switch off from the world when on holiday, cut off from the intrusions of technology.
Today there are no excuses. I am always on duty.
Thanks to our television, we have of course been able to witness signs of progress elsewhere.
Maybe the terrible floods in Pakistan and China are not the direct result of climate change.
But the evidence seems to suggest that variations in climactic conditions are increasing in scale and frequency.
We know that a 17-fold increase in the carbon dioxide in our atmosphere over the last century is part of the price of the surge in our prosperity, and that the world’s poorest citizens will bear the heaviest burden in paying it.
We have also been able to watch on our televisions this month what appears to be the final stages in the battle to cap the huge oil spill off the coast of Florida and Louisiana.
Will this environmental disaster persuade Americans to look harder at their incontinent use of energy?
Will it affect their love affair with the internal combustion engine and air conditioning?
I rather doubt it.
Defining progress in ways that make it sustainable and allow us to maintain the best of the past is difficult.
Opposition to globalization and market forces has often been the preferred way of trying to hang on to an idealized view of what life used to be like.
This produces paradoxical results here in France, where – despite all the anti-globalization rhetoric – McDonald’s is more popular than anywhere else in Europe.
French companies do spectacularly well in the global market place.
At home, meanwhile, small, distinctively French businesses – cheese makers, patisseries, or restaurateurs – get hammered by heavy taxes and social-welfare costs while supermarkets flourish selling products from Asia.
So, how do we keep the best of what is familiar and foster the identity of our local neighborhoods and regions while embracing the sort of changes that make most of us better off?
How can we make markets and technology serve us rather than – as so often seems to be true – vice versa?
One partial solution is to try harder to put a price on what we call progress.
What are the real costs of out-of-town shopping malls in terms of increased traffic and loss of green spaces, for example?
What may make sense in the vast open reaches of Texas will not necessarily work in rural France or Britain.
How can we ensure that technology meets the needs of the poor and does not simply increase the divide between laptop-owning, Blackberry-using Westerners like me and the poor in India or China?
Above all, when will we agree to assign real costs to the energy we use, especially carbon-based resources?
The casualties of our failure to do so will be future generations of flood victims in Asia and China, farmers in drought-hit Russia and Africa, and everyone’s grandchildren, like my five, with whom I have spent this summer.
What sort of legacy will today’s “progress” bequeath to them?
We like to think that older generations always leave a better world for those that follow.
Is that still true?
Taking Drug Safety Seriously
Health hazards – nuclear reactors, guns, and contaminated foods – surround all of us, so governments take an active role in limiting these hazards through regulations, which, in many cases, are very successful.
But the situation is far different concerning the safety of prescription drugs.
Indeed, as far as protecting the public is concerned, drug safety is the regulator’s neglected stepchild.
The magnitude of the problem is huge.
In the United States alone, it is estimated that every year up to 100,000 patients die due to serious adverse drug reactions (ADR’s).
If true, drug-induced death would qualify as the fourth or fifth leading cause of death (depending on which mortality estimates are used).
Moreover, the direct annual hospital costs attributable to ADR’s run into the billions of dollars, and this does not include all the suffering that ADR’s cause that does not lead to hospitalization (or death).
The difficulties in determining cause and effect must be acknowledged.
Whether a patient’s death or hospitalization is due to a particular drug, the underlying illness, or a combination of the two can be hard to determine.
But this makes drug safety all the more important.
Inherent to drug safety is the fact that all drugs, in addition to their benefits, cause harm in certain patients.
Drug approval and use requires a careful weighing of desirable and undesirable effects.
These judgments vary, depending on whether they are made by a drug company, which stands to benefit from sales, or a patient at risk of suffering a serious adverse effect.
Incomplete knowledge complicates this assessment.
The rush to get new drugs to market often leads to inadequate safety documentation.
More than half of all approved drugs produce a serious adverse reaction that is not known at the time of regulatory approval.
For example, when the new class of painkillers called Cox-2 inhibitors was introduced, regulators, physicians, and patients were unaware that these drugs could cause heart attacks and strokes.
Tens of thousands of innocent patients – perhaps more – suffered such ADR’s before the first two drugs of this class were withdrawn.
Proper and complete documentation of harmful drug effects is difficult.
Spontaneous reporting rates to regulatory agencies are low – approximately 1% – and ongoing monitoring is passive in many countries.
There is also a general reluctance to report unfavorable drug effects.
Physicians may feel guilty and fear litigation, drug companies worry about the threat to corporate profits and regulatory agencies must face the question: “Why was the drug approved in the first place?”
It is especially difficult to attribute an adverse reaction to a drug if the medical event is common in the user’s age group or in the condition being treated.
Because the risk of heart attacks is high in older people, many of whom have arthritic pain requiring treatment with painkillers, it took six years to link Cox-2 inhibitors to a two- to three-fold increase in the risk of heart attacks.
A recent Harris Survey in the US concluded that 60% of adults are either not confident at all or not very confident that drug makers will publicly and in a timely manner disclose data on their products’ adverse effects.
Their skepticism is hardly groundless: internal documents obtained in recent lawsuits reveal that drug companies often fail to submit critical safety information to regulatory agencies, as required by law, and fail to communicate such information to physicians and patients.
One problem is that the consequences for neglecting drug safety are non-existing or minimal.
The time has come to get serious:
· Citizens and government must make drug safety a priority and commit adequate resources to fixing the problems;
· Penalties for drug companies’ failure to report and communicate safety information must be increased dramatically if they are to serve as effective deterrents;
· Regulatory agencies need enforcement authority so that stricter rules can be implemented;
· The drug-safety problem must be seen as a systemic failure.
It is unfair to blame clinicians for serious ADR’s, particularly in the absence of complete safety information.
Fixing the problem requires full cooperation from clinicians, but this requires ending their fear of litigation.
This approach works well in the airline industry: pilots reporting near misses are not penalized;
· Patients need to be better informed about the risks of prescription drugs and more involved in detection and reporting.
Package inserts in fine print are useless;
· Monitoring of ADR’s must be more pro-active.
This requires more funding, which should come from the main beneficiary of drug sales – the pharmaceutical industry – just as oversight of aviation safety is funded by the airlines.
Above all, the success of any comprehensive effort to improve drug safety hinges upon establishing an independent office of drug safety to advocate, coordinate, and provide direction to the regulatory agenda.
Such an office exists in the United Kingdom.
Other governments should follow this model in order to fulfill their neglected role as guardian of public health.
Taking Sides in the War Within Islam
PARIS – French Prime Minister Manuel Valls was right when he recently said that there is no good excuse for jihadism.
Rejecting the culture of excuses, said Valls, also meant resisting the temptation to dwell on explanations of the jihadist impulse.
And Valls was right again on April 4 when he warned against the danger of an ideological victory for Salafism, the doctrine underlying jihadism, which views Europe (and, within Europe, France) as prime ground for proselytization.
Successive French governments, over three decades, abdicated responsibility for engaging in this debate.
But while passivity may have ensured social peace in the short term, it enabled values other than those of the republic to take root in wide swaths of French cities.
And this was followed by willful blindness, as governments refused to recognize that militant Islamic fundamentalism was actually Islamo-fascism, the third global variant of totalitarianism that diehard critics had been decrying for a quarter-century.
This failure of government was abetted by the complicit myopia prevailing at the extremes of the political spectrum.
In 2012, Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, lumped together (in order to condemn them both) the religious symbol that is the yarmulke and the political emblem that is the veil.
And just this month, Green Senator Esther Benbassa claimed that a miniskirt is no less alienating than a chador.
What were Le Pen and Benbassa doing if not making acceptable a form of barbarism whose occasionally human face should never allow us to forget that people are killing, maiming, and raping in its name?
Compounding the problem is the well-known advantage that extremists have over moderates, by virtue of yelling the loudest.
Just as the Montagnards drowned out the Girondins in the Legislative Assembly during the French Revolution, the rabid jihadists are drowning out the large number of Muslims who want nothing more than to be left alone to practice their faith in peace and with respect for others and the law.
And finally, there is the timorous backpedaling we tend to see from our leaders whenever religious fanatics stigmatize those who offend them.
Yesterday it was the Indian novelist Salman Rushdie; today it is the Algerian novelist Kamel Daoud.
The first reflex of too many leaders at such times is to stigmatize the victims a second time, by suggesting that they were asking for it.
In any event, the result is plain: Appeasement of violent radicalism only encourages more of the same.
As a consequence, we find ourselves in an undeclared state of intellectual emergency, one that, regrettably, has given rise to the states of emergency that our governments proclaim in the wake of terrorist attacks.
Dealing with this emergency requires, above all, saying and doing the opposite of what has most often been said and done.
Specifically, we must call a spade a spade.
An Islamist may be a lost Muslim or a Muslim gone astray, but he or she is a Muslim all the same.
We must stop repeating ad nauseam that these aberrant Muslims have “nothing to do with Islam.”
In other words, we must acknowledge that two Islams are locked in a fight to the death, and that because the battlefield is the planet and the war threatens values that the West embraces, the fight is not solely the Muslims’ affair.
Once we do that, we must devote ourselves to identifying, untangling, and exposing the networks of Islamic hate and terror with the same energy and ingenuity that are now being applied to unraveling the global schemes of tax evaders.
How long will we have to wait for the Panama Papers of Salafism?
What is stopping the great newspapers from flushing out from the dark web the Mossack Fonsecas of global jihad and its criminal offshore companies?
We must also aid, encourage, and ideologically arm Muslims who reject the Islam of hate in favor of an Islam respectful of women, their faces, and their rights, as well as of human rights in general. Is that not what we did in the not-so-distant past with regard to the brave people we called dissidents in the Soviet world?
And were we not right, at the time, to ignore those who told us that the dissidents were a minority who would never, ever, prevail against the granite ideology of communism?
That means protecting and defending Daoud (to take just one current example), a French-language writer of Muslim origin who suggested that those seeking sanctuary in Europe would do well to learn to appreciate European values.
For that, Daoud has been saddled with a double fatwa: one from his “assassin brothers,” to borrow the Algerian-French journalist Mohamed Sifaoui’s phrase, and another from a handful of supposedly progressive and anti-racist French intellectuals who accused him of “recycling the most hackneyed clichés of Orientalism” when he urged Arab men to respect the dignity of women.
Genuine anti-racists, anti-imperialists, and believers in republican democracy must take the side of the Islam of moderation and peace in its war against the criminal Islam of the Salafists.
It is a war that is ideological, theological, and political, a war that cuts across worlds, cultures, and what we are right to call civilizations, from the lost city neighborhoods of France to those areas – for example, Kurdistan, Morocco, Bosnia, and Bangladesh – where enlightened Islam remains alive and well.
That, in broad strokes, is our urgent task.
This is our war.
Beating the Child Killers
GENEVA – Ask most people to name the two biggest causes of death among children, and they will most likely say malaria and HIV.
In fact, it is pneumonia and diarrhea – the “forgotten killers” – that are responsible for the highest death toll, claiming more than two million of the most vulnerable lives every year.
Together, these two diseases account for 29% of all deaths of children under five years old.
That is more than double the total for HIV and malaria combined, and nearly as many as all other infectious diseases, injuries, and other post-neonatal conditions put together.
Yet as shocking as these statistics are, what is perhaps even more surprising is just how preventable pneumonia and diarrhea are – so much so that it would be quite feasible to introduce measures that by 2025 would reduce their death toll to almost zero.
That is precisely what we are now aiming to do.
An ambitious new plan, called the Integrated Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Pneumonia and Diarrhea, launched this month by the World Health Organization and UNICEF, aims to step up existing interventions and pool global efforts, with the goal of reducing the number of deaths from pneumonia to less than three children per 1,000, and of diarrhea-related deaths to below one in 1,000.
This would effectively end the preventable deaths of more than two million children every year.
For any other infectious disease or global health threat, achieving this kind of reduction in incidence rate and mortality would be nothing short of miraculous.
Yet, for pneumonia and diarrhea, we have every reason to believe that we can succeed, because we already know what works.
For example, infants who are not exclusively breastfed for the first six months have a ten-fold increase in the risk of death from diarrhea, and are 15 times more likely to die from pneumonia.
Similarly, basic sanitation, such as improved hand washing and access to clean water, and better nutrition can also produce significant risk reduction, much of which can be achieved through simple education programs.
Immunization is also highly effective.
Vaccinating children against rotavirus, for example, can protect them from a pathogen that is responsible for 37% of all diarrhea deaths in children under five, thus saving 450,000 lives every year.
Similarly, vaccines exist to protect against pneumococcal disease, which accounts for a half-million pneumonia-related deaths annually.
When combined, these interventions significantly reduce both pneumonia and diarrhea; the problem is that, too often, they do not reach the children most at risk, such as those living in extreme poverty or hard-to-reach communities in the world’s poorest countries.
That is why we now need the Integrated Global Action Plan.
The two diseases share so many common causes and risk factors, prevention strategies and interventions, and delivery platforms for care in clinics, communities, and schools that it makes sense to bring them together.
But, if those hard-to-reach children are to benefit, our efforts must be scaled up significantly.
Until recently, this simply would not have been possible, at least not on the immunization front.
The vaccines protecting against rotavirus and pneumococcal disease are both barely more than a decade old.
In the past, such new vaccines would take, on average, 15 years to reach developing countries – and then at prices that would place them beyond the reach of those most in need.
This is one of the reasons why my organization, the GAVI Alliance, was created: to help accelerate the introduction of new vaccines and make them more affordable and accessible in developing countries.
None of this means that we will not still face significant obstacles.
But the one thing that we know about immunization is that we can reach everyone.
We did it with smallpox, which has now been eradicated, and we are doing it with polio (with less than 100 cases worldwide this year).
The challenge now is to do the same with all of our life-saving vaccines – particularly those that target the biggest killers of children.
Talent versus Capital in the Twenty-First Century
GENEVA – When financial policymakers attempt to promote economic growth, they almost invariably focus on looking for new ways to unleash capital.
But, although this approach may have worked in the past, it risks giving short shrift to the role that talent plays in generating and realizing the ideas that make growth possible.
Indeed, in a future of rapid technological change and widespread automation, the determining factor – or crippling limit – to innovation, competiveness, and growth is less likely to be the availability of capital than the existence of a skilled workforce.
Geopolitical, demographic, and economic forces are relentlessly reshaping labor markets.
Technology, in particular, is changing the nature of work itself, rendering entire sectors and occupations obsolete, while creating completely new industries and job categories.
By some estimates, almost half of today’s professions could be automatable by 2025.
Speculation about what will replace them ranges from predictions of unexpected opportunities to forecasts of large-scale unemployment as machines displace most human labor.