Populists are always anti-pluralists; the task for those opposing them is to fashion conceptions of a pluralist collective identity devoted to shared ideals of fairness.
Many rightly worry that Trump might not respect the US Constitution.
Of course, the meaning of the constitution is always contested, and it would be naive to believe that non-partisan appeals to it will immediately deter him.
Still, America’s founders obviously wanted to limit what any president could do, even with a supportive Congress and a favorably inclined Supreme Court.
One can only hope that enough voters – including Trump supporters – see things the same way and put pressure on him to respect this non-negotiable element of the American constitutional tradition.
When Leaders Are True to Their Lies
HANOI – What does the Venezuelan domestic payments crisis have in common with the death of the North American Free Trade Agreement, announced by Wilbur Ross, US President-elect Donald Trump’s pick to be the next US Secretary of Commerce?
These two seemingly disparate events are linked by the odd relationship with the truth that both Trump and the Chavista regime seem to share.
All governments lie.
A few believe their own lies.
But things get dangerous when they act in order to be true to their lies.
That is the trap into which Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro’s government has fallen, and it seems to be the logic behind the decision articulated by Ross to withdraw from NAFTA.
Many observers have noted similarities between Trump and Maduro’s predecessor, the late Hugo Chávez, even though they represent opposite ends of the political spectrum.
But our brains are designed to identify patterns.
Toddlers learn the concept of a cat by being shown just a handful of exemplars.
Even adults classify things based on concepts that we cannot really define.
In 1964, US Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart stated his now famous criterion of obscenity: “I know it when I see it.”
That certainly seems true of the connection between Chávez (who died in 2013) and Trump.
Chávez, and then Maduro, adopted policies that put Venezuela in a very weak position: lavish spending, expropriation, price and foreign-exchange controls, and reckless borrowing abroad.
Global capital markets lost confidence in Venezuela in 2013, and the price of oil plummeted in 2014, making these policies unsustainable and sending the economy into a tailspin.
Confronting a declining economy, Maduro decided to blame it all on an economic war waged by the United States and its local cronies.
The crucial point is that this imaginary war ended up being the rationale for government decisions.
Every symptom of the crisis was transformed into the consequence of an action taken by the enemy.
Shortages were the result of hoarding by speculators.
Inflation was caused by price gouging by unscrupulous businessmen.
Currency depreciation was driven by a website that reported on the exchange rate.
People have been prosecuted and imprisoned on the basis of these allegations.
In managing the crisis, Maduro failed to authorize the issuance of higher-denomination banknotes, which would constitute an acknowledgement of the high inflation that the country has suffered.
The highest-denomination banknote, the 100-bolivar bill, which was worth $46.5 when it was introduced in 2008, fell to just $0.03, requiring mountains of bills to make small payments.
The value of the stock of bills and coins held outside banks has fallen from about $150 per capita in 2012 to less than $6 at the beginning of this month.
And the shortage of bills – caused in part by the difficulty of supplying so much low-value currency – upset Venezuelans to the point that the government finally took action.
According to Maduro, the problem was straightforward: bills were being siphoned out of the country by mafias financed by the CIA.
To destroy the mafias, Maduro canceled these bills as legal tender and gave their holders only 72 hours to exchange them at banks.
To prevent the mafias from returning the money from abroad in this period, the borders with Colombia and Brazil were closed.
The chaos that ensued is hard to describe.
Just as Venezuelans were getting ready for Christmas, they found out that they had no money to pay for anything.
Nobody would accept their 100-bolivar notes, and banks had no bills to exchange for those being returned by the public.
People without bank accounts, mainly the poor, lost what little they had.
The payment system went into a tailspin, and the country fell into chaos.
Now consider NAFTA.
Trump convinced many voters that NAFTA was the worst trade deal the US ever signed.
It was a deal negotiated by “really stupid people,” he declared.
Millions of jobs left the US for Mexico, causing Americans to suffer.
The lack of good manufacturing jobs was clearly a major complaint during the election; but let’s check the facts before blaming Mexico and NAFTA.
In 1993, the last year before NAFTA came into effect, Mexican manufacturing value added was equivalent to just 7.7% of US manufacturing.
By 2014, it had grown to about 10% of the US level, a gain representing about $50 billion.
With average US productivity per worker at about $150,000, if Mexico’s manufacturing gain is attributed entirely to NAFTA, this represents about 333,000 US jobs, or less than one out of every 400 jobs in the US.
In the same period, value added in US manufacturing increased by $972 billion, more than 19 times as much as Mexico’s gain.
Compared to US manufacturing value added of $2.1 trillion, Mexico’s $50 billion is a paltry sum.
And the US may have derived other benefits from the deal, such as more jobs, thanks to more exports to Mexico and more competitive Mexican inputs.
In the same 1993-2014 period, industrial employment as a share of total employment fell by 8% in the US, 8.5% in Japan, and 9.8% in Germany, but it barely moved in Mexico.
Clearly, the industrial jobs that are missing in the US have also gone missing in Japan and Germany, and those jobs are not in Mexico.
Trump may have convinced Rust Belt voters that “their” jobs are in Mexico.
But if he actually believes it, a lot of damage will be done before people discover the truth.
As a consequence of all the talk about withdrawing from NAFTA, the Mexican peso has lost about 14% of its value since the election results were announced.
That depreciation is larger than the likely tariffs the US would impose on Mexican goods if it left NAFTA.
Lying to get ahead is a human foible.
But it becomes something much worse if, like Chávez, Maduro, and Trump, you remain true to your word.
Trust Negotiations, Not Iran
North Korea’s agreement to give up its military nuclear programme was a huge success for the international community.
Admittedly, the country’s dire economic condition and its urgent need for energy made the agreement venal in a way.
But North Korea’s decision nonetheless demonstrated the virtues and efficacy of diplomacy, which brings us once again to the case of Iran.
French President Jacques Chirac recently implied that we should not overestimate the seriousness of Iran’s possessing nuclear weapons.
I disagree.
It is true that possessing does not mean using; that for 15 years the world has had eight nuclear powers; and that nuclear force has not been used since 1945.
But it is also true that Iran’s emergence as the ninth nuclear power would provoke a regional and global upheaval, dangerously aggravate fears and suspicions, and confront the international community with a profound crisis of vision and policy.
So, what can we do?
First, resorting to force is simply not realistic.
A nuclear strike would have incalculable consequences, and the Muslim world would in this case stand together.
Nor is a conventional attack possible, as Israel has no common border with Iran and most of the American army is tied down in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Exploring diplomatic avenues is therefore absolutely necessary.
Success would be guaranteed if the international community, especially the United States, clearly understands and admits its necessity, and supports it firmly and completely.
For example, economic sanctions, to which Iran is very sensitive, could be tightened, with a commitment not to resort to military force facilitating Russian and Chinese approval.
The only possible framework for negotiations is the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), concluded in 1968.
Iran was one of the first countries to sign, and it cooperated with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for more than 30 years – a relationship that deteriorated only in the last three years.
But the current climate of mutual wariness between Iran and the self-proclaimed triad of Germany, Great Britain, and France (with sporadic US support) is not propitious to effective negotiations.
The West’s aim, announced by the US and followed by the triad, is to force Iran to give up uranium enrichment.
Yet the NPT is clear: any signatory country that gives up nuclear weapons and accepts the IAEA’s absolute and unconditional control is entitled to produce electric energy from civil nuclear sources, and to receive from the international community, if necessary, technical and financial support.
Iran’s oil resources are not infinite, and it wants to have complete control over the civil nuclear field – a basic right as an NPT signatory.
I cannot see how a negotiation aimed at getting Iran to renounce unilaterally a right recognized for all NPT signatories simply in order to build confidence in the West could be successful.
Uranium enrichment is certainly the first condition for making bombs, but the level of enrichment must reach about 95%, compared to 3.5% for energy production.
Are the international scientific community and the IAEA really incapable of providing indicators and criteria that would allow the international community to differentiate between two types of industrial operations?
For example, forty years ago, when fear of nuclear proliferation was new, my teacher and friend Vassili Leontief, who invented the macroeconomic table of inter-industrial flows, argued that the best indicator of an illegal arms program is massive electricity consumption.
Nor has the Iranian government ever publicly expressed a will to possess nuclear weapons.
In fact, it has offered several times to accept IAEA monitoring and has suggested that its civil nuclear program would be carried out with international cooperation.
So far, the West has rejected everything, on the pretext that any uranium enrichment would indicate a military program.
Although this stance is technically wrong, it is strategically rational, given the West’s wariness regarding Iran’s true intentions.
I recently met in Paris with Iran’s ambassador to France, and I began brusquely: “So, you really want this bomb, Ambassador?”
His answer deserves consideration.
“Of course not,” he replied.
“You know very well that the actual ambition of my country is to achieve regional leadership.
If we had the bomb, the relationships with all our neighbors would immediately deteriorate.”
As everybody knows, ambassadors are paid to lie.
The West’s wariness is well founded, and we have no reason to renounce our mistrust.
But that should not prevent us from exploring all scenarios.
If we interpret the NPT correctly, we can launch negotiations with Iran that would carefully explore the potential sincerity or not of its official stance.
Truthiness on the March
LONDON – The late US Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan famously said, “Everyone is entitled to his own opinion, but not to his own facts.” That may be true.
But, entitled or not, politicians and electorates are constructing their own alternate realities – with far-reaching consequences.
Nowadays, facts and truth are becoming increasingly difficult to uphold in politics (and in business and even sports).
They are being replaced with what the American comedian Stephen Colbert calls “truthiness”: the expression of gut feelings or opinions as valid statements of fact.
This year might be considered one of peak truthiness.
To make good decisions, voters need to assess reliable facts, from economic data to terrorism analysis, presented transparently and without bias.
But, today, talking heads on television would rather attack those with expertise in these areas.
And ambitious political figures – from the leaders of the Brexit campaign in the United Kingdom to US Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump – dismiss the facts altogether.
The environment is ripe for such behavior.
Voters, particularly in the advanced economies, are jaded by years of broken political promises, revelations of cover-ups, and relentless political and media spin.
Opaque or dubious dealings have cast doubt on the integrity of organizations and institutions on which we should be able to rely.
For example, the New York Times recently published a series of articles on think tanks that highlighted the conflict of interest faced by those who operate as analysts, but are beholden to corporate funders and sometimes also act as lobbyists.
As soon as a few experts are found to have been offering half-truths – or worse – the credibility of the entire field can be called into question.
Christine Todd Whitman, who was Head of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on September 11, 2001, told residents of New York City that the air was safe to breathe and the water was safe to drink in the days after the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
But, as a 2003 EPA report noted, the agency “did not have sufficient data and analyses to make such a blanket statement” at that time.
With cases of severe respiratory illness piling up, Whitman now admits that the statement was wrong.
Likewise, as the recently published Chilcot report showed, the Iraq War was launched in 2003 under false pretenses.
Intelligence reports had not established that there were weapons of mass destruction in the country, yet British Prime Minister Tony Blair dutifully followed US President George W. Bush in ordering his military to invade.
The consequences of that decision are still emerging.
If our leaders can be so willfully wrong about such consequential matters, how can we believe anything they tell us?
This question has opened the door for a new, more overt truthiness, espoused by the likes of Trump, who seems to introduce freshly invented “facts” on a daily basis.
Trump’s surrogates, for their part, use television appearances and social media to restate the falsehoods, seemingly operating under the principle that if you repeat something often enough, it will become true.
And many voters seem willing to go along for the ride.
When 40 leading Republican foreign policymakers and national-security experts signed a letter expressing their opposition to Trump, whom they fear would be “the most reckless president in American history,” their concerns were largely disregarded.
Trump’s response – that those leaders are the ones who made the world “such a dangerous place” – sounds just plausible enough to justify ignoring their warning.
Even outright lies spoken in a nationally broadcast interview go unchallenged, as if Trump were indeed entitled to his own facts.
The leaders of the UK’s campaign to withdraw from the European Union enjoyed a similar advantage in the run-up to June’s Brexit referendum.
They painted a wholly false picture of the country’s circumstances – from its role in the EU to the impact of immigration – and knowingly made impossible promises about what would happen if the public voted “Leave.”
For example, leaders like Boris Johnson, now Britain’s foreign secretary, declared that the £350 million ($465 million) supposedly paid weekly to the EU (a deeply flawed figure that fails to take into account the benefits received) would be redirected to the National Health Services.
The Leave campaign even plastered the pledge onto the side of a campaign bus.
Now that the referendum is over, Johnson and others have backtracked, and the campaign has rebranded itself the “Change Britain” movement and promised to redirect EU funds to other areas instead.
This has infuriated many, especially given the recent warning by the body that represents hospitals across England that underfunding has pushed the NHS to the brink.
Brexiteers have also walked back pledges to curb immigration, amid a sharp increase in hate crimes across the UK that their rhetoric helped to fuel.
The downsides of Brexit should have been obvious to voters before the referendum – not least because so many economists, defense experts, and world leaders spelled them out during the campaign.
But, as leading Brexiteer Michael Gove proudly observed, people in the UK had “had enough of experts.”
In fact, it seems that some people voted for Brexit specifically because so many experts spoke out against it.
They seemed to believe Brexiteer MP Gisela Stuart: “the only expert that matters” is the voter.
It should be no surprise that the post-referendum reality is not what many Brexit voters expected.
Yet the revelations of the falsehoods that propelled the Leave campaign to victory have hardly driven people back into the arms of experts.
Truthiness is on the march, particularly across Europe and the US – in large part because so many of the authorities who should be calling out the lies are tainted by truthiness themselves.
Yunani Tanpa Ilusi
ATHENA – “Pergantian pemerintah bersifat minor yang termahal dalam sejarah Yunani”. Pernyataan ini setidaknya merupakan satu cara menggambarkan hasil pemilihan umum Yunani pada tanggal 20 September.
Sesungguhnya, meskipun ada beberapa pengecualian, menteri-menteri yang sama kembali menjadi anggota kabinet sebagai pemerintah yang berkuasa, didukung oleh partai-partai ganjil yang sama (partai sayap kiri Syriza dan partai kecil sayap kanan Yunani Independen), dengan persentase hasil suara yang sedikit lebih rendah dibandingkan pemerintah sebelumnya.
Tetapi kesan adanya kontinuitas ini cenderung menyesatkan.
Meskipun persentase pemilih yang mendukung pemerintah relatif tetap, 0.6 juta dari 6.1 penduduk Yunani yang memberikan suara di referendum pada tanggal 5 Juli untuk meneruskan utang “extend-and-pretend” dengan  syarat austerity yang ketat, tidak memilih di pemilu ini (voters turnout).
Penurunan jumlah pemilih yang anjlok dalam waktu kurang dari dua bulan menggambarkan perubahan suasana hati pemilih secara drastis – dari penuh semangat menjadi murung.
Pergeseran ini mencerminkan mandat yang dicari dan diperoleh Perdana Menteri Alexis Tsipras.
Bulan Januari lalu, ketika saya mendukung beliau, kami mengajak pemilih mendukung tekad kami mengakhiri dana talangan “extend-and-pretend” yang mendorong Yunani masuk ke lubang hitam dan diterapkan sebagai model kebijakan austerity di seluruh Eropa.
Pemerintah yang kembali berkuasa pada tanggal 20 September memiliki mandat yang berlawanan: melaksanakan program dana talangan “extend-and-pretend” – benar, ini merupakan perbedaan yang paling mematikan.
Pemerintah baru yang dipimpin Tsipras sadar akan hal ini.
Tsipras paham bahwa pemerintahnya menghadapi risiko besar terkait dengan program fiskal yang tidak bisa berhasil dan agenda reformasi yang dibenci menteri-menterinya.
Walaupun pemilih dengan bijak memilih Tsipras dan kabinetnya, bukan oposisi yang konservatif, untuk menerapkan program yang dibenci oleh sebagian besar penduduk Yunani, kenyataan agenda austerity ini akan menguji kesabaran publik.
Pemerintah Tsipras berkomitmen untuk memberlakukan daftar panjang tindakan dalam kondisi resesi.
Tiga diantaranya menyoroti rencana kenaikan pajak yang tengah ditunda: lebih dari 600.000 petani diminta membayar tunggakan pajak tambahan di tahun 2014 dan membayar di muka (pre-pay) sebesar lebih dari 50% perkiraan pajak tahun mendatang.
Sekitar 700.000 usaha kecil (termasuk buruh dengan upah rendah yang terpaksa bekerja sebagai penyedia jasa swasta) harus membayar di muka 100% pajak tahun depan (ya, saya tidak mengada-ada).
Mulai tahun depan, setiap pengusaha diharuskan membayar 26% turnover tax dari setiap euro yang dihasilkan – sembari diwajibkan membayar pajak di muka pada tahun 2016 nanti yang besarnya adalah 75% dari jumlah pajak mereka tahun 2017.
Selain dari kenaikan pajak yang menggelikan ini (yang juga mencakup kenaikan pajak penjualan secara besar-besaran), pemerintah Tsipras telah menyetujui pemotongan pensiun dan penjualan aset-aset publik (fire sales).
Bahkan penduduk Yunani yang paling reformis pun menolak keras agenda yang ditetapkan oleh “tiga serangkai” ini (Komisi Eropa, Dana Moneter Internasional, dan Bank Sentral Eropa).
Tsipras berusaha membangun dua lini pertahanan melawan gelombang penderitaan (supaya mengurangi ketidakpuasan populer).
Baris pertama adalah menekan tiga serangkai agar memenuhi janjinya untuk melakukan perundingan penghapusan utang setelah kebijakan dalam kondisi resesi ini dilaksanakan sepenuhnya.
Baris pertahanan kedua didasarkan pada janji adanya agenda “paralel” yang bertujuan untuk memperbaiki dampak terburuk dari program troika ini.
Akan tetapi kedua bentuk pertahanan ini lemah, mengingat buruknya kenyataan yang dihadapi akibat kondisi perekonomian Yunani.
Ada sedikit keraguan bahwa pemerintah Yunani akan mendapatkan penghapusan utang.
Utang-utang yang tidak mungkin terlunaskan ibarat potong rambut.
Namun kreditor-kreditor asal Yunani sudah dua kali memotong rambut mereka, pertama di musim semi tahun 2012 dan selanjutnya di bulan Desember.
Sayangnya, meskipun potong rambut ini diperlukan, sekarang sudah terlambat, hanya sedikit, dan terlalu berbahaya sehubungan dengan parameter keuangan dan hukum mereka.
Dengan demikian pertanyaan yang dihadapi pemerintah Tsipras ialah apakah potongan rambut berikutnya akan lebih berguna dibandingkan dengan sebelumnya.
Agar dapat membantu pemulihan perekonomian Yunani, penghapusan utang harus cukup besar dan menjadi pengungkit untuk menghilangkan sebagian besar upaya-upaya austerity baru, yang semata-mata memastikan terjadinya perputaran  pada siklus deflasi-utang.
Lebih tepatnya, pengurangan utang harus disertai dengan penurunan target primary budget surplus jangka menengah, yang saat ini 3.5% dari PDB menjadi paling banyak 1.5%.
Tindakan lainnya tidak akan bisa memulihkan perekonomian Yunani.
Apakah hal seperti ini dimungkinkan secara politis?
Satu petunjuk baru muncul dalam artikel di Financial Times dimana Klaus Regling, kepala dana talangan Eropa, the European Stability Mechanism (Mekanisme Stabilitas Eropa), merujuk kepada mantra troika bahwa Yunani tidak memerlukan penghapusan utang secara besar.
Regling mungkin bukan pelaku utama disini karena tindakan atau upayanya, tapi ia tidak pernah bicara ketika bukan gilirannya atau menyampaikan pernyataan yang bertentangan dengan Bank Sentral Eropa dan pemerintah Jerman.
Tentu saja, ada IMF, yang mana salah satu karyawannya menyampaikan kepada semua orang yang bersedia mendengarkan bahwa utang Yunani harus dihapuskan sekitar sepertiga atau €100 miliar ($112 miliar).
Tetapi jika kejadian baru-baru ini menggambarkan masa depan, maka pandangan IMF ini akan direkayasa.
Ini menyisakan Tsipras dengan baris pertahanannya yang kedua: program “paralel”.
Gagasan ini bertujuan untuk menunjukkan kepada pemilih bahwa pemerintah dapat menggabungkan kapitulasi pada troika dengan agenda reformasinya sendiri, terdiri atas peningkatan efisiensi dan serangan terhadap oligarki yang dapat membebaskan dana dengan tujuan mengurangi dampak austerity terhadap Yunani yang melemah.
Ini adalah proyek yang layak.
Jika pemerintah Yunani berhasil, proyek ini berpotensi menjadi “game changer”.
Bagaimanapun juga, supaya upaya ini berhasil pemerintah harus membunuh dua naga sekaligus: ketidakmampuan administrasi publik Yunani dan kepandaian oligarki yang tidak ada habisnya yang tahu cara membela diri – termasuk membentuk aliansi kuat dengan troika.
Tuberculosis or Hair Loss?
Refocusing Medical Research
PRINCETON – In an ideal world, the amount of money we spend on medical research to prevent or cure a disease would be proportional to its seriousness and the number of people who suffer from it.
In the real world, 90% of the money spent on medical research is focused on conditions that are responsible for just 10% of the deaths and disability caused by diseases globally. 
In other words, the diseases that cause nine-tenths of what the World Health Organization refers to as “the global burden of disease” are getting only one-tenth of the world’s medical research effort.
As a result, millions of people die every year from diseases for which no new drugs are in the pipeline, while drug companies pour billions into developing cures for erectile dysfunction and baldness.
But blaming drug companies is too easy a response.
They cannot justify developing new drugs unless they can expect to recoup their costs through sales.
If they target diseases that affect affluent people, or people living in countries with national health insurance, they will be able to patent any new drugs they discover.
For the 20 years that the patent lasts, they will have a monopoly on the drug’s sale and be able to command a high price. 
If drug companies target diseases that affect only people who are unable to pay high prices for drugs, they cannot expect to cover their research costs, let alone make a profit.
No matter how much their directors may want to focus on the diseases that kill the most people, the current system of financial incentives means that if they did so, their shareholders would remove them, or their companies would soon be out of business. That would help no one.
The problem is with the system, not with the individuals who make their choices within it.
At a meeting in Oslo in August, Incentives for Global Health, a nonprofit organization directed by Aidan Hollis, professor of economics at the University of Calgary, and Thomas Pogge, professor of philosophy and international affairs at Yale, launched a radical new proposal to change the incentives under which corporations are rewarded for developing new medicines.  They suggest that governments contribute to a Health Impact Fund that would pay pharmaceutical companies in proportion to the extent to which their products reduce the global burden of disease.
The fund would not replace existing patent laws, but would offer an alternative to them.  Pharmaceutical companies could continue to patent and sell their products as they do now.  Alternatively, they could register a new drug with the Heath Impact Fund, which would set a low price based on the drug’s manufacturing cost.
Instead of profiting from sales at high prices, the corporation would become eligible for a share of all payments made by the fund over the next ten years.
The size of the share would be calculated by assessing the contribution the drug has made to reducing death and disability.
The beauty of the scheme is that it gives economic support to the idea that all human lives are of equal value.
For products that drug companies register with the Health Impact Fund, corporations would get the same reward for saving the lives of Africans living in extreme poverty as they would get for saving the lives of wealthy citizens of affluent nations. 
The most potentially lucrative targets would become the diseases that kill the most people, because that is where a breakthrough drug would have the biggest impact on global health.
Moreover, companies would have an incentive to produce and distribute drugs at the lowest possible price, because only when the poor could use them would the drug save the greatest possible number of lives.
A company might choose to allow cheap generic copies of its drug to be made in developing countries, because that would enable it to be used more widely, and to save more lives – for which the Health Impact Fund would reward the company that registered it.
Hollis and Pogge estimate that about $6 billion a year would be required to enable the Fund to provide a sufficient incentive for drug companies to register products that target the diseases of the poor.
That figure would be reached if countries accounting for one-third of the global economy – say, most European nations, or the United States and one or two small affluent nations – contributed 0.03 % of their gross national income, or three cents for every $100 they earn.
That’s not a trivial sum, but it isn’t out of reach, especially considering that affluent nations would also benefit from cheaper drugs and from medical research that was focused on reducing disease rather than on maximizing profits.
It’s the Economy, Tunisia
TUNIS – On December 21, Tunisia completed a remarkable democratic transfer of power, with the election of Beji Caid Essebsi, the leader of the secular political party Nidaa Tounes (Call of Tunisia).
As with the parliamentary election in October, the process of choosing a president was, for the most part, fair and free of violence.
For the moment, Tunisia is the only Arab Spring country that appears to be on a path to genuine democratic governance.
Since the ouster of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali in 2011, the country has endured pressures from Islamic radicals, a deterioration of its economy, and a chaotic transitional period.
But it has also written and adopted a new constitution structured to encourage the separation and balance of powers, and it seems on track to pull off a successful change in government.
Tunisia is relatively homogeneous ethnically and lacks sharp sectarian divisions; nonetheless, owing partly to its porous borders with Algeria and Libya, the specter of violence is always present.
Indeed, the issue of security dominated both the parliamentary and presidential elections, with all sides claiming to be the best qualified to counter extremism.
Lurking in the background of the presidential election was fear in some quarters that a victory by Nidaa Tounes, which won a plurality in parliament, might mean a return to authoritarian rule.
Given concerns about security and the fate of the democratic transition, economic issues were essentially put on hold in both elections.
Now it is time for Tunisia’s leaders to put the economy at the top of their agenda.
In the coming weeks, Nidaa Tounes, which won 86 of the parliament’s 217 seats, will face a difficult decision as it attempts to form a government.
The party’s leaders could strike a power-sharing arrangement with the moderate Islamist Ennahda party, which finished second, with 69 seats, and risk a stalemate over policy.
Or they could piece together a working majority from smaller political parties and try to govern in an unstable coalition beset by deep policy disagreements.
Whatever Nidaa Tounes decides, the new government will have to act quickly.
The country’s moribund economy has fueled public disillusionment.
Unemployment is falling, but it remains high, at more than 15% – and higher still among the young.
The fiscal and current-account deficits are widening, foreign investment is weak, inflation is rising, and corruption remains rampant.
Distrust of political parties and disappointment in their ability to govern is widespread, as evidenced by low voter turnout in the recent elections.
Tunisia’s political achievements could rapidly be reversed if the new government cannot quickly revive the economy and improve citizens’ daily lives.
Nidaa Tounes must take the lead in forging support from all major parties for a national-unity agenda on economic reforms.
In its first 30 days, the new National Assembly should publicly announce a consensus vision for economic growth and job creation.
A broad multi-party commitment would likely help discipline subsequent legislative action and assist in generating the necessary public support.
There is already broad agreement among the major political parties on the necessary priorities: bringing public spending under control, encouraging private-sector growth and employment, promoting regional development and social inclusion, and investing in essential infrastructure.
In the previous assembly, work stalled on several significant pieces of legislation, including laws on public-private partnerships, foreign investment, and banking reform.
The unity agenda should include early passage of these bills.
Tunisia’s politicians will be able to draw on existing work.
The program developed by acting Prime Minister Mehdi Jomaa in September 2014 deserves serious consideration.
The International Monetary Fund Stand-By Arrangement of 2013 provides a similar starting point.
To maintain support from the IMF when its current program ends in summer 2015, Tunisia will need to negotiate new commitments.
A consensus reform package could serve as a credible point of departure.
In the meantime, Western democracies must do their part and sustain engagement with Tunisia.
The 2011 Deauville Partnership with Arab Countries in Transition, in which G-8 members pledged to support Arab countries’ efforts to move toward “free, democratic, and tolerant societies,” has a role to play.
This mechanism may be unlikely to mobilize significant new financing, but participating countries can provide valuable political and technical support on structural reform, regional integration, and private-sector development.
Provided the security threats are contained, an early consensus within Tunisia on a credible economic agenda would open the taps of the largest potential source of capital: international financial markets.
The incoming funds, and the subsequent growth and job creation, would undergird the consolidation of democracy – and thus help cement the impressive gains that Tunisia has made so far.
Turkey’s ISIS Crisis
ISTANBUL – Following the recent safe return of 46 Turkish hostages held by the Islamic State, hopes were raised in the United States that Turkey would finally commit to joining the US-led coalition now fighting the group.
But Turkey’s willingness to contribute to the coalition remains constrained by the legacy of its ill-fated Syria policy, as well as by a fundamental strategic disconnect between President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government and US President Barack Obama’s administration.
Since Syria’s civil war began three years ago, Turkey has provided logistical and financial support to virtually all elements of the Syrian opposition, while allowing them to use Turkish territory to regroup after launching military operations across the border.
Committed to regime change in Syria, Turkey turned a blind eye to some of these groups’ brutal tactics, radical ideologies, and big ambitions.
The fear now is that this benign neglect has allowed the Islamic State to embed itself in Turkey and build the capacity to conduct terrorist activities on Turkish soil – and thus to retaliate for Turkish participation in the US-led coalition.
But there is more behind Turkey’s reticent response to the coalition.
Turkey fundamentally disagrees with the US in its interpretation of the threat that the Islamic State poses – and how to address it.
Simply put, whereas the US is approaching the Islamic State as the Middle East’s most pressing problem, Turkey views the group as a symptom of deeper pathologies.
According to this view, any campaign that focuses exclusively on destroying the Islamic State will do nothing to prevent the emergence of similar threats in the near future.
And, unlike the US, Middle Eastern countries and their neighbors cannot decide to “pivot” away from the region when the consequences of their poorly designed interventions become too unruly.
In this context, Turkey’s leaders believe that the international community’s response to the Islamic State should be far more ambitious, seeking to redress the underlying causes of the current disorder.
Such a strategy would have to include efforts to compel Iraq’s new government to break with the sectarianism of former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, while supporting the new leadership’s efforts to provide basic health, educational, and municipal services to all of Iraq’s citizens.
As for Syria, the only plausible route to normalcy begins with forcing President Bashar al-Assad to cede power.
To this end, the US and its allies should consider striking Assad’s strongholds in Syria, while establishing safe havens for the moderate opposition under the protective cloak of a no-fly zone.
Here, Turkey, for which the establishment of safe havens is vital to accommodate Syrians who have been displaced by the conflict, could play a central role.
Turkey is already bearing a heavy burden of Syrian refugees, having absorbed more than one million since the crisis began in 2011.
Following Islamic State attacks against Kurdish enclaves, more than 120,000 refugees crossed into Turkey in a single weekend.
That is roughly the same number of Syrians allowed to seek refuge in the entire European Union since the crisis began in 2011.
An orchestrated military campaign against the Islamic State will undoubtedly displace even more Syrians.
But, in Turkey’s view, they should not have to cross the border to be safe.
Instead, Turkey wants to take the lead in building infrastructure that could serve the needs of Syria’s displaced people within the country’s borders.
Such projects would make sense only within internationally guaranteed safe havens protected by a no-fly zone.
Given that the Islamic State poses a graver threat to Turkey than to any other Western country, Turkey has no choice other than to participate in the campaign against it.
This means, first and foremost, adopting a zero-tolerance policy toward the Islamic State at home, aimed at preventing the group from fundraising and recruiting on Turkish soil.
Continued improvement of border security and deeper cooperation with Western intelligence agencies on the issue of foreign fighters are also essential.
But Turkey’s imperative to fight the Islamic State does not trump – much less invalidate – Turkish leaders’ concerns about Obama’s long-term goals.
If the US and Turkey are to work together to eradicate the Islamic State, they will first have to agree on a longer-term strategy for restoring some semblance of order to a crisis-ravaged region.
Turkey and Europe: Two Trains on a Collision Course?
By intervening in Lebanon, Europeans have made a far-reaching, risk-fraught, and, at the same time, correct decision.
The reason is that the future of Europe’s security will be determined in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East.
Europe, whether it likes it or not, has taken on a new, strategic role in the region.
Should it fail, the price will be high.
In view of the serious risks that Europe has assumed, in full awareness of the consequences, it is of the utmost importance that a European “Grand Strategy” for the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East be developed, so that Europe can calmly and clearly define its interests.
In any serious variation of this Grand Strategy, Turkey will need to play a central role – politically, militarily, economically, and culturally.
Safeguarding Europe’s interests today means establishing a strong link – indeed an unbreakable bond – with Turkey as a cornerstone of regional security.
So it is astonishing that Europe is doing exactly the opposite: firmly closing its eyes to the strategic challenge posed by Turkey.
Successful modernization and democratization of Turkey – with a strong civil society, the rule of law, and a modern economy – will not only be hugely beneficial for Turkey, but will also export stability and serve as a model for transformation in the Islamic world.
Above all, the successful modernization of a large Muslim country will make a decisive contribution to Europe’s security.
Since the days of Kemal Atatürk, the founder of modern Turkey, the modernization of Turkey has relied on its Western or European perspective.
For the last 43 years, this perspective has been largely defined by Turkey’s interest in joining the European Union and by the EU’s promise of accession.
But at the very moment when even slightest glance at the crisis-ridden region on Europe’s eastern flank – Iran, Iraq, Syria, the Middle East conflict, Central Asia and the Southern Caucasus, Islamic terrorism, emigration, and threats to Europe’s energy supplies – should make clear Turkey’s paramount importance to European security, Europe is reveling in its disinterest in the state of European-Turkish relations.
This autumn, the European Commission is scheduled to issue a progress report on accession negotiations with Turkey.
A dangerous situation may well emerge, as this report threatens to derail the whole process.
The key dispute is over Cyprus.
Turkey has refused to open its ports, airports, and roads to the Republic of Cyprus, as it is obligated to do by the Ankara Protocol, which set the terms of Turkey’s accession negotiations.
Turkey explains its refusal by the EU’s failure (as a result of a veto by the Greek Cypriot government in Nicosia) to fulfill its own promise to open up trade with Northern Cyprus, which is under Turkish rule.
The EU made these promises at the Council of Europe in December 2003 and formally at the Council of Foreign Ministers in April 2004. But so far it has not fulfilled them.
So it is Ankara – and not the EU! – that has a legitimate point here.
When the Ankara Protocol was agreed, the government of Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan achieved something that, until then, had been considered impossible: he shattered the decades-old opposition of Turkish Cypriots to a compromise between the two parts of the divided island.
Turkish Northern Cyprus accepted UN Secretary General Kofi Annan’s plan (massively supported by the EU) to resolve the long-standing conflict.
But the Greek South, goaded and inflamed by its government, rejected it.
It would be deeply unjust and outright foolish if the EU Commission’s report holds Turkey responsible for its refusal to make further concessions to Greek Cyprus (now an EU member), while refusing to blame the government in Nicosia, which is the real cause of the blockage.
Some in the EU – mainly in France, Germany, and Austria – seem smugly pleased by the prospect of a clash on this issue, believing it will force Turkey to give up its drive for membership.
But this attitude is irresponsible.
The EU is about to commit a grave strategic error by allowing its report this autumn to be guided by the short-sighted domestic policy considerations of some of its important member states.
And what perspective would Turkey have outside the EU?
Pan-Turkish illusions?
A return to the Orient and to Islam?
None of these will work.
But Turkey will not sit idly on Europe’s doorstep.
Europe’s attitude is pushing Turkey towards forging alliances with its traditional regional rivals, Russia and Iran.
These three powers, each of great importance to Europe, have been rivals for many centuries.
So an alliance between them would seem a near impossibility. Yet Europe seems bent on achieving the impossible, to the Continent’s detriment.
Within Turkey, opinion polls suggest that frustration with Europe is intensifying, while Iran is viewed with increasing favor.
A sense of alienation towards the West is spreading, and Turkey’s diplomatic relations with Russia have reached a hitherto unknown intimacy.
Of course, there is vast domestic resistance to Turkey’s accession to the EU.
The final result of the accession process is therefore an open question for both sides.
Admittedly, Turkey has a long way to go.
But to endanger this process here and now, in full awareness of the possible costs, is an act of very costly stupidity on the part of the Europeans – and stupidity is the worst sin in politics.
In European-Turkish relations, two trains are racing headlong towards each other.
Neither Turkey nor Europe can afford the all-too-foreseeable crash.
Turkey’s Quagmire
TEL AVIV – As the Islamic State militant group has advanced across Iraq and Syria, traditional regional alliances, long shaped by Western powers, have been upended.
Particularly consequential is Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s struggle to reconcile his country’s relationship with NATO with its image as a leading protector of Sunni Islam.
The Turkish government’s reluctance to join the United States-led coalition against the Islamic State’s extremist Sunni fighters has isolated it from other Sunni Arab powers, such as Saudi Arabia, that have joined the coalition.
Moreover, it has further alienated Turkey’s Iranian allies, already estranged by Erdoğan’s obsession with toppling their man in Damascus, Bashar al-Assad.
And it appears to vindicate European Union countries, such as France and Germany, that never trusted Turkey’s capacity to reconcile its Islamist vocation with its European aspirations.
Indeed, a key NATO member state has become the paladin of radical Islam throughout the Middle East, led by a president whose core political constituency is ingrained with anti-Western sentiment.
Erdoğan’s supporters dismiss Western campaigns against Islamist terrorism as a ploy to repress Sunnis.
As one such supporter, Kenan Alpay,&nbsp;recently wrote, “Turkey cannot be a part of an international system that aims to dissolve all Islamic movements from the Muslim Brotherhood to&hellip;the Taliban in Afghanistan.”
A couple of weeks later, Erdoğan himself unleashed a furious anti-Western diatribe at Istanbul’s Marmara University. In his speech,&nbsp;he compared the West’s interference in the Middle East today with the British officer Lawrence of Arabia’s involvement in the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans during World War I, and blasted the&nbsp;Sykes-Picot Agreement, which has since defined the Middle East’s political map.
The similarities with the views of the Islamic State are glaring.
In a video produced after the battle for the Mosul Dam in August, the group called for the “end of Sykes-Picot,” and proclaimed the need to redraw the Western-imposed political map of the Middle East.
Erdoğan’s ambition to restore Turkey’s primacy in the Sunni world is driving him to collude with this challenge to the Western-devised regional order.
Indeed, Turkey has been offering logistical support to the Islamic State, even as it has enabled the group’s murderous members to massacre thousands of civilian Kurds and Yazidis in the Syrian town of Kobani on Turkey’s doorstep.
This highlights another issue on which Turkey and the Islamic State converge: the Kurds.
Erdoğan seems to hope that, by degrading Kurdish military strength and territorial control, the Islamic State will help him to achieve his central goal of diminishing the Kurdish nationalist movement, which has long been a thorn in Turkey’s side.
But, if anything, the war against the Islamic State has bolstered the Kurdish cause.
The Kurdish Peshmerga fighters in Iraq have already established a quasi-independent state along the border with Turkey.
And the Democratic Union Party – the Syrian affiliate of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which has been fighting a guerrilla war against the Turkish state for the last three decades – is on its way toward establishing a Kurdish autonomous region along Turkey’s Syrian border.
Together, these groups have emerged as the most effective force in the war against the Islamic State.
And there is more bad news for Erdoğan.
The perception that his true objective in supporting the Islamic State is to stem the rise of the Kurds, bolstered by his apparent indifference to the agony in Kobani, has jeopardized one of his major legacies: peace talks with the PKK.
Erdoğan has even argued that, in Turkey’s view, the PKK and the Islamic State are the same – mirroring Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s statement that Hamas and the Islamic State were branches of the same tree.
With such desperate and unreasonable rhetoric, Erdoğan is lending credence to accusations that the entire “peace process” was simply a ploy to persuade the Kurdish members of Turkey’s parliament to support the constitutional changes that allowed him to move from Prime Minister to President.
That is an entirely plausible conclusion.
After all, Erdoğan’s anti-Kurdish sentiment also shaped his policy decisions concerning regime change in Syria.
He has long insisted on the creation of a no-fly “buffer” zone on the Syrian side of the border, under the pretext that it would help to address the humanitarian crisis that the civil war has engendered.
But his real objective is to forestall any Kurdish bid for autonomy in northern Syria.
(Turkey’s Western allies continue to oppose the proposal, lest they be dragged into an all-out confrontation with the Syrian regime and its Russian and Chinese allies.)
Erdoğan now finds himself in a strategic quagmire.
If his position on the Islamic State continues to waver, he will only alienate the Kurds further, which means that when the jihadists decide to encroach on Turkish territory, Turkey will have to confront them without a Kurdish alliance.
But if he decides to support the Kurds in their fight against the Islamic State, he will undoubtedly enhance their national aspirations.
But stronger Kurdish nationalism might not be such a bad thing for Erdoğan, who has been a vociferous advocate of the right of national self-determination beyond Turkey’s immediate vicinity, such as in the case of Palestine.
Indeed, such a move could be a welcome sign of political and moral consistency, possibly even boosting Erdoğan’s leverage in devising an arrangement with Turkey’s Kurds, including the PKK.
In any case, it is time for Erdoğan to make a choice.
He has already led Turkey into a thicket of clashes among its vital interests: its Western alliance, its regional aspirations, and the Kurdish question.
Something will have to give – and soon.
Turkey, Armenia, and the Burden of Memory
All wars end, eventually.
But memories of atrocity never seem to fade, as the government-fanned anti-Japanese riots now taking place in China remind us.
The 90th anniversary of the Armenian massacres of 1915, ordered by the ruling Young Turks of the Ottoman Empire and carried out with the help of the Kurds, is another wound that will not heal, but one that must be treated if Turkey’s progress toward European Union membership is to proceed smoothly.
It is believed that the Armenian genocide inspired the Nazis in their plans for the extermination of Jews.
However, in comparison with the Holocaust, most people still know little about this dark episode.
Indeed, it is hard for most of us to imagine the scale of suffering and devastation inflicted on the Armenian people and their ancestral homelands.
But many members of today’s thriving global Armenian Diaspora have direct ancestors who perished, and carry an oral historical tradition that keeps the memories burning.
It is particularly ironic that many Kurds from Turkey’s southeastern provinces, having been promised Armenian property and a guaranteed place in heaven for killing infidels, were willingly complicit in the genocide.
They later found themselves on the losing end of a long history of violence between their own separatist forces and the Turkish army, as well as being subjected to an ongoing policy of discrimination and forced assimilation.
Historically, the ancient Christian Armenians were amongst the most progressive people in the East, but in the nineteenth century Armenia was divided between the Ottoman Empire and Russia.
Sultan Abdulhamit II organized the massacres of 1895-97 but it was not until the spring of 1915, under the cover of the First World War, that the Young Turks’ nationalistic government found the political will to execute a true genocide.
Initially, Armenian intellectuals were arrested and executed in public hangings in groups of 50 to 100.
Ordinary Armenians were thus deprived of their leaders, and soon after were massacred, with many burned alive.
Approximately 500,000 were killed in the last seven months of 1915, with the majority of the survivors deported to desert areas in Syria, where they died from either starvation or disease.
It is estimated that 1.5 million people perished.
Recently, the Armenian Diaspora has been calling on Turkey to face-up to its past and recognize its historic crime.
Turkey’s official line remains that the allegation is based on unfounded or exaggerated claims, and that the deaths that occurred resulted from combat against Armenians collaborating with invading Russian forces during the First World War, or as a result of disease and hunger during the forced deportations.
Moreover, the local Turkish population allegedly suffered similar casualties.
Turkey thus argues that the charge of genocide is designed to besmirch Turkey’s honor and impede its progress towards EU accession.
There are also understandable fears that diverging from the official line would trigger a flood of compensation claims, as occurred against Germany.
For many politicians, particularly in America, there is an unwillingness to upset Turkey without strong justification, given its record as a loyal NATO ally and putative EU candidate country.
But, despite almost half a century of membership in the Council of Europe – ostensibly a guardian of human rights, including freedom of speech and conscience – Turkey still punishes a crime against national honor any suggestion that the Armenian genocide is an historic truth.
Fortunately, this article of Turkey’s penal code is now due for review and possible repeal.
Indeed, broader changes are afoot in Turkey.
The press and government, mindful of the requirements of EU membership, are finally opening the sensitive Armenian issue to debate.
Even Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, under increasing EU pressure as accession negotiations are due to begin this October, has agreed to an impartial study by academic historians, although he has reiterated his belief that the genocide never occurred.
In France, the historical occurrence of the Armenian genocide is enshrined in law, and denial of its occurrence is regarded in the same way as Holocaust denial.
The European Parliament is pressing for Turkish recognition of the Armenian genocide. It is also calling for an end to the trade embargo by Turkey and its close ally Azerbaijan against the Republic of Armenia, a reopening of frontiers, and a land-for-peace deal to resolve the territorial dispute over Nagorno Karabakh in Azerbaijan and safeguard its Armenian identity.
Armenia, an independent country since 1991, remains dependent on continued Russian protection, as was the case in 1920 when it joined the Soviet Union rather than suffer further Turkish invasion.
This is not healthy for the development of Armenia’s democracy and weak economy.
Nor does Armenia’s continued dependence on Russia bode well for regional co-operation, given deep resentment of Russian meddling in neighboring Georgia and Azerbaijan.
There is only one way forward for Turkey, Armenia, and the region.
The future will begin only when Turkey – like Germany in the past and Serbia and Croatia now – repudiates its policy of denial and faces up to its terrible crimes of 1915.
Only then can the past truly be past.
Turkey’s Baffling Coup
GRANADA – Military coups – successful or otherwise – follow a predictable pattern in Turkey.
Political groups – typically Islamists – deemed by soldiers to be antagonistic to Kemal Atatürk’s vision of a secular Turkey gain increasing power.
Tensions rise, often accompanied by violence on the streets.
Then the military steps in, exercising what the soldiers claim is their constitutional power to restore order and secular principles.
This time, it was very different.
Thanks to a series of sham trials targeting secularist officers, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had managed to reconfigure the military hierarchy and place his own people at the top.
While the country has been rocked by a series of terrorist attacks and faces a souring economy, there was no inkling of unrest in the military or opposition to Erdoğan.
On the contrary, Erdoğan’s recent reconciliation with Russia and Israel, together with his apparent desire to pull back from an active role in the Syrian civil war, must have been a relief to Turkey’s top brass.
No less baffling was the almost amateurish behavior of the putschists, who managed to capture the chief of the general staff but apparently made no meaningful attempt to detain Erdoğan or any senior politicians.
Major television channels were allowed to continue to operate for hours, and when soldiers showed up in the studios, their incompetence was almost comical.
Planes strafed civilians and attacked the parliament – very uncharacteristic behavior for the Turkish military outside areas of Kurdish insurgency.
Social media were full of pictures of hapless (and apparently clueless) soldiers being pulled out of tanks and disarmed (and sometimes much worse) by civilian crowds – scenes I never thought I would see in a country that has come to hate military coups but still loves its soldiers.
Erdoğan was quick to blame his former ally and current nemesis, the exiled preacher Fethullah Gülen, who leads a large Islamic movement from outside of Philadelphia.
There are obvious reasons for taking this with a grain of salt, but the claim is less outlandish than it may seem.
We know that there is a strong Gülenist presence in the military (without which the government’s earlier move against senior Turkish officers – the so-called Eregenekon and Sledgehammer cases – could not have been mounted).
In fact, the military was the last remaining Gülenist stronghold in Turkey, since Erdoğan had already purged the movement’s sympathizers in the police, judiciary, and media.
We also know that Erdoğan was preparing to make a major move against the Gülenists in the military.
A few officers had already been arrested for fabricating evidence in earlier trials, and it was rumored that a large-scale purge of Gülenist officers was in the works for next month’s meeting of the Supreme Military Council.
So the Gülenists had a motive, and the timing of the attempt supports their involvement.
It is a supreme irony that the coup Erdoğan long feared from the secularists may have eventually come from his one-time allies – who themselves were responsible for fabricating myriad coup plots against Erdoğan.
Yet a bloody military coup lies very much outside the traditional modus operandi of the Gülen movement, which tends to prefer behind-the-scenes machinations to armed action or explicit violence.
The coup may have been a desperate last-ditch effort, given the prospect that they were about to lose their last stronghold in Turkey.
But, with so many unanswered questions about what took place, the emergence of many strange twists and turns in the coming weeks would be no surprise.
There is less uncertainty about what is likely to happen next.
The coup attempt will add potency to Erdoğan’s venom and fuel a wider witch-hunt against the Gülen movement.
Thousands will be sacked from their positions in the military and elsewhere, detained, and prosecuted with little regard for the rule of law or the presumption of innocence.
There are already alarming calls to bring back the death penalty for putschists, which recent experience shows is a very broad category for Erdoğan.
Some of the mob violence against captured soldiers portends a Jacobinism that would jeopardize all remaining due-process protections in Turkey.
The coup attempt is bad news for the economy as well.
Erdoğan’s recent, somewhat skin-deep reconciliation with Russia and Israel was likely motivated by a desire to restore flows of foreign capital and tourists.
Such hopes are now unlikely to be realized.
The failed coup reveals that the country’s political divisions run deeper than even the most pessimistic observers believed.
This hardly makes for an attractive environment for investors or visitors.
But, politically, the failed coup is a boon for Erdoğan.
As he put it while it was still unclear if he was going to emerge on top, “this uprising is a gift from God to us because this will be a reason to cleanse our army.”
Now that the coup has failed, he will have the political tailwind to make the constitutional changes he has long sought to strengthen the presidency and concentrate power in his own hands.
The coup’s failure will thus bolster Erdoğan’s authoritarianism and do little good for Turkish democracy.
Had the coup succeeded, however, the blow to democratic prospects surely would have been more severe, with longer-term effects.
That provides at least some reason to cheer.
Narrative Power in Turkey
ISTANBUL – At the end of March, a retrial finally resulted in the acquittal of more than 200 Turkish military officers who had been convicted of plotting a coup in 2003 against the then-newly elected Islamist government.
The defendants had been given long prison sentences after the first trial concluded in September 2012, even though the evidence against them was clearly forged.
By the time the retrial ended, most observers recognized that the original proceedings had been a sham.
But, until recently, the “Sledgehammer” case – named after the fictitious coup plot – was widely viewed as heralding the long-overdue democratic subjugation of Turkey’s meddlesome military to its elected government.
Liberal intellectuals and Western observers applauded the prosecution and hailed it as one of the greatest achievements of the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who had since come to power.
Now that the case has been shown for what it was – a thuggish government’s attempt to weaken its rivals and consolidate its hold on power – the question is why so many well-intentioned observers got their analysis so terribly wrong.
My father-in-law was the alleged mastermind of the Sledgehammer plot, so my wife and I found ourselves moonlighting as forensic detectives and political activists.
In my five years investigating this bizarre saga, I learned to appreciate the power of narratives.
What proved most effective for the government was not brute force, but tales of nefarious activities by Turkey’s secular and military elites, which were contrasted to Erdoğan’s supposed commitment to establishing a democratic (albeit Islamist-tinged) state through a reconstituted judiciary.
Grotesque exaggerations based on half-truths, these tales gave Erdoğan and his allies the maneuvering room within which to make the political regime more, not less, authoritarian.
One ally in particular was crucial.
The Gülen movement – made up of the followers of the Pennsylvania-based Turkish imam Fethullah Gülen – did the heavy political lifting.
The Gülen movement oversaw Sledgehammer and similar trials via its followers in the police and the judiciary, and used its extensive media outlets to craft and disseminate the narrative – built from countless stories of military plots and other malfeasance – on which these cases rested.
Its representatives in the United States and Europe lobbied Western politicians and opinion leaders incessantly to vouch for Erdoğan’s democratic credentials.
At the same time, the Gülen movement invested heavily and shrewdly in cultivating Turkey’s Western-oriented intelligentsia.
Thus, despite Gülen’s own embarrassing history of anti-Semitic and anti-Western sermons, his followers managed to establish themselves by the 2000s as a civil-society movement that shared Turkish liberals’ values and aspirations.
Gülenists provided resources and networks to Turkey’s liberals, who then lent the movement legitimacy and credibility in the West.
When American and European politicians, reporters, and human rights specialists looked for insight on Turkey, they turned to the Gülenists’ liberal beneficiaries, who fed them the established narratives.
What made these intellectuals willing allies of Erdoğan and the Gülenists was their view that the military’s control of state institutions – “military tutelage” – posed the greatest obstacle to democracy in Turkey.
For Turkey’s liberals, the weakening of the military’s political influence became an end in itself.
It allowed them to overlook (or downplay) the growing list of rights violations and judicial manipulations.
And it allowed the Gülenists to play them – for example, by ensuring that damaging leaks from the military (the most egregious of which were fabricated) would be published in liberal outlets first.
The Erdoğan government adopted legislation that lent credence to its false narrative.
The European Commission looked with approval on a succession of initiatives – a new penal code adopting “modern European standards,” training programs on the European Convention of Human Rights, expert missions from the European Union, and constitutional amendments seemingly guaranteeing much greater judicial independence.
Unfortunately, as in development economics, mimicking advanced-country regulations and institutions rarely produces the desired results.
Form does not guarantee function.
But it can help obfuscate reality.
So it was with the Erdoğan government’s “pro-European” reforms, which served mainly to provide political cover for strengthening the Gülenists’ hold over the judiciary.
Fooled by appearances, the European Commission continued to assert, year after year, that the military show trials were an opportunity to strengthen the rule of law.
Until recently, the military was widely regarded as Turkish society’s most powerful and cohesive institution.
The generals had never been shy about intervening in politics when they felt it necessary.
But a well-honed narrative can be mightier than the sword.
The Sledgehammer case and other allegations, false as they were, immobilized the military.
Under intense attack by pro-government media, the general staff failed to mount even the slightest public effort on the accused officers’ behalf, even refusing to release an internal report that left no doubt that the defendants had been framed.
The top brass did not want to look like they were “aiding the putschists.”
Once the narrative was established, even its targets succumbed to it.
Western observers and the bulk of domestic liberals did not give up on Erdoğan until his government’s heavy-handed tactics during the Gezi Park protests in Istanbul in the summer of 2013.
He then broke clumsily with the Gülen movement after its acolytes in the judiciary launched a corruption probe against him and his inner circle.
Without his Gülenist allies, Erdoğan’s message has become oriented exclusively to a domestic audience, and features heavy doses of populist-religious-nationalist symbolism.
Meanwhile, the Gülenists, ever in search of the narrative upper hand, have been presenting themselves to Western audiences as Erdoğan’s victims rather than as his collaborators.
False narratives eventually become unsustainable (with the Internet and social media hastening their demise).
But, as in Turkey, a collapsed narrative can leave much debris.
And, rather than helping to clear the rubble, Erdoğan and the Gülenists appear determined to use it to build their own new edifices of lies, magnifying the challenge of future political reconciliation.
The EU’s Turkish Opening
MADRID ‒ June’s Turkish general election sent a powerful message: Turkey’s democracy remains intact.
Indeed, while there were some grievances about transparency during the campaign process, democracy prevailed, with a stunning 86% of eligible voters turning out – a rate rarely seen in Europe.
The rest of the world – and especially the European Union – should take note.
With their votes, Turkey’s citizens denied the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) the absolute majority that it needed to amend the constitution.
Moreover, by giving the Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) – which brings together the country’s long-marginalized Kurdish minority and other groups – more than 10% of the vote, they enabled the party to enter parliament for the first time, with representation throughout the country, not just in Kurd-majority areas.
Reinforcing this triumph of pluralism, the Alevi and Christian minority groups won greater parliamentary representation, and the Yazidis and Roma will be represented for the first time.
The new parliamentary configuration is likely to have a major impact on Turkey’s foreign policy, which has faced serious challenges in the last few years.
Indeed, as regional conflicts have intensified, the country’s central foreign-policy objective of ensuring “zero problems” with its neighbors has become unattainable.
And the policies that Turkey has pursued, most notably toward Syria and Egypt, have satisfied neither the region’s Sunni-majority countries nor the West.
Perhaps more important, the AKP government’s foreign policy has faced considerable criticism from domestic forces, which now have more power to change it – an outcome that will occur regardless of whether the AKP ultimately forms a coalition or a minority government.
The direction of change will have to account for the various parties’ preferred approaches.
The secular, center-left Republican People’s Party, for example, opposes interference in the internal affairs of any country, advocating instead that Turkey re-establish good relations with the countries of the region, including Syria.
By contrast, the HDP protested against the previous AKP government’s failure to intervene last year when the Islamic State besieged the Syrian city of Kobane.
For its part, the rightist Nationalist Movement Party criticizes the AKP administration’s decision to denounce the current Egyptian government, arguing that the move has all but eliminated Turkey’s influence in the country.
Now, the party asserts, Turkey should work to defend its regional neighbors’ territorial integrity.
Amid all of this uncertainty, one thing is clear: Turkey cannot turn inward.
Indeed, as a regional power, it has a responsibility to work to ease tensions and promote conflict resolution.
It also has a long-term national interest in increased regional stability, not least because it would help to stem the tide of refugees – already numbering two million – flowing into the country, while opening up more commercial opportunities nearby.
Turkey’s democratic revival represents an ideal opportunity for the EU to rekindle its relations with the country.
The EU is Turkey’s leading trade partner and one of its largest investors, and has long considered Turkey to be a stable ally in a volatile region.
The escalation of warfare and sectarian violence, which are becoming chronic, endanger both Turkey and Europe.
In this context, renewed relations would serve both sides’ interests.
The EU could, for example, provide diplomatic support in Turkey’s dealings with its neighbors and humanitarian aid to help refugees.
Given that a more stable Middle East would send fewer refugees and terrorists across its borders, Europe has a strong incentive to provide such support.
The urgency of this situation demands that the bilateral relationship move beyond narrow discussions of Turkey’s accession to the EU.
After all, given broad resistance to any further EU enlargement at the moment, the accession process will undoubtedly move very slowly.
The objective should thus be to find new, more efficient modes of cooperation that avoid the issues and conflicts that have impeded accession negotiations.
This is not to say that the accession process should be abandoned.
Rather, other more efficient channels of cooperation should be opened up in parallel to it.
A good place to start would be a meeting of members of the European and Turkish parliaments.
European leaders should also carefully monitor the possible revision of Turkish foreign policy, grasping opportunities to reignite bilateral dialogue on issues of common interest.
This will require subsequent high-level meetings at regular intervals, in order to produce agreement regarding specific joint actions on urgent challenges.
This is a moment of opportunity for EU-Turkey relations, and it must be seized.