The rest of the planet should learn from us how to live together without terrorizing each other.
As a Swede, I have heard such pacific boasting all my life: that neutral Sweden is a moral superpower.
Now this bragging has become the EU's ideology.
We are the moral continent.
Call this the "Swedenization" of Europe.
Yes, today's EU is a miracle for a continent where two modern totalitarian movements - Communism and Nazism - unleashed rivers of blood.
But what Europe forgets is how those ideologies were overcome.
Without the US Army, Western Europe would not have been liberated in 1945.
Without the Marshall Plan and NATO, it would not have taken off economically.
Without the policy of containment under America's security umbrella, the Red Army would have strangled the dream of freedom in Eastern Europe, or brought European unity, but under a flag with red stars.
West Europeans also forget that some areas of the world have never known freedom.
In many places, torture chambers are the rules of the game, not the grotesque and shameful mistakes of ill-supervised troops.
Any attempt in such places to go behave the European way and negotiate - without the military power needed to back up diplomacy - would be pathetic.
Instead of supporting those who fight international terrorism, many Europeans try to blame the spread of terrorism on Israel and the US.
This is a new European illusion. Spain's latter day appeasement à la Munich arises from this thinking.
But what if Spain - and Europe as a whole - had reacted in the opposite way to the Madrid train bombing of April, saying: "We promise that because of that slaughter we will double our support for stabilization in Iraq by sending twice as many troops, experts, engineers, teachers, policemen, doctors, and billions of euros in support of allied forces and their Iraqi co-workers."
The triumph of terrorists would have been transformed into a triumph of the war on terror.
The images many Europeans hold of America and Israel create the political climate for some very ugly bias.
You have the Great Satan and the Small Satan.
America wants to dominate the world - exactly the allegations made in traditional anti-Semitic rhetoric about the Jews.
Indeed, modern anti-Zionist rhetoric portrays Israel's goal as domination of the whole Middle East.
Such ideas are reflected in opinions polls in which Europeans claim that Israel and the US are the true dangers to world peace.
Ian Buruma, the British writer, claims that this European rage against America and Israel has to do with guilt and fear.
The two world wars led to such catastrophic carnage that "never again" was interpreted as "welfare at home, non-intervention abroad."
The problem with this concept is that it could only survive under the protection of American might.
Extreme anti-Americanism and anti-Zionism are actually merging.
The so-called peace poster "Hitler Had Two Sons: Bush and Sharon," displayed in European anti-war rallies, combines trivialization of Nazism with demonization of both the victims of Nazism and those who defeated Nazism.
Much of this grows from a subconscious European guilt related to the Holocaust.
Now the Holocaust's victims - and their children and grandchildren - are supposedly doing to others what was done to them.
By equating the murderer and the victim, we wash our hands.
This pattern of anti-Zionism and anti-Americanism returns again and again.
"The ugly Israeli" and "the ugly American" seem to be of the same family.
"The ugly Jew" becomes the instrumental part of this defamation when so-called neoconservatives are blamed both for American militarism and Israeli brutalities and then selectively named: Wolfowitz, Perle, Abrams, Kristol, etc.
This is a new version of the old myth that Jews rule the US.
Earlier this year, the editor of Die Zeit , Josef Joffe, put his finger on the issue: like Jews, Americans are said to be selfish and arrogant.
Like Jews, they are in thrall to a fundamentalist religion that renders them self-righteous and dangerous. Like Jews, Americans are money-grabbing capitalists, for whom the highest value is the cash nexus.
"America and Israel are the outsiders - just as Jews have been all the way into the 21st century," Joffe says.
The links between anti-Semitism, anti-Zionism, and anti-Americanism are all too real.
Unless Europe's leaders roundly condemn this unholy triple alliance, it will poison Middle East politics and transatlantic relations alike.
The Geneva Conversion
DENVER – The agreement on Syria’s chemical weapons reached by Russia and the United States is important not so much for what it could mean on the ground – which remains to be seen as inspectors begin to flow into Syria and, we hope, chemical-weapons stockpiles begin to be destroyed.
Rather, the agreement’s main significance consists in the fact that it was struck at all: US Secretary of State John Kerry met with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva, that most traditional of diplomatic venues, and cut a deal on an issue of intense mutual interest.
In the days, weeks, and months ahead, the arrangements to remove chemical weapons from Syria will, one hopes, begin a new era in which the US and Russia work together on other pressing global issues as well.
A cooperative US-Russia relationship is essential if the international system, now almost dysfunctional, is to work properly in the future.
The agreement on Syria could accomplish something else: Americans might recognize that, lo and behold, there are other ways to solve problems than by dropping bombs.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s clumsy foray into the American debate infuriated many Americans (including me), but it was certainly a teachable moment.
Many outside the US thought it was high time that someone offered America a taste of its own paternalism – and even better that that someone was Putin, a politician who has, to put it gently, his own set of foibles.
So Americans might want to tone down their anti-Putin rhetoric.
As a practical matter, Putin certainly does not seem to be suffering any adverse domestic political consequences from his bashing in the US.
More broadly, America’s supply of moralistic – and even churlish – advice to the rest of the world has greatly exceeded international demand for it.
And its willingness to engage militarily as an early step, rather than as a last resort, has alienated many around the world.
No amount of “Muslim outreach” and other public diplomacy alone will change that.
Support for insurgencies is a case in point.
Many countries – Syria qualifies as a poster child in this regard – suffer under miserable, brutal governments.
But backing an armed rebellion is a major step, especially when the rebels whom one is backing have, as in Syria, started something that they may not be able to finish.
This is not to say that the US should never support insurgencies against established governments; but doing so is almost always a lonely affair, without any realistic expectation of enlisting many partners in the process.
Such policy choices should be made rarely, and with a clear understanding that support for the violent overthrow of a government is not very popular around the world.
The road that got the US to the Geneva agreement with the Russians was long and windy, and may indeed have done some damage to America’s standing in the world, even though the outcome was better than any other on offer.
To put that process behind it, the US needs to follow up with the Russians to establish a broader pattern of long-overdue cooperation.
Call it a “reset” button – like the one then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton gave to Lavrov in 2009 – or whatever one wants.
But it should be more than a gag gift.
The reset must occur in the context of efforts to solve real problems together.
A good place to start would be to seek a Syrian peace deal that enables the country’s different communities – now butchering each other – to live in one state.
Maybe the US is right that Syria’s brutal and mendacious president, Bashar al-Assad, cannot be part of any eventual solution.
But there is time to figure that out, and Syria’s own 2014 election might offer a face-saving way out of that conundrum.
A role for the Russians could help coax Assad into offering concessions that he will not make as long as he views the process as one that is intended to destroy him.
At this point, any peace process is a long shot, but so is the prospect of either side winning militarily, with or without the arrival of American arms for the rebels.
The alternative of allowing this fight to the death to play out – a proposal heard daily on American talkathon television – is not worthy of our civilization.
Such a scenario could amount to fighting to the last Syrian child.
The world needs all hands on deck – not only Russian and American, but also Arab, Chinese, European, and anyone else’s.
The beacon of hope shining from Geneva should guide us all.
The Tabloid Syndrome
The world is a complex and intricate place.
So how are we to understand even just a piece of it, say, the United States government and its economic policies?
It is a big problem, for the standard sources that I was taught as a child to rely upon – newspapers and television news – are breaking down.
For example, in early February 2004, the then Chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, N. Gregory Mankiw, spent some time trying to explain the issues surrounding “outsourcing” to America’s elite political news reporters.
Mankiw’s standard description of outsourcing is very much like mine – indeed, like that of all neoclassical and neoliberal economists – and goes something like this:
As with any change in technology that increases the volume of international trade in goods and services, the outsourcing of service-sector jobs creates winners and losers – but almost surely more and bigger winners than losers.
Big winners are workers in poor countries who get better jobs working for firms that can now export services to rich countries.
The major losers are those who previously held the now-outsourced service-sector jobs; they must now find new and different jobs and almost surely find that their skills are worth less.
But even in the US, losers’ losses are outweighed by winners’ gains.
Workers in certain industries find their skills in higher demand as foreigners spend their increased dollar earnings, consumers benefit from lower prices, and shareholders and managers see their companies’ profits increase.
However much we may worry about the distributional consequences of outsourcing, we should never overlook the fact that it increases the total size of the economic pie.
Of course, the Washington Post’s journalists know, on some level, that they were being unfair to Mankiw.
They didn’t claim that what he said was inaccurate, or shortsighted, or analytically unsound.
The descriptive terms they used – “discordant,” “embarrassing,” “political liability” – suggest that they knew they were giving Mankiw a raw deal.
But was there any sign of the standard economic analysis of outsourcing in their stories?
Not one.
Greg Mankiw thought a bunch of reporters were coming to talk to him about the state of the economy and the analysis made by the Council of Economic Advisers in its “2004 Economic Report of the President.”
But the last thing the reporters wanted to do was to convey a thumbnail summary of Mankiw’s analysis of outsourcing.
That’s simply not the business they saw themselves as being in.
The problem is not that the Washington Post and papers like it hire people who are unintelligent or lazy.
The problem is that conveying accurate information about the economy is far down the list of priorities for normal news reporters.
Making a splash matters. So does keeping track of who is up politically and who is down.
So does pleasing your editors so that they’ll give your stories better placement, and pleasing your sources so that they’ll keep talking to you.
Compared to these imperatives, there is little to be gained from informing the public about how the economy really functions and about the dilemmas of economic policy.
Indeed, the economy is vastly inferior to Hollywood as a source of glitterati gossip, but much economic reporting makes the coverage of the birth of Brad Pitt’s and Angelina Jolie’s baby look profoundly serious.
Likewise, government is vastly inferior to the World Cup as a sporting spectacle, but much political reporting focuses on who played well and who played badly.
What can we do about this?
The answer is simple, and it is a matter of demand, not supply.
After all, few people go into journalism to deliberately mislead the public.
If we demand better economic and political journalism the way we demand excellent coverage of the World Cup, we’ll get it.
The Tails Wagging the Kremlin Dog?
MOSCOW – Imagine a crank who tries to pass himself off as a nineteenth-century Russian baron. He grows sideburns, wears a long frock-coat, and carries a walking stick.
Anyone who runs into such a figure would sneer and mock him.
Now, suppose that same crank attempted to treat passersby as if they were his serfs.
In that case, he would risk getting a beating, though perhaps a few beggars would indulge his fantasies in the hope of duping him out of his money.
Something of this sort now characterizes relations between Russia and several former Soviet republics, for the foreign-policy doctrine that guides today’s Kremlin is a preposterous mix of nineteenth-century Realpolitik and early twentieth-century geopolitics.
According to this view, every great power needs obedient satellite countries.
Under such an approach, NATO’s expansion is represented as an extension of America’s sphere of influence, to the detriment of Russia, of course.
In order to compensate for its growing inferiority complex, Russia has cobbled together the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), which, by its title and constitutional principles, is a parody of NATO.
For all this, the Kremlin is not in the least embarrassed by the fact that the CSTO is essentially a mechanical connection of bilateral military agreements between Belarus, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Russia.
Nobody knows what vision of collective defense is to be implemented: one needs a fertile imagination to imagine Belarusian paratroopers defending the Tajik border.
Moreover, the constitutions of a number of CSTO countries expressly prohibit sending troops outside national territory.
But the Kremlin’s myopic concentration on military matters, and its pointless attempts to play a zero-sum game with the West has turned Russia into an object for manipulation by its junior partners.
The virtuoso of such manipulation is Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko.
Belarus’s economy can function only if Russia subsidizes energy prices and allocates non-repayable credits.
Yet, despite all this, Lukashenko manages to avoid implementing economic projects profitable to Russia (i.e., a single currency).
Whenever Russia applies pressure, he immediately starts yelling about Moscow’s “ingratitude” – proclaiming that “10,000,000 Belarusians protect Russia from NATO’s tanks.”
Worse, whenever Moscow persists in its demands, Lukashenko abrogates agreements without a twinge of conscience.
Thus, when Russia banned imports of Belarusian dairy products (in an attempt to punish Lukashenko for accepting a $2,000,000,000 credit but not fulfilling his promise to recognize South Ossetia and Abkhazia), Lukashenko refused to attend a CSTO summit or join its collective agreement for the establishment of an operational response force.
Lukashenko avoids any major integration projects, even those in the military sphere.
The most telling example is the creation of a joint air defense system.
Both Russia and Belarus have been trying to realize this project for ten years; countless agreements have been achieved – on paper. Yet no concrete action is taken.
Lukashenko, simply, does not intend to allow even a small part of his army to become subordinated to Moscow.
While the military threat in the West looks as illusory as it is, in Central Asia that threat is concrete.
In the event that the coalition of NATO forces in Afghanistan is defeated, a wave of Islamic extremism will submerge the Central Asian states, inciting local civil wars.
For Russia, this could mean (in the best case) tens of thousands of refugees or (in the worst case) the arrival of armed militias on its territory.
As a result, the Kremlin has a vital interested in NATO’s success in Afghanistan.
Yet, for the last four years, Russia has tried to hinder NATO in every possible way.
In 2005, at the summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, Vladimir Putin pressed for the final declaration to include a demand for withdrawal of American bases from Central Asia.
Kremlin strategists explained that they feared the US would oust Russia from Central Asia.
But, now that a Russian-American agreement allows supply flights to Afghanistan to go through Russian airspace, it is clear that Russia sought only to monopolize the military cargo transportation routs in order to gain leverage over the United States.
In February, the Kremlin gave Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev $500 million for a promise to close America’s base in his country.
Then the Americans offered Bakiyev $160 million a year, and now there may be no official base, but a “transit center” that serves the same functions.
So the Kremlin paid out several hundred million dollars just to replace some signs.
Soon after this, Russian Vice Premier Igor Sechin and Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov were sent to Bishkek in an effort to get something for Russia’s money.
Bakiyev seems to have said: so, you are worried about the American military presence in Central Asia, and you want to confront it. Fine, the Americans can have one base in Kyrgyzstan, and Russia can have two.
The resulting “military asset,” however, is strategic gibberish, having been built in Kyrgyzstan’s near-lawless Osh region, with its appalling poverty, drug trafficking, and ethnic tensions.
Seizure of a Russian military base in order to acquire weapons is, indeed, likely to become a vital goal of “extremists.”
But, in a way, the Russian soldiers there are already hostages – not least to the Kremlin’s bankrupt foreign policy.
The Taliban Reborn
NEW DELHI – The lull in headline-grabbing terror attacks appears to be over.
But do the recent suicide attack on the Bagram air base outside of Kabul, a key United States military installation in Afghanistan, and the failed car bombing in New York City’s Times Square mean that the “war on terror” (a phrase that the Obama administration has deliberately sought to avoid) has reignited?
Although America and the West may have felt as if jihadist terrorism was declining in its ferocity, in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India, no such feeling of false security ever took hold.
Indeed, the question in this region is not whether the war on terror can be wound down, but whether Pakistan, which in many ways has become Islamic terrorism’s nexus, is doing all that it can to fight it.
Here is a simple formula for assessing a country’s approach to combating terrorism: credibility + transparency + integrity of approach = legitimacy and effectiveness.
Let us apply this formula to Pakistan.
Analyzing the failed Times Square bombing, Ambassador Zafar Hilaly, a well-respected former Pakistani diplomat, wrote “that nowhere else today have so many armed foreign outlaws been able to use the territory of a sovereign state to wage war for so long, and with such impunity, against other countries.
[Those] who roam…unchallenged have become…partners…in a war against the country itself.”
The Taliban in Pakistan, Hilaly concluded, have become an “autonomous force beyond … control.”
Pakistan, after joining the US, as an “ally” in the war on terror now appears to be paying a high price domestically for becoming a “rented state.”
A vast majority of Pakistan’s citizens deeply resent America’s presence and influence in their country.
This growing alienation probably played a considerable part in US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton saying that deteriorating security in nuclear-armed Pakistan “pose(d) a mortal” threat to the US.
Following the Times Square bombing attempt, Clinton issued an even harsher judgment: “if a terror attack like the New York bombing were to be successful and found to have originated from that country, there would be very severe consequences.”
Clinton also said that Osama bin Laden’s whereabouts are known to “some” in Pakistan.
Eric Holder, the US attorney general, was even more explicit about the Times Square episode: “We know that they (the Pakistan Taliban) helped direct it.
And I suspect that we are going to come up with evidence that they helped to finance it.
They were intimately involved in this plot.”
US President Barack Obama has termed the Pakistan Taliban a “cancer” in the heart of Pakistan, and its origins are not shrouded in mystery.
In December 2007, about 13 militant groups came together to form the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), and chose Baitullah Mehsud as their leader.
Mehsud was reported killed by an airstrike from a US drone in August 2009.
The TTP has an estimated 30,000-35,000 adherents from all of Pakistan���s Federally Administered Tribal Areas, the near lawless regions where the writ of Pakistan’s government barely reaches.
The TTP’s stated objectives include jihad against the Pakistani army, enforcement of sharia law across the country, and a plan to unite with the Afghan Taliban to fight the NATO forces in that country.
The failed Times Square attack demonstrates the TTP’s growing transnational ambitions (but also that the group’s reach exceeds its grasp, at least for now).
Despite a supposed offensive by Pakistan’s government against the TTP in some of the tribal regions, a recent documentary reported that the group is now recruiting young children to carry out suicide attacks.
Indeed, there were nearly 60 suicide attacks in Pakistan in 2009, compared to only two in 2002.
According to Brian Fishman, a terrorism expert at the US Military Academy at West Point, the growth in suicide attacks poses a severe challenge to Pakistan, for a “whole milieu of militant groups, and individuals have come together ideologically…to embark on mission(s) that Al Qaeda set(s) for them.”
Bruce Riedel, the Afghanistan-Pakistan policy coordinator on Obama’s National Security Council, stresses that Al Qaeda's growing cooperation with the Afghan Taliban, the Pakistani Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba, and other like-minded groups is the most dangerous development in the effort to reduce global terrorism.
“The notion that you can somehow selectively resolve the Al Qaeda problem while ignoring the larger jihadist sea in which [Al Qaeda] swims has failed in the past and will fail in the future,” Riedel argues.
Given this analysis, however, Obama’s “Afghanistan-oriented” policy is doomed to failure.
The US would certainly like Pakistan to eliminate the leadership of the Taliban, both Afghan and Pakistani, but will not lean too heavily on Pakistan’s rulers to accomplish this goal.
The price to be paid for this political squeamishness is exacted in blood.
Ambassador Hilaly has pointed to the way forward: “To succeed today, it (is) essential that first and foremost the power of the armed groups within Pakistan be broken.
Without an all-out effort to do so, the terrorized population will not lend us support.”
But the US, let alone the Pakistani government, may not have the will to act with such determination.
The Talmud and Greek Debt
BUENOS AIRES – There are two ways to look at Greece’s majestically unsustainable sovereign-debt mountain. There is, first, a pragmatic and short-term perspective, which focuses on ensuring some form of orderly restructuring (possibly for other vulnerable European states as well) without bringing down the eurozone.
And there is a “moral” perspective, which focuses on the nature of debt and on the long-term economic consequences of failing to honor it.
Neither perspective is wrong; on the contrary, the problem is how to reconcile them.
Indeed, failure to do so appears to explain why the official response to the Greek debt crisis has been so inadequate.
In these circumstances, the Talmud, the ancient repository of Jewish legal commentary – and one of the oldest sources of human thought on morality and economic activity – might hold the key.
An oft-quoted passage provides a fresh, if not exactly new, perspective on Greece’s debt and the best way to address it.
The passage concerns sales, divorces, and offerings, and specifies that these acts are legally valid only if a person performs them voluntarily.
Nevertheless, under certain circumstances, courts may force an individual until he says that he is, indeed, willing.
The verse says, literally, “We (the court) force him until he says that he wants to do it willingly.”
So, “in divorces (if the man refuses to grant it), we exercise force on him until he says ‘I want to do it voluntarily.’”
Similarly, if a court forces a person to sell his property, the sale is valid because it is considered to have been carried out voluntarily.
Understanding this apparent contradiction sheds light on the controversy surrounding the question of private bondholders’ involvement in the Greek rescue package.
It is argued that, to avoid a default, private creditors should agree to shoulder part of the cost of the bailout.
But how does one impose a financial loss on bondholders without it being classified by credit-rating agencies as a default?
The prevailing answer is that one coerces bondholders to accept the deal “voluntarily.”
One could dismiss this dispute as being mere rhetoric.
But, using the Talmudic logic, one can also show that there are mechanisms that can – and should – be used to place pressure on the parties in the interest of obtaining superior voluntary outcomes.
There are two preponderant interpretations of the Talmudic passage. One argues that coercion can change minds.
When a court forces an individual until he surrenders and says that he wants to follow orders, his compliant actions are to be considered voluntary, because, ultimately, he has made the conscious decision to agree.
While technically correct, this is a ruthless interpretation, since this type of “willing” behavior is bound to leave resentment.
A more benign interpretation, based on the collective-action principle, envisages the court as instrumental in attaining a superior welfare equilibrium.
Individuals know fundamentally what is good for them and for society, but they are often hesitant to act accordingly, owing to fear, embarrassment, or, very often, the belief that their actions will not be worthwhile if others do not follow in their footsteps.
The court, according to this view, provides the coordinating mechanism, eliminating free riders and forcing all parties to an outcome that makes everybody better off.
Thus, individual decisions, though extracted under pressure, become, when assessing the outcome, truly voluntary.
Seen in this light, unilateral schemes, such as the original German proposal (forcing maturities on Greek debt to be voluntarily extended for several years) are only voluntary under the ruthless interpretation.
In initiatives of this sort, agreement is obtained reluctantly and pressure could provoke harsh responses.
Rating agencies are right in considering them a “selective” default that is bound to result in contagion – and, eventually, in widespread debt restructuring.
The alternative is to seek a cooperative resolution, consistent with the benign interpretation of “forced willingness.” This can be achieved by adopting some features of the model used in Eastern Europe, known as the “Vienna Initiative.”
Some of the current proposal to deal “voluntarily” with the Greek debt goes some way in this direction.
But the initiative is insufficient, because the three pillars of the Vienna model are basically missing.
The first pillar of that model is simultaneous involvement of all parties – the sovereign, bondholders and their governments, the European Central Bank, and international organizations – in designing the scheme from the start.
The second ingredient is proper incentives to participate, including direct financing from bondholders’ governments, using the resources that today finance the transfer of Greek debt from private to official hands.
The third component is the exercise of suasion on bondholders to achieve maximum participation, obtain binding pre-commitments, and eliminate free riders.
Since this scheme would imply losses for bondholders, substantial official muscle and peer pressure is needed.
But gaining time for a more orderly resolution, mitigating contagion, and reducing the size of an eventual write-down do indeed add up to a superior outcome.
Therefore, under this model – and despite the initial pressure – the behavior of bondholders could be considered truly voluntary.
And, while rating agencies might still regard a Vienna-type outcome as a default, the Talmudic sages show us why a more thoughtful classification is required.
The Tea Party’s Modest Proposal
WASHINGTON, DC – America’s Tea Party has a simple fiscal message: the United States is broke.
This is factually incorrect – US government securities remain one of the safest investments in the world – but the claim serves the purpose of dramatizing the federal budget and creating a great deal of hysteria around America’s current debt levels. This then produces the fervent belief that government spending must be cut radically, and now.
There are legitimate fiscal issues that demand serious discussion, including how to control growth in health-care spending and how best to structure tax reform.
But the Tea Party faction of the Republican Party cares more about small government than anything else: its members insist, above all, that federal tax revenue never be permitted to exceed 18% of GDP.
Their historical antecedent is America’s anti-revenue Whiskey Rebellion in 1794, not the original anti-British, pro-representation Boston Tea Party in 1773.
Most importantly, their tactics have proven massively destructive of wealth in the US.
Since the prolonged showdown over the budget began earlier this year, the stock market has lost about 20% of its value (roughly $10 trillion).
In effect, the Tea Party is working hard to reduce publicly funded social benefits – including pensions and Medicare – even as its methods dramatically reduce the value of private wealth now and in the future.
Part of the Tea Party’s founding myth, of course, is that smaller government will lead to faster growth and greater prosperity for all.
Never mind that the eye-popping growth projections in Representative Paul Ryan’s budget plan, for example, are utterly implausible; these projections matter politically, because, without them, the full sting of Ryan’s proposed Medicare cuts would be readily apparent.
Standard &amp; Poor’s has received some justified criticism for the analysis behind its recent decision to downgrade US government debt; after all, there was little economic news that could explain the move’s timing.
But S&amp;P’s assessment of the political situation is on target: by creating a dysfunctional paralysis at the heart of government, the Tea Party has shown that it is willing to impose dramatic costs on the broader economy and to ensure significantly slower growth.
Confrontation and brinkmanship have become the new watchwords of American politics, even when the US government’s legal ability to pay its debts is on the line, owing to the Tea Party’s ideological rigidity.
And the tone of political debate, not surprisingly, has become much nastier.
By signing a pledge not to raise taxes, Tea Party representatives have credibly committed themselves not to acquiesce in any middle-of-the-road compromise.
If they break this pledge, presumably they will face defeat in the next round of Republican Party primaries.
So, while a budget deal would technically be easy to achieve, it looks politically impossible in the near term.
Indeed, while Congress and the Republican Party have become less popular during 2011, support for the Tea Party has remained remarkably constant, at around 30% of the population.
Its tactics thus appear politically sustainable, at least through the 2012 elections.
Perhaps the most damaging outcome of these tactics is to take countercyclical fiscal policy off the table completely.
Regardless of what happens to the global economy in the weeks and months ahead, it is inconceivable that any kind of meaningful fiscal stimulus would get through the House of Representatives.
It remains to be seen whether the US Federal Reserve will also feel constrained by the political mood on Capitol Hill.
Clearly, influential Tea Party supporters would strongly resist any attempt now by Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke to find unorthodox ways to run a more expansionary monetary policy.
And, as for protecting the financial system against disaster, the current majority on the House Financial Services Committee is clear – they favor use of the bankruptcy system when megabanks get into serious trouble.
If the eurozone crisis continues to spiral out of control, the US should expect to see Lehman or near-Lehman-type collapses among exposed financial institutions.
The irony of the Tea Party revolt, of course, is that it undermines the private sector more than it reins in “big government.”
The S&amp;P downgrade resulted in a “flight to quality,” meaning that investors bought US government debt – thus increasing its price and lowering the rate that the federal government pays to borrow.
It was the value of the stock market that fell sharply – which makes sense, given that counter-cyclical policy is now severely constrained.
The government part of the credit system has been strengthened, relatively speaking, by developments over the past few months.
It is the private sector – where investment and entrepreneurial activity are needed to generate growth and employment – that has taken a beating.
Unless and until America’s private sector recovers, investment and job creation will continue to stagnate.
But today’s atmosphere of fear and aggressive budget tactics are combining to undermine private-sector confidence and spending power.
As Jonathan Swift put it in 1727, “Party is the madness of many, for the gain of the few.”
The Terror Next Door.
NEW DELHI – The fallout from the terror attacks in Mumbai last week has already shaken India.
Deep and sustained anger across the country – at its demonstrated vulnerability to terror and at the multiple institutional failures that allowed such loss of life – has prompted the resignations of the Home Minister in the national government and the Chief Minister and his Deputy in the state of Maharashtra, of which Mumbai is the capital.
As evidence mounts that the attacks were planned and directed from Pakistani territory, calls for decisive action have intensified.
But what can India do?
The terrorists hit multiple targets in Mumbai, both literally and figuratively.
They caused death and destruction to Indians with near-impunity, searing India’s psyche, showing up the limitations of its security apparatus and humiliating its government.
They dented the worldwide image of India as an emerging economic giant, a success story of the era of globalization and an increasing magnet for investors and tourists.
Instead the world was made to see an insecure and vulnerable India, a “soft state” bedevilled by enemies who can strike it at will.
That was not all.
By singling out Americans, British and Israelis for their malign attention, the terrorists extended the global Islamist war against “Jews and crusaders” to new territory.
As they dominated the world’s media for three gruesome days, the killers achieved a startling success for their cause, one that must have shaken anti-terrorist experts around the world, who now realize how easy it would be for ten men unafraid of death to hold any city in the world hostage.
The interrogation of the one surviving terrorist, and evidence from satellite telephone intercepts and other intelligence, has led to an emerging international consensus that the attacks were masterminded by the Wahhabi-inspired Lashkar-e-Taiba, a terrorist group once patronized, protected and trained by Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) as a useful instrument in their country’s proxy war against India in Kashmir.
Though banned by General Pervez Musharraf under duress after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Lashkar (which considers the United States, Israel and India “existential enemies of Islam”) simply regrouped under a different name and is even more powerful than before.
The Pakistani military finds militant outfits useful tools to bleed their adversaries in India and Afghanistan, and has shown little inclination to clamp down on them, despite years of assurances that action would be taken to curb their activities.
In July this year, American intelligence sources publicly revealed that the suicide-bombing of the Indian Embassy in Kabul had been conducted at the behest of the ISI.
This episode, along with two climbdowns by Pakistan’s government after public attempts to curb the ISI had been spurned by the Army, confirmed that the civilian government in Islamabad is too weak to challenge the all-powerful military.
So if the US and India demand, as they will, that Pakistan disband the Lashkar and similar terrorist outfits that have enjoyed military patronage in the past, dismantle their training facilities, freeze their bank accounts (before they are simply transferred to another name) and arrest their leaders, they will face a typically Pakistani conundrum: the military isn’t willing, and the civilian government isn’t able.
India’s government, which has reacted to previous terrorist outrages with calm and restraint, has no choice this time but to respond decisively.
Anything that smacks of temporizing and appeasement will further inflame the public a few months before national elections are due.
But India’s government has few good options.
An earlier assault on India’s Parliament in December 2001 by the Pakistan-based militant organization Jaish-e-Muhammad, nearly triggered a full-scale war between the two countries. &nbsp;In the end India pulled back its deployment on the border.
Though some hotheads in India now call for military action, including strikes on terrorist facilities in Pakistani territory, this would certainly lead to a war that neither side could win.
If anything, such an Indian reaction would play into the hands of the terrorists, by strengthening anti-Indian nationalism in Pakistan and diverting forces away from the Afghan borderlands, where they are aiding NATO’s fight against the Taliban and Al Qaeda.
For this reason, the US is likely to press India not to contemplate forceful retaliation that could undermine America’s objectives in Afghanistan.
And since both India and Pakistan have nuclear weapons, the risk of military action spiralling out of control is too grave for any responsible government to contemplate.
Yet inaction is not an option.
So India is likely to ask the US to use its undoubted clout with Pakistan – the US is a huge donor of both military and economic assistance to its near-bankrupt ally – to demand tougher action against the militants on its territory.
The governments of the victims of the Mumbai massacre are also likely to demand accountability from Islamabad.
Pakistan is likely to face disagreeable diplomatic and economic consequences for inaction.
But excessive pressure may only bring down the government of President Asif Ali Zardari, who is personally inclined towards rapprochement with India but who knows that every one of his civilian predecessors has been overthrown.
Contemplating such options, the world may be forced to admit its impotence.
That will have a chilling result: as long as a military-dominated Pakistan continues, willingly or helplessly, to harbour the perpetrators of Islamist terror, what happened in Mumbai could happen again -- anywhere.
The Terror Next Door
LONDON – In a prominent hadith, the Prophet Mohammed said: “If disorder threatens, take refuge in Yemen.”
The Prophet was referring to the prosperous and civilized Yemen.  But today disorder and radicalization in Yemen are beginning to infect Saudi Arabia, and thus the safety of the world’s largest oil producer.
The Prophet’s hadith about Yemen has enjoyed new resonance ever since the 1980’s, when Saudi Arabia – in line with American policy – sought to export domestic dissenters, most prominently Osama bin Laden, a Yemeni of Saudi birth, to fight Soviet infidels in Afghanistan.
Although dissent was mostly diverted to Afghanistan, bin Laden’s most trusted companions (his wife, too) have remained mainly in Yemen.
In the wake of the Taliban’s ouster in Afghanistan, bin Laden and his followers have come to regard Yemen, alongside Pakistan, as a haven.
Indeed, Yemen is now a bubbling cauldron of jihadis who have flocked there because it, like Afghanistan and Pakistan, has weak, easily manipulated state institutions.
US President Barack Obama’s recent order to shut down the Guantánamo Bay detention facility has made the problem of Yemen’s weakness a leading international issue.
One-third of the Guantánamo detainees are Yemeni, but Yemen cannot guarantee the United States that the detainees will be controlled effectively if they are returned home.
This fear is real.
Many previously released Guantánamo inmates have disappeared underground.
Saudi Arabia, unlike Yemen, has supposedly created a “model” system for reintegrating and re-educating Guantánamo returnees.
The Al Munasaha rehabilitation center is supposed to “cure” jihadi passions, and Saudi returnees from Guantánamo who spend time at Al Munasaha are later offered jobs and wives.
But many of them relapse and escape to Yemen.
Most notorious among these recidivists is Abu Sufyan Al Shihri, now “Deputy Leader of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.”
Seven other Saudi jihadis who escaped to Yemen are also known to be active in Al Qaeda there.
Thus the two largest countries on the Arabian peninsula – Saudi Arabia, the biggest in terms of landmass and oil wealth, and Yemen in terms of population – are now locked in life-and-death struggles with internal enemies.
The paradox is that, though the threat to both countries is the same, each is worsening the outlook for the other by the policies they are pursuing.
For example, in the 1980’s, millions of Yemeni men worked in the Kingdom. Remittance income formed a big part of Yemen’s budget.
But in 1991, 800,000 Yemenis were expelled because they were seen as a domestic security threat in the run-up to the first Gulf war.
Since then, Yemeni labor has been banned from Saudi Arabia.
Embittered and unemployed, young Yemeni men often become subject to another Saudi policy gone awry – its propagation for export of the Sunni Wahhabi form of Islam.
With new Wahhabi madrasas popping up everywhere in Yemen because of Saudi financial support, it is small wonder that the number of Yemeni jihadis has grown exponentially.
But Yemen, too, is engaged in its own destructive policies.
President Ali Abdullah Salih has regularly used Yemeni Wahhabis to defeat his domestic opponents – first the Communists, then the Zaidis, and then the Huthis.
Saudi Arabia’s relationship with Yemen is unlike that with any other Arab country.
The two countries are joined through historical, ethnic, and tribal ties, yet neither has the means to resolve popular resentments and resistance.
Saudi Arabia’s traditional “soft power” foreign policy tools – lavish spending of oil money and da’wa, “the Call” – are no longer effective. Building fences and sending helicopters to police the borders will not be sufficient, and the idea that jihadis can be rehabilitated is a myth.
No medicine will work if, when the patient is released, he encounters the same virus: institutionalized Wahhabism.
Yet there are things the Saudis can do to vaccinate themselves, and Yemen, from fanaticism.
The tentative moves toward liberalization that King Abdullah has made over the past two years need to be accelerated, made more daring, and become more effective in removing the Wahhabi ideology as an incubator for radicalism.
This should not be impossible, because both Saudi Arabia and Yemen have moderate, indigenous Islamic traditions that can be mobilized against jihadism.
If given the financial support that the Wahhabis received, these forces could reverse the current drift to fanaticism.
Both King Abdullah and President Salih understand the problem; they need to stop using the old tactics and grasp the strategic need for change.
The first change is economic.
Instead of exporting radicalism, Saudi Arabia must start importing Yemeni manpower by lifting its ban on Yemeni workers.
Yemeni officials have also requested admission to the Gulf Cooperation Council.
Up to now, GCC leaders have spurned Yemen’s membership for the same reasons that the European Union fears admitting Turkey: Yemen would instantly become the bloc’s most populous country.
Indeed, Yemen’s population exceeds that of all six GCC members – Qatar, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman, and Saudi Arabia – combined.
But if Yemen’s masses are not to become more radicalized, they will need to be incorporated into an economic zone that offers hope for the future.
The GCC can and must assume that role.
Yemen is strategically important, not only for Saudi Arabia, but for the world, because it is the only country on the Arabian Peninsula from which oil can reach the open seas without passing through a narrow strait – either the Strait of Hormuz or the Suez Canal.
To endanger this passage is to endanger the world economy’s energy lifeline.
When considering Yemen’s future, therefore, the stakes could hardly be higher.
The Threat of German Amnesia
BERLIN – Europe’s situation is serious – very serious.
Who would have thought that British Prime Minister David Cameron would call on eurozone governments to muster the courage to create a fiscal union (with a common budget and tax policy and jointly guaranteed public debt)?
And Cameron also argues that deeper political integration is the only way to stop the breakup of the euro.
A conservative British prime minister!
The European house is ablaze, and Downing Street is calling for a rational and resolute response by the fire brigade.
Unfortunately, the fire brigade is being led by Germany, and its chief is Chancellor Angela Merkel.
As a result, Europe continues to try to quench the fire with gasoline – German-enforced austerity – with the consequence that, in a mere three years, the eurozone’s financial crisis has become a European existential crisis.
Let’s not delude ourselves: if the euro falls apart, so will the European Union (the world’s largest economy), triggering a global economic crisis on a scale that most people alive today have never experienced.
Europe is on the edge of an abyss, and will surely tumble into it unless Germany – and France – alters course.
The recent elections in France and Greece, together with local elections in Italy and continuing unrest in Spain and Ireland, have shown that the public has lost faith in the strict austerity forced upon them by Germany.
Merkel’s kill-to-cure remedy has run up against reality – and democracy.
We are once again learning the hard way that this kind of austerity, when applied in the teeth of a major financial crisis, leads only to depression.
This insight should have been common knowledge; it was, after all, a major lesson of the austerity policies of President Herbert Hoover in the United States and Chancellor Heinrich Brüning in Weimar Germany in the early 1930’s.
Unfortunately, Germany, of all countries, seems to have forgotten it.
As a consequence, chaos looms in Greece, as does the prospect of subsequent bank runs in Spain, Italy, and France – and thus a financial avalanche that would bury Europe.
And then?
Should we write off what more than two generations of Europeans have created – a massive investment in institution-building that has led to the longest period of peace and prosperity in the history of the continent?
One thing is certain: a breakup of the euro and the EU would entail Europe’s exit from the world stage.
Germany’s current policy is all the more absurd in view of the bitter political and economic consequences that it would face.
It is up to Germany and France, Merkel and President François Hollande, to decide the future of our continent.
Europe’s salvation now depends on a fundamental change in Germany’s economic-policy stance, and in France’s position on political integration and structural reforms.
France will have to say yes to a political union: a common government with common parliamentary control for the eurozone.
The eurozone’s national governments already are acting in unison as a de facto government to address the crisis.
What is becoming increasingly true in practice should be carried forward and formalized.
Germany, for its part, will have to opt for a fiscal union.
Ultimately, that means guaranteeing the eurozone’s survival with Germany’s economic might and assets: unlimited acquisition of the crisis countries’ government bonds by the European Central Bank, Europeanization of national debts via Eurobonds, and growth programs to avoid a eurozone depression and boost recovery.
One can easily imagine the ranting in Germany about this kind of program: still more debt!
Loss of control over our assets!
Inflation!
It just doesn’t work!
But it does work: Germany’s export-led growth is based on just such programs in the emerging countries and the US.
If China and America had not pumped partly debt-financed money into their economies beginning in 2009, the German economy would have taken a serious hit.
Germans must now ask themselves whether they, who have profited the most from European integration, are willing to pay the price for it or would prefer to let it fail.
Beyond political and fiscal unification and short-term growth policies, Europeans urgently need structural reforms aimed at restoring Europe’s competitiveness.
Each of these pillars is needed if Europe is to overcome its existential crisis.
Do we Germans understand our pan-European responsibility?
It certainly does not look that way.
Indeed, rarely has Germany been as isolated as it is now.
Hardly anyone understands our dogmatic austerity policy, which goes against all experience, and we are considered largely off-course, if not heading into oncoming traffic.
It is still not too late to change direction, but now we have only days and weeks, perhaps months, rather than years.
Germany destroyed itself – and the European order – twice in the twentieth century, and then convinced the West that it had drawn the right conclusions.
Only in this manner – reflected most vividly in its embrace of the European project – did Germany win consent for its reunification.
It would be both tragic and ironic if a restored Germany, by peaceful means and with the best of intentions, brought about the ruin of the European order a third time.
Europe’s New Jewish Question
NEW YORK – In March 1936, Poland’s Sejm (the lower house of parliament) almost succeeded in outlawing shechita (slaughter according to Jewish law).
Only the Polish Constitution prevented an outright ban.
Had the majority of legislators gotten their way, many of Poland’s 3.2 million Jews would have gone meatless.
A few days ago, the ghosts of the past returned to the Sejm, when deputies rejected a government bill intended to keep religious slaughter legal.
Even many of the bill’s supporters (including Prime Minister Donald Tusk) were concerned not with defending the rights of religious minorities, but rather with protecting meatpacking jobs.
The vote was an assault on freedom of religion that flies in the face of Article 53 of the Polish Constitution, which states that “Freedom of conscience and religion shall be ensured to everyone” and specifies that the “performing of rites” is protected.
It was also a slap in the face for Poland’s Jewish community, which has been part of the country’s social landscape for more than a thousand years, and which, despite the Holocaust, has witnessed a remarkable renaissance over the past two decades.
Indeed, Poland, with its rich Jewish heritage and history, was believed to be among the most fertile environments for a Jewish revival after the fall of communism.
Yet the Sejm’s decision raises the question: Do Poles really want Jewish life to return to their country?
Or do they see Poland’s Jewish legacy only as something that benefits their tourism and food industries?
Not every Jew keeps kosher, and some are vegetarians.
Hence, not every Jew relies on kosher meat.
But almost every Jew will defend the right of others to live according to Jewish dietary laws.
Shechita is an indispensable, non-negotiable part of Jewish religious life.
Today, Poland’s Jewish population numbers only a few thousand.
Everyone knows why.
That, of course, makes it easier for today’s politicians to ban shechita.
Such populist measures are vote winners.
The civil rights of small religious minorities do not matter much politically; the perceived rights of animals (and economic motivations) do.
But was this decision really motivated by concern for animal welfare?
For some deputies, it undoubtedly was; but others discovered their love of animals only when it seemed popular to do so.
As The Economist noted succinctly, “Poland is not a country hitherto known for championing animal rights.”
Indeed, it is hypocritical that hunting for sport and unsupervised home slaughtering continue to be permitted, whereas shechita, which is carried out by experienced people according to well-established procedures, is not.
In recent months, Polish politicians became agitated about “ritual slaughter.”
Granted, the term sounds archaic; but the Torah is the first systematic legislation that forbids cruelty to animals and mandates that they be treated with consideration and respect.
Those who argue that ritual slaughter is “foreign” to Polish culture not only know nothing about their country’s history; they also exploit and reinforce anti-Semitic sentiment.
Poland is not the only place where established religious practices are being questioned.
In other Western countries, such as Germany, France, the Netherlands, and New Zealand, heated debates about religious slaughter and circumcision have taken place recently.
A year ago, a German judge ruled that religious circumcision was a cruel practice that inflicted bodily harm on boys and was therefore illegal – a view supported by many commentators in the media.
But German politicians strove to find a solution that accommodated the concerns of the Jewish and Muslim minorities.
They demonstrated real leadership.
Within weeks, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government proposed legislation that put religious circumcision on a solid legal basis, with the support of most members of the Bundestag.
In the Netherlands, a covenant was signed that allowed religious slaughter.
It received the backing of the legislature, which had previously favored a ban.
Likewise, in Poland, following a Constitutional Court ruling in November 2012 that struck down on technical grounds a provision permitting religious slaughter, the government promised that the practice would remain legal.
Yet when legislators voted on the government’s bill earlier this month, following a sometimes-hysterical debate on ritual slaughter in the media, three dozen deputies from Tusk’s Civic Platform, the largest faction in the Sejm, opposed it.
By taking this step, Poland has become the ringleader for those in Europe who want to deny Jewish citizens the right to practice their religion freely.
If not halted, such measures could call into question the Jewish presence on the Continent in the longer term.
Yet Tusk has ruled out a reversal of the ban, and one of his ministers asked the Jewish and Muslim communities to challenge it before the Constitutional Court.
The relationship between Central and Eastern European countries and the Jewish people has always been characterized by both triumph and tragedy.
In recent years, it has been strengthening, especially in Poland.
Encouraging developments have taken place, such as the construction of a new state-of-the-art Jewish Museum in Warsaw.
A few months ago, I participated in the March of the Living at Auschwitz.
Many Jews with European roots who now live in America or Israel were in attendance.
As usual, it was a bittersweet experience.
For my part, and for many years now, I have tried to highlight the sweet.
But now I am left wondering: Can the Jewish renaissance in the heart of Europe continue if essential elements of Jewish life are declared illegal?
Or will Europe’s leaders stand up for the civil rights of their Jewish compatriots?
As Pinchas Goldschmidt, President of the Conference of European Rabbis, recently remarked, one cannot be proud of the Jews of yesterday and tell the Jews of today that their religious practices are no longer welcome.
The Jewish heritage is part of Europe’s heritage. It should be protected, not restricted.
The Three Swedish Models
Sweden’s economic and social system, sometimes called the “Swedish Model,” is often depicted either as an ideal or an abnormality.
But Sweden’s system has varied considerably.
In fact, broadly speaking there have been three different Swedish “models” since the late nineteenth century.
The first model lasted from about 1870 until the 1960’s.
During this “liberal” period, the government basically provided stable market-supporting legislation, education, health care, and infrastructure.
As late as 1960, both total government spending (as a share of GDP) and the distribution of earnings were similar to those prevailing in the United States.
During this century-long period, Sweden moved from being one of the poorest western countries to being the third richest country in terms of GDP per capita.
In other words, Sweden became a rich country 
 before
 its highly generous welfare-state arrangements were created. 
A second era lasted from 1960 until 1985.
The free-trade regime of the liberal period was retained during this period – indeed it was deepened by the various rounds of global trade liberalization – but the dominant thrust was the creation of a generous welfare state.
By the late 1980’s, total public spending reached 60-65% of GDP, compared to about 30% in 1960.
Moreover, marginal tax rates hit 65-75% for most full-time employees, compared to about 40% in 1960 (all taxes on households being included).
Economic incentives to work, save, and start businesses were also reduced through the compression of wage differentials and a big squeeze on company profits, both largely the result of strong and centralized labor unions.
Moreover, new labor-market regulations were introduced, the most important being strict job-security legislation implemented in the early 1970’s.
The regulation of financial markets that was imposed during WWII was retained.
It is this economic and social system that is usually identified as the “Swedish model.” 
Although economic performance during this period was not dismal, it was certainly not impressive.
Between 1970 and 1995, GDP per capita in Sweden lagged by about 18% behind the average of rich OECD countries.
As a result, Sweden fell from third to approximately seventeenth place in the OECD in terms of GDP per capita.
This can partly be explained by the “catch up” mechanism, as technologically less advanced countries imported technology from more advanced countries.
But this does not explain why 14 countries not only caught up with Sweden during this period, but 
 surpassed
 it in terms of GDP per capita.
The removal of capital-market regulations and foreign-exchange controls in the late 1980’s, and Sweden’s entry into the EU in the early 1990’s, signaled a new era – the embryo of a third Swedish model.
In 1991, marginal tax rates were cut by 10-20% for large parts of the population.
These reforms had broad political support and were, in fact, initiated during a social-democratic government.
Subsequently, mainly during a period of center-right governance, several product markets were deregulated: telecommunications, electricity, road transport, taxis, and, to some extent, railways.
A process of deregulation and privatization, although with continued tax-financing (in fact, basically a voucher system), began in the field of “human services,” in particular for childcare, education, and old-age care.
One purpose of this was to increase competition and freedom of choice.
Partly in response to these reforms, Sweden’s growth rate picked up from the mid 1990’s, and today about a third of the previous lag in GDP per capita since 1970 (as compared to other developed countries) has been recovered.
However, Sweden is still characterized by high welfare dependency, with about 23% of working-age people in recent years living on various types of government benefits, including temporary and permanent disability payments.
The new center-right government elected in the fall of 2006 has committed itself to continuing economic liberalization.
The government has announced plans to privatize state-owned companies, improve conditions for small firms, and continue increasing individual freedom of choice in the case of human services.
It has also abolished the wealth tax (after the previous social-democratic government had already abolished the inheritance tax).
Moreover, the government has modestly reduced taxes on wages and slightly scaled down the generosity of some benefits.
One argument for the latter policy is to improve the government’s budget, another to make work more economically rewarding relative to government benefits.
Indeed, in important respects today’s Sweden is moving back to the liberal economic regime that existed before the explosion of government interventionism in the 1960’s.
But there are two basic caveats.
First, all political parties agree that welfare-state arrangements should remain tax-financed, although possibly with a stronger application of insurance principles in the social insurance systems.
So even if the generosity of state benefits may be curtailed, aggregate government spending is unlikely to be rolled back dramatically from the current 53% of GDP. 
Second, there is general agreement that the government should take more active responsibility for environmental issues, although policies in this area increasingly rely on market instruments (prices for environmental disturbances) rather than on quantitative regulations
Clearly, some of these policy measures may conflict with traditional egalitarianism in Sweden, at least in the short term.
Hence, the big question underlying the current wave of liberalization is whether these reform tendencies are politically sustainable.
The next general election in 2010 will give part of the answer.
The Time is Now to Fight Disease
It is possible for a child born just ten years from now to live in a world where AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria are on the wane.
But this can only happen with considerable investment. Now.
Otherwise, today’s grim picture will only get worse.
Each day, these diseases kill 16,000 people—devastating entire communities and plummeting countries deeper into poverty.
Upping the ante could turn the tables.
Recent successes in Brazil against AIDS, in Mozambique against malaria, and in China against TB, show what can be achieved on a global scale with more resources. There are new ways of directing aid to where it is most needed.
A key instrument is the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria. Created in 2002 as a partnership between governments and civil society, the Global Fund is unique in the way it aims to deliver assistance.
Driven by real needs on the ground, projects are designed and implemented by recipients, and its procedures and operations are transparent.
Of late there has been much talk about intensifying efforts to eradicate poverty.
Ahead of the G8 summit in Scotland in July, a coalition of non-governmental organizations has launched the “Global Call to Action Against Poverty,” and the UK host has made Africa a top priority.
Building on this momentum, the campaigns for debt relief, trade reform, and increasing aid to poor countries have gained traction.
Yet, while pledges to increase development assistance have soared, short-term funding is woefully inadequate.
Any strategy for raising living standards must include urgent measures that address AIDS, TB and malaria.
Stemming the spread of this deadly trio of diseases is the linchpin in the global fight against poverty.
Unchecked, these diseases not only sap the strength of national economies, but jeopardize peace and security.
Teachers and nurses are dying; police and security forces are being hard hit, and 14 million children have already been orphaned by AIDS.
We now risk failing to meet the Millennium Development GOAL, set out by the United Nations, of reversing the spread of AIDS, TB and malaria by 2015.
This failure will make remote any hope of reaching the other Millennium goals in the fight against poverty.
A comprehensive response to AIDS, TB and malaria is needed.
Acting now means less spending in the long run.
Investments in effective prevention, treatment and research in 2005 and 2006 will save millions of lives, lessen the socio-economic impact of the diseases in poorer countries, and remove the need for increased spending on these chronic crises in the future.
The Global Fund plays an important role in this funding environment, providing approximately 66% of all current external funds in the fight against TB, 45% in the fight against malaria, and 20% of all external support to combat HIV/AIDS.
Since the Global Fund was founded three years ago, it has built an impressive track record: approving 310 grants totaling $3.1 billion in 127 countries and disbursing $920 million since 2002.
Despite the scope of its mission, it has a minimal bureaucracy, which allows for a flexible response to changing needs.
The Global Fund is not perfect; as with all new organizations, it is experiencing growing pains.
Yet, issues such as procurement policies, trade-offs between efficiency and ownership, and the balance between government and non-governmental organizations as implementing partners are being addressed through the Fund’s open and inclusive governance systems.
If the Fund is to live up to its potential it will need $2.3 billion to continue its work effectively in 2005.
The first of two replenishment conferences for the Global Fund is taking place this week in Stockholm, with the aim of securing financial pledges to cover grant commitments in 2006-2007, as well as to fill the gap for this year.
Donors have long preached the importance of a funding vehicle such as the Global Fund—one that is needs-driven, relies on local input, and promotes donor coordination.
They now have a chance to make good on their word.
With many battles ahead in the fight against AIDS, TB and malaria, it would be a disgrace if this opportunity is squandered.
Betting on the Tortoise in Japan