Three years after the start of their revolutions, neither country has been able to draft a broadly acceptable constitution.
Meanwhile, Algeria is preoccupied with the presidential election in April, in which the incumbent, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, will stand again.
Mauritanian politics is polarized, with the government unable to restore confidence.
Libya stands on the brink of civil war and de facto partition.
Farther afield, Syria is experiencing only bloodshed and sorrow.
Morocco’s evolutionary approach to improving the country’s well-being – quietly and resolutely building on the political, economic, and social reforms launched more than a decade ago – is backed by an overwhelming majority of citizens.
A new constitution, proposed by the king and adopted in a referendum in July 2011, has already generated robust political competition.
Meanwhile, a new National Initiative for Human Development is helping to end poverty and social exclusion among Morocco’s most vulnerable citizens, especially women.
Rising living standards and a broad political consensus have provided the stability needed to allow the economy to grow strongly and diversify.
Slowly but surely, national income is becoming less dependent on agriculture, thereby reducing Moroccans’ vulnerability to poor rainfall and failed harvests.
The country is developing a strong processing industry, especially in fertilizers, based in part on having the world’s largest phosphate reserves.
And the textiles industry, recovering from a slowdown caused by the European crisis, is penetrating new export markets.
A similar story can be told about tourism.
Indeed, Morocco can be proud of its export strategy.
Despite the weak global economy, Morocco sells its goods worldwide, with strong exports to France, the US, Brazil, the Gulf states, and China.
The country has free-trade agreements with Europe, Turkey, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Tunisia, and – unique in the region – the US.
Morocco boasts solid infrastructure, a robust banking system, sound public finances, low inflation, and manageable unemployment.
Despite capital flight from much of the region, foreign investment continues to flow in.
Clearly, Morocco is benefiting from being a stable country in a combustible region.
But its longer-term interests lie in having politically stable neighbors that embrace similar economic reforms, thereby opening the way for a free-trade area that would benefit the entire region.
This regional perspective has been promoted ever since Mohammed acceded to the throne in 1999.
One important part of his strategy has been to encourage intra-African economic relations.
Morocco already provides expertise in finance, telecoms, energy, agriculture, and food security across the continent; indeed, it is now Africa’s second-largest investor, after South Africa.
The king’s familiarity with the region’s cultural and spiritual life makes him an invaluable adviser, especially regarding the role of Islam in a modern society.
For example, Morocco helps train imams in a form of open Islam, which currently is helping Mali move on from its recent bloodletting.
This principle of regional solidarity extends to Morocco’s deployment of military hospitals not only in Mali but also in other conflict zones, such as one in Jordan that serves Syrian refugees.
Morocco is well positioned to promote security and development across northwest Africa and beyond.
Its political stability, open economy, and balanced international relations are increasingly aligned with the regional interests of the US and Europe.
Moreover, Morocco is a loyal and longstanding US ally.
The West would do well to start cultivating a natural partner in such a dangerous and complex region.
A Standby Program for the Eurozone
CHICAGO – How will the eurozone crisis play out in the next few weeks?
With luck, Italy may soon get a credible government of national unity, Spain will obtain a new government in November with a mandate for change, and Greece will do enough to avoid roiling the markets.
But none of this can be relied upon.
So, what needs to be done?
First, eurozone banks have to be recapitalized.
Second, enough funding must be available to meet Italy’s and Spain’s needs over the next year or so if their market access dries up.
And, third, Greece, now the sickest man of Europe, must be treated in a way that does not spread the infection to the other countries on the eurozone’s periphery.
All of this requires financing – bank recapitalization alone could require hundreds of billions of euros (though these needs would be mitigated somewhat if the sovereign debt of large eurozone countries looked healthier).
In the short run, it is unlikely that Germany (and Northern Europe more generally) will put up more money for the others.
Germans are upset at being asked to support countries that do not seem to want to adjust – unlike Germany, which is competitive because it endured years of pain: low wage increases to absorb the former East Germany’s workers and deep labor-market and pension reforms.
The unwillingness of the Greek rich to pay taxes, or of Italian parliamentarians to cut their own perks, confirms Germans’ fears.
At the same time, German politicians have done a poor job explaining to their people how much they have gained from the euro.
But we are where we are.
A glimmer of hope is Europe’s willingness to use the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) imaginatively – as equity or first-loss cover.
Clearly, some of the EFSF funds will have to go to recapitalize banks that cannot raise money from the markets.
As for the rest, the amounts that are not already committed to the peripheral countries could be used to support borrowing that can be lent onward to Italy and Spain.
There is, however, no consensus about how to do this.
Some propose bringing in the European Central Bank to leverage the EFSF’s funds.
This is a recipe for trouble.
Giving the ECB a quasi-fiscal role, even if it is somewhat insulated from losses, risks undermining its credibility.
And if Italy were helped, the incoming ECB President, Mario Draghi, an Italian, would be criticized, no matter how dire Italy’s need.
Moreover, financing would have to be accompanied by conditionality, and these institutions have neither the requisite expertise nor the necessary distance from the countries at risk to apply and enforce appropriate conditions.
Finally, both the EFSF and the ECB ultimately rely on the same eurozone resources for their financial strength.
If markets start panicking about large eurozone defaults, they could question whether even a willing Germany has the necessary capacity to support the EFSF-ECB combine.
Put differently, these institutions do not offer a credible, non-inflationary, external source of strength.
Indeed, the eurozone’s problems might soon become too big for its members to address.
The world has a stake in their resolution.
And it has an institution that can channel help: the International Monetary Fund.
The IMF could set up a special vehicle along the lines of its New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB), which would be capitalized by a first-loss layer from the EFSF with the IMF’s own capital comprising a second layer.
This NAB-like vehicle could borrow as needed from countries, including the United States and China, as well as tap financial markets.
It would offer large lines of credit to illiquid countries like Italy, with conditionality intended to help such countries resume borrowing from markets at reasonable cost.
A special vehicle is required because the amounts that must be made available far exceed what IMF members can usually access, and it is only right that if the eurozone seeks such amounts for its members, it should bear a significant portion of any potential losses.
At the same time, the Fund’s capital resources would back the vehicle if the first-loss buffer provided by the eurozone were eroded; that way, the market would understand that strength from outside the eurozone can be brought to bear.
The IMF is not an institution that inspires warm and cuddly feelings.
But it is also not the mindless preacher of fiscal austerity that it is accused of being – and it should start taking the lead in managing the crisis, rather than holding up the rear.
The eurozone needs an independent outside assessment of what needs to be done, and rapid implementation, before it is too late and the incipient bank runs become uncontrollable.
Of course, the IMF cannot act without the permission of its masters, the large countries.
The eurozone should suppress any wounded pride, acknowledge that it needs help, and provide quickly what it has already promised.
The US should continue pushing hard for a solution.
And the emerging-market countries should pitch in too, once some safeguards for their money are in place.
Unresolved, the crisis will spare no one.
As for the birthplace of the euro crisis, Greece’s debt will almost surely have to be restructured.
But adequate funding structures for Italy and Spain must be in place before any resolution.
So, while others have to step forward to do their part, it is best if Greece steps back from the brink.
A Star is Jailed
BANGKOK – Joseph Estrada, the disgraced former president of the Philippines, faces the prospect of spending his remaining years in prison after a special court in Manila found him guilty of amassing around US$15 million in bribes and kickbacks.
During the 30 months he ruled his country, from mid-1998 to the start of 2001, Estrada accepted payoffs from gambling lords and orchestrated (with social security funds) sales of stocks, channeling much of the profits into his personal aliased account.
Estrada literally defined plunder: as a senator in the early 1990’s, he was a member of the congress that crafted the law under which he was convicted.
For many Filipinos, there is more than enough poetry in this fact, and certainly more irony than Estrada’s action-comedy movies of the 1960’s ever mustered.
There is no underplaying the significance of the court’s unanimous decision to convict the first Philippine president ever to undergo a criminal trial.
This is, after all, the Philippines, where Imelda Marcos is still living free and easy.
Despite massive evidence of the widespread death, poverty, suffering, and dysfunction she and her late husband, the dictator Ferdinand Marcos, inflicted on the Philippines, the only real disappointment she has subsequently endured has been losing the last presidential election she was allowed to contest.
The Philippines is not a country used to seeing powerful people punished.
When officials are accused or suspected of corruption, they do not quickly resign, as in Korea or Japan.
Instead, they often seek immunity by running for public office.
When a bloody coup against Corazon Aquino’s fledgling democratic government failed, the leader of the putsch escaped from a floating prison – and then successfully ran for senator.
The wheels of Philippine justice need retooling, so much so that the country’s Chief Justice himself recently called for an emergency summit to discuss a rash of extra-judicial killings that have the claimed the lives of leftists, human rights workers, and journalists under President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo.
There have been few convictions for these crimes.
Yet Filipinos themselves simply cannot seem to imagine their leaders behind bars.
Even before Estrada’s conviction, opinion polls showed that 48% of Filipinos wanted clemency, if not a guaranteed pardon from Arroyo.
More than 80% said Estrada should be allowed to languish in a lush private family vacation home where he already spent the last six years awaiting his verdict.
Is this lack of appetite for justice a part of Filipino culture, or learned behavior?
Has an overly forgiving nature prevented Filipinos from achieving closure in so many painful chapters of their history, or are the ravages of impunity to blame?
With so few examples of justice clearly dispensed, and overwhelmed by examples of villains so easily forgiven or forgotten, perhaps Filipinos could not bring themselves to demand what they could not imagine.
Estrada’s conviction gives Filipinos the clearest illustration of what the rule of law may bring to their society.
Estrada remains adored by the masses, but so far the public’s reaction to the verdict has been nonviolent and almost subdued.
Notwithstanding the opinion polls, it does seem as though the public not only accepts his conviction, but that they respect it as the outcome of a fair system that has been allowed to work.
This suggests not only that justice in the Philippines has a chance; equally important, it suggests that Filipinos will give justice a chance.
If the Estrada saga leads to a firm yet dignified exercise of justice, Filipinos may discover a taste for more of the same.
Europe’s Lost Keynesians
CAMBRIDGE – There is no magic Keynesian bullet for the eurozone’s woes.
But the spectacularly muddle-headed argument nowadays that too much austerity is killing Europe is not surprising.
Commentators are consumed by politics, flailing away at any available target, while the “anti-austerity” masses apparently believe that there are easy cyclical solutions to tough structural problems.
The eurozone’s difficulties, I have long argued, stem from European financial and monetary integration having gotten too far ahead of actual political, fiscal, and banking union.
This is not a problem with which Keynes was familiar, much less one that he sought to address.
Above all, any realistic strategy for dealing with the eurozone crisis must involve massive write-downs (forgiveness) of peripheral countries’ debt.
These countries’ massive combined bank and government debt – the distinction everywhere in Europe has become blurred – makes rapid sustained growth a dream.
This is hardly the first time I have stressed the need for wholesale debt write-downs.
Two years ago, in a commentary called “The Euro’s Pig-Headed Masters,” I wrote that “Europe is in constitutional crisis.
No one seems to have the power to impose a sensible resolution of its peripheral countries’ debt crisis.
Instead of restructuring the manifestly unsustainable debt burdens of Portugal, Ireland, and Greece (the PIGs), politicians and policymakers are pushing for ever-larger bailout packages with ever-less realistic austerity conditions.”
My sometime co-author Carmen Reinhart makes the same point, perhaps even more clearly.
In a May 2010 Washington Post editorial (co-authored with Vincent Reinhart), she described “Five Myths About the European Debt Crisis” – among them, “Myth #3: Fiscal austerity will solve Europe’s debt woes.”
We have repeated the mantra dozens of times in various settings, as any fair observer would confirm.
In a debt restructuring, the northern eurozone countries (including France) will see hundreds of billions of euros go up in smoke.
Northern taxpayers will be forced to inject massive amounts of capital into banks, even if the authorities impose significant losses on banks’ large and wholesale creditors, as well they should.
These hundreds of billions of euros are already lost, and the game of pretending otherwise cannot continue indefinitely.
A gentler way to achieve some modest reduction in public and private debt burdens would be to commit to a period of sustained but moderate inflation, as I recommended in December 2008 in a commentary entitled “Inflation is Now the Lesser Evil.”
Sustained moderate inflation would help to bring down the real value of real estate more quickly, and potentially make it easier for German wages to rise faster than those in peripheral countries.
It would have been a great idea four and a half years ago.
It remains a good idea today.
What else needs to happen?
The other steps involve economic restructuring at the national level and political integration of the eurozone.
In another commentary, “A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold,” I concluded that “without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade.”
Here, all eyes may be on Germany, but today it is really France that will play the central role in deciding the euro’s fate.
Germany cannot carry the euro on its shoulders alone indefinitely.
France needs to become a second anchor of growth and stability.
Temporary Keynesian demand measures may help to sustain short-run internal growth, but they will not solve France’s long-run competitiveness problems.
At the same time, France and Germany must both come to terms with an approach that leads to far greater political union within a couple of decades.
Otherwise, the coming banking union and fiscal transfers will lack the necessary political legitimacy.
As my colleague Jeffrey Frankel has remarked, for more than 20 years, Germany’s elites have insisted that the eurozone will not be a transfer union.
But, in the end, ordinary Germans have been proved right, and the elites have been proved wrong.
Indeed, if the eurozone is to survive, the northern countries will have to continue to help the periphery with new loans until access to private markets is restored.
So, given that Germany will be picking up many more bills (regardless of whether the eurozone survives), how can it best use the strength of its balance sheet to alleviate Europe’s growth problems?
Certainly, Germany must continue to acquiesce in an ever-larger role for the European Central Bank, despite the obvious implicit fiscal risks.
There is no safe path forward.
There are a number of schemes floating around for leveraging Germany’s lower borrowing costs to help its partner countries, beyond simply expanding the ECB’s balance sheet.
For meaningful burden-sharing to work, however, eurozone leaders must stop dreaming that the single currency can survive another 20 or 30 years without much greater political union.
Debt write-downs and guarantees will inevitably bloat Germany’s government debt, as the authorities are forced to bail out German banks (and probably some neighboring countries’ banks).
But the sooner the underlying reality is made transparent and becomes widely recognized, the lower the long-run cost will be.
To my mind, using Germany’s balance sheet to help its neighbors directly is far more likely to work than is the presumed “trickle-down” effect of a German-led fiscal expansion.
This, unfortunately, is what has been lost in the debate about Europe of late: However loud and aggressive the anti-austerity movement becomes, there still will be no simple Keynesian cure for the single currency’s debt and growth woes.
A Survival Strategy for the Eurozone
NEW YORK – After the Greek and Irish crises and the spread of financial contagion to Portugal, Spain, and possibly even Italy, the eurozone is now in a serious crisis.
There are three possible scenarios: “muddle through,” based on the current approach of “lend and pray”; “break-up,” with disorderly debt restructurings and possible exit of weaker members; and “greater integration,” implying some form of fiscal union.
The muddle-through scenario – with financing provided to member states in distress (conditional on fiscal adjustment and structural reforms), in the hope that they are illiquid but solvent – is an unstable disequilibrium.
Indeed, it could lead to the disorderly breakup scenario if institutional reforms and other policies leading to closer integration and restoration of growth in the eurozone’s periphery are not implemented soon.
The crisis started with too much private debt and leverage, which became public debt and deficits as crisis and recession triggered fiscal deterioration and private losses were mostly socialized via bailouts of financial systems.
Then, distressed sovereigns that had already lost market access – Greece and Ireland – were bailed out by the International Monetary Fund and the European Union.
But no one will bail out these super-sovereigns if the sovereigns prove to be insolvent.
Thus, the current strategy of kicking the can down the road will soon reach its limits, and a different plan will be needed to save the eurozone.
The first institutional reform takes the form of a larger envelope of official resources, which would mean a quasi-fiscal union.
Official resources currently are sufficient to bail out Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, but not to prevent a self-fulfilling run on the short-term sovereign and financial liabilities of Spain and other potentially distressed eurozone members.
So, even if these countries were to implement the necessary fiscal and structural reforms, an increase of official resources would nonetheless be needed.
Because nervous investors don’t want to be last in line in case of a run, a disorderly rush to the exits is likely when official resources are insufficient.
Short of full fiscal unification – or a variant of it in the form of eurozone bonds – this increase in official resources would occur through a much-enlarged European Financial Stability Facility and a much greater commitment by the European Central Bank to long-term bond purchases and liquidity operations to support banks.
Since quasi-fiscal union implies that the eurozone’s core economies could end up systematically bailing out those on the periphery, only a formal loss of fiscal sovereignty – a credible commitment by the peripheral countries to medium- and long-term fiscal discipline – could overcome the current political resistance of Germany and others.
But even a larger envelope of official resources is not sufficient to stem the insolvency problems of Greece, Ireland, and, possibly, Portugal and Spain.
Thus, a second set of policies and institutional reforms requires that all unsecured creditors of banks and other financial institutions need to be “treated” – that is, they must accept losses (or “haircuts”) on their claims.
This is needed to prevent even more private debt being put on government balance sheets, causing a fiscal blowout.
If orderly treatment of unsecured senior creditors requires a new cross-border regime to close down insolvent European banks, such a regime should be implemented without delay.
Similarly, super-sovereigns cannot continue to bail out distressed sovereigns that are insolvent rather than illiquid.
Thus, in addition to an orderly resolution regime for banks, Europe must also implement early orderly restructurings of distressed sovereigns’ public debt.
Waiting until 2013 to implement these restructurings, as German Chancellor Angela Merkel proposes, will destroy confidence, as it implies a much larger haircut on residual private claims on sovereign borrowers.
Thus, orderly market-based restructurings via exchange offers need to occur in 2011.
Such exchange offers can limit private creditors’ losses if they are done early.
That way, formal haircuts on the face value of debt can be avoided via new bonds that include only a maturity extension and an interest-rate cap that is set below today’s unsustainable market rates.
Waiting to restructure unsustainable debts would only lead to disorderly workouts and severe haircuts for some private creditors.
Finally, Europe needs policies that restore competitiveness and growth to the eurozone’s periphery, where GDP is either still contracting (Greece, Spain, and Ireland) or barely growing (Italy and Portugal).
Without growth, it will be difficult to stabilize public and private debts and deficits as a share of GDP – the most important indicator of fiscal sustainability.
Moreover, without growth, the social and political backlash against painful belt-tightening will eventually undermine austerity and reform.
Unfortunately, fiscal austerity and structural reforms are – at least in the short run – recessionary and deflationary.
So other policies are needed to restore growth.
The ECB should pursue a much looser monetary policy to jump-start growth, with a weaker euro to help boost the periphery’s competitiveness.
In addition, Germany should delay its fiscal consolidation; if anything, it should cut taxes for a couple of years to boost its own growth and – via trade – that of the periphery.
In the next few months, it will become clear whether European policymakers can compromise and implement reforms that dampen the threat of a eurozone breakup.
Either the EU moves in the direction of a more stable equilibrium of closer integration, or the risk of an unstable and disorderly breakup scenario will rise significantly.
A Sustainable Recovery
NEW YORK – The global recession now underway is the result not only of a financial panic, but also of more basic uncertainty about the future direction of the world economy.
Consumers are pulling back from home and automobile purchases not only because they have suffered a blow to their wealth with declining stock prices and housing values, but also because they don’t know where to turn.
Should they risk buying a new car when gasoline prices might soar again?
Will they be able to put food on the table after this year’s terrifying rise in food prices?
Decisions about business investment are even starker.
Businesses are reluctant to invest at a time when consumer demand is plummeting and they face unprecedented risk penalties on their borrowing costs.
They are also facing huge uncertainties.
What kinds of power plants will be acceptable in the future?
Will they be allowed to emit carbon dioxide as in the past?
Can the United States still afford a suburban lifestyle, with sprawling homes in far-flung communities that require long-distance automobile commutes? 
To a large extent, economic recovery will depend on a much clearer sense of the direction of future economic change.
That is largely the job of government.
After the confused and misguided leadership of the Bush administration, which failed to give any clear path to energy, health, climate, and financial policies, President-elect Barack Obama will have to start charting a course that defines the American economy’s future direction.
The US is not the only economy in this equation.
We need a global vision of sustainable recovery that includes leadership from China, India, Europe, Latin America, and, yes, even Africa, long marginalized from the world economy, but very much part of it now.
There are a few clear points amidst the large uncertainties and confusions.
First, the US cannot continue borrowing from the rest of the world as it has for the past eight years.
America’s net exports will have to increase, meaning that the net exports of China, Japan, and other surplus countries will consequently decrease.
The adjustments needed amount to a sizeable deficit-to-balance swing of around $700 billion in the US current account, or nearly 5% of US GNP.
China’s trade surplus might shrink by half of that amount (with cuts in trade surpluses also spread over other global regions), meaning a shift in Chinese GNP toward internal demand and away from net exports equal to between 5% and 10% of China’s GNP.
Fortunately, China is promoting a major domestic expansion. 
Second, the decline in US consumption should also be partly offset by a rise in US investment.
However, private business will not step up investment unless there is a clear policy direction for the economy.
Obama has emphasized the need for a “green recovery,” that is, one based on sustainable technologies, not merely on consumption spending.
The US auto industry should be re-tooled for low-carbon-emission automobiles, either plug-in hybrids or pure battery-operated vehicles.
Either technology will depend on a national electricity grid that uses low-emission forms of power generation, such as wind, solar, nuclear, or coal-fired plants that capture and store the carbon-dioxide emissions.
All of these technologies will require public funding alongside private investment.   
Third, the US recovery will not be credible unless there is also a strategy for getting the government’s own finances back in order.
George W. Bush’s idea of economic policy was to cut taxes three times while boosting spending on war.
The result is a massive budget deficit, which will expand to gargantuan proportions in the coming year (perhaps $1 trillion) under the added weight of recession, bank bailouts, and short-term fiscal stimulus measures.
Obama will need to put forward a medium-term fiscal plan that restores government finances.
This will include ending the war in Iraq, raising taxes on the rich, and also gradually phasing in new consumption taxes.
The US currently collects the lowest ratio of taxes to national income among rich nations.
This will have to change. 
Fourth, the world’s poor regions need to be seen as investment opportunities, not as threats or places to ignore.
At a time when the major infrastructure companies of the US, Europe, and Japan will have serious excess capacity, the World Bank, the European Investment Bank, the US Export-Import Bank, the African Development Bank, and other public investment funds should be financing large-scale infrastructure spending in Africa, to build roads, power plants, ports, and telecommunications systems.
So long as the credits are long term and carry a modest interest rate (say, 25-year dollar loans at 5% per annum), the recipient countries could repay the loans out of the significant boost in incomes that would result over the course of a generation.
The benefits would be extraordinary, for both Africa and the rich countries, which would be putting their businesses and skilled workers back to work.
Such loans, of course, would require a major global initiative, at a time when even blue-chip companies cannot borrow overnight, much less for 25 years!
In typical business cycles, countries are usually left to manage the recovery largely on their own.
This time we will need global cooperation.
Recovery will require major shifts in trade imbalances, technologies, and public budgets.
These large-scale changes will have to be coordinated, at least informally if not tightly, among the major economies.
Each should understand the basic directions of change that will be required at the national level and globally, and all nations must share in the deployment of new sustainable technologies and in the co-financing of global responsibilities, such as increased investments in African infrastructure.
We have arrived at a moment in history when cooperative global political leadership is more important than ever.
Fortunately, the US has taken a huge step forward with Obama’s election.
Now to action.
A Tale of Two American Economies
NEW YORK – While the United States recently reported 3.5% GDP growth in the third quarter, suggesting that the most severe recession since the Great Depression is over, the American economy is actually much weaker than official data suggest.
But official measures of GDP may grossly overstate growth in the economy as they don't capture the fact that business sentiment among small firms is abysmal and their output is still falling sharply.
Third quarter GDP - properly corrected for these factors - may have been 2% rather than 3.5%.
Moreover, the total effect on labor income – the product of jobs times hours worked times average hourly wages – has been more severe than that implied by the job losses alone, because many firms are cutting their workers’ hours, placing them on furlough, or lowering their wages as a way to share the pain.
Many of the lost jobs – in construction, finance, and outsourced manufacturing and services – are gone forever, and recent studies suggest that a quarter of US jobs can be fully outsourced over time to other countries.
Thus, a growing proportion of the workforce – often below the radar screen of official statistics – is losing hope of finding gainful employment, while the unemployment rate (especially for poor, unskilled workers) will remain high for a much longer period of time than in previous recessions.
Consider also the credit markets.
Prime borrowers with good credit scores and investment-grade firms are not experiencing a credit crunch at this point, as the former have access to mortgages and consumer credit while the latter have access to bond and equity markets.
But non-prime borrowers – about one-third of US households – do not have much access to mortgages and credit cards.
They live from paycheck to paycheck – often a shrinking paycheck, owing to the decline in hourly wages and hours worked.
And the credit crunch for non-investment-grade firms and smaller firms, which rely mostly on access to bank loans rather than capital markets, is still severe.
Or consider bankruptcies and defaults by households and firms.
Larger firms – even those with large debt problems – can refinance their excessive liabilities in court or out of court; but an unprecedented number of small businesses are going bankrupt.
The same holds for households, with millions of weaker and poorer borrowers defaulting on mortgages, credit cards, auto loans, student loans, and other forms of consumer credit.
Consider also what is happening to private consumption and retail sales.
Recent monthly figures suggest a pick-up in retail sales.
But, because the official statistics capture mostly sales by larger retailers and exclude the fall in sales by hundreds of thousands of smaller stores and businesses that have failed, consumption looks better than it really is.
And, while higher-income and wealthier households have a buffer of savings to smooth consumption and avoid having to increase savings, most lower-income households must save more, as banks and other lenders cut back on home-equity loans and lower limits on credit cards.
As a result, the household savings rate has risen from zero to 4% of disposable income.
But it must rise further, to 8%, in order to reduce the high leverage of household sector.
To be sure, the US government is increasing its budget deficits to put a floor under demand.
But most state and local governments that have experienced a collapse in tax revenues must sharply retrench spending by firing policemen, teachers, and firefighters while also cutting welfare benefits and social services for the poor.
Many state and local governments in poorer regions of the country are at risk of bankruptcy unless the federal government undertakes a massive bailout of their finances.
Moreover, income and wealth inequality is rising again: poorer households are at greater risk of unemployment, falling wages, or reductions in hours worked, all leading to lower labor income, whereas on Wall Street outrageous bonuses have returned with a vengeance.
With the stock market rising while home prices are still falling, the wealthy are becoming richer, while the middle class and the poor – whose main wealth is a home rather than equities – are becoming poorer and being saddled with an unsustainable debt burden.
So, while the US may technically be close to the end of a severe recession, most of America is facing a near-depression.
Little wonder, then, that few Americans believe that what walks like a duck and quacks like a duck is actually the phoenix of recovery.
A Tale of Two Elections
LONDON – Individual elections do not always enhance democracy – a useful reminder that the ballot box is only one part, albeit a central one, in any free, plural society.
Of course, there are also magnificent examples of elections that strengthen both the stability and the institutions of a community.
We have just witnessed an example of the second kind in India, the world’s largest and greatest democracy, where 420 million voters there returned a Congress-led government with a solid majority.
It was in many respects a personal triumph for Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
His victory shows that it is possible to succeed in politics through decency, honesty, and high intelligence.
Sonia Gandhi and her family should also take credit for putting at the forefront of their campaign a vision of an inclusive society, which rejects divisions on the basis of caste, ethnicity, language, and religion.
The result should help India to continue – not without occasional turbulence – its journey toward becoming a high-growth economy that raises the standard and quality of life for the poor.
I wish we could look forward in Europe to a similarly healthy democratic experience next month when voters throughout the European Union elect new members of the European Parliament.
Since 1979, these MEPs have been elected direct rather than indirectly from national parliaments.
But turnout for these elections has been falling in several countries.
There is a danger that the number voting in June will be lower than ever before.
Moreover, in the current grim economic conditions across Europe, voters who do turn out are all too likely to take the opportunity to punish the major parties and vote for fringe and even extremist politicians.
There are particular circumstances that may encourage this electoral response.
First, everywhere there is a sense of disgust at the way the recent boom seemed to privatize gains while the subsequent bust socialized losses.
A few rich individuals appeared to gain and all taxpayers to lose.
This has spread a sense of unfairness.
Second, globalization has been the target for populist criticism.
It is usually defined to mean everything we dislike – from changes to our traditional way of life to loss of jobs.
It is a brave politician who points out how much liberalizing trade and opening up markets have increased our overall prosperity.
Third, in Britain at least, the entire political class has been discredited by a sleazy scandal about the expenses that many parliamentarians have paid themselves.
Analogies with pigs, snouts, and troughs fill the pages of British newspapers.
But there is another reason for the lack of interest in the EU elections.
The European Parliament has power, but it deals with issues that, while important to voters, do not top their list of concerns.
The EU’s member states retain power over the most sensitive political issues, including taxes, health, education, pensions, the labor market, and foreign policy.
So the questions that dominate national campaigns have little impact on European elections.
The European Parliament deals with the important areas where individual countries have pooled their sovereignty, like trade, the creation of a pan-European market, and the biggest environmental issues.
But these are not often the questions that trigger the most passionate interest.
In addition, the European Parliament’s detachment from national political debates means that it has less political legitimacy than is desirable.
Indeed, those who worry about the creation of a European superstate can rest easy.
There will be no such entity, because there is no European electorate; the electorate remains French, Belgian, Latvian, Greek, and so on.
They all vote at the same time, for the same institution. But what does an Italian know – or care, for that matter – about British politics?
Look at our television programs. We know far more about Europe’s football than we do about Europe’s politics.
“The beautiful game” brings people together more effectively and reliably than the European Parliament is able to do.
That is no criticism of those who work – often very hard – in the European Parliament.
We have created a political body that has power to hold European institutions to account but has no obvious European electorate to which it can itself be held accountable.
A parliament without a people inevitably increases the sense of frustration that many European voters feel about the process of making Europe-wide policy choices in their name.
If the Lisbon Treaty is ratified later this year, one of the changes should result in national parliaments becoming more involved in European decision-making.
But we need to look country-by-country at what else we can do to tie Europe’s own parliament into national politics.
Unless we do that better, fewer people will vote for MEPs, more of them will be elected simply on a protest vote and represent Europe’s murky extremes, and the whole practice and principle of European democracy will be discredited.
A Tale of Two Terminals
BEIJING – Ever since it opened recently, Terminal 5 of London’s Heathrow Airport has been plagued with failures.
On the other side of the globe, Terminal 3 in Beijing, which opened for full operations just one day before Terminal 5, has been operating almost without a glitch.
The media, unsurprisingly, have feasted upon the failures of T5 in London, while neglecting the successes of T3 in Beijing.
By all measures, Beijing’s T3 surpasses London’s T5.
Whereas T5 can handle only 12,000 bags an hour (when it handles them at all) and 30 million passengers per year, T3 can handle 20,000 bags an hour and 50 million passengers.
While T5 will mostly service British Airways, T3 will service Air China and two dozen other airlines. 
At one million square meters, T3 in Beijing is the largest terminal in the world, but was much less costly to build than T5 in London.
Using the most recent exchange rates, T3 cost only $3.86 billion compared with $8.6 billion for London’s T5.
Furthermore, T3 took less than four years to complete, whereas T5 took almost 20 years.
But to call T3 a success for socialism and T5 a failure of capitalism would be to miss a fundamental point.
After all, if China’s political system can still be called socialism, it is at best “socialism with Chinese characteristics,” which embodies an increasing amount of market-oriented economic activity and greater economic openness and transparency.
It would be similarly misleading to attribute T3’s success to China alone.
After all, T3 was designed by a Briton, and has incorporated the most recent architectural and operational trends, styles, and standards in the world.
T3 in Beijing is just one of many projects China has recently built to improve its transportation infrastructure.
In addition to having become the world’s industrial park, China now has more mobile phone subscribers than the combined populations of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, and the number of Internet users has just surpassed that in the US. 
All of this development raises a fundamental question: how should we make sense of the explosive productivity growth that has become China’s new hallmark?
Those who cling to old ideological stereotypes face an almost impossible task in reconciling China’s rapid growth with what they condemn as China’s failing system. 
The truth is that ever since the end of the 1970’s, China has become convinced that peace and stability are the most important preconditions for its development.
Thus, anything that may distract China from its focus on peace, stability, and development has been strongly resisted.
This may help explain why T3 in Beijing is such a success, and why Chinese are now more united than ever before in condemning attempts to hijack or sully the Olympics for ulterior motives.
I hope that when millions of overseas passengers pass through T3, including those who do so during the Beijing Olympics, they will pause and reflect upon the distance China has traveled over the past three decades in its reform and opening to the outside world.  Granted, China still has further to go, and many people may find fault with much in the country.
But they should not refuse to acknowledge that China’s mission to turn a nation of 1.3 billion poor people into a developed country through peace and free trade is one of the great, honorable, and most difficult sagas in human history.
Following the disturbances in Tibet and the troubles affecting the Olympic torch’s progress around the world, some voices abroad are showing a greater inclination to dismiss, vilify, humiliate, or even split China.
But it would be best for all to pause a moment, contemplate T3 in Beijing, consider what it represents, and reflect on what an accomplishment the quick completion of such an iconic structure is for an emerging country like China.
A Thai Spring?
BANGKOK – The thunderous results of Thailand’s general election on July 3 will seem familiar to anyone attuned to the political upheaval in the Middle East and North Africa.
Entrenched incumbent regimes everywhere are under severe stress from advances in information technology, shifts in demographics, rising expectations, and the obsolescence of Cold War exigencies.
In the absence of a willingness and ability to use violent repression, regime survival can be achieved only through concessions, accommodation, and periodic reinvention.
With 47 million voters and turnout at 75%, Thailand’s latest election results pose a decisive challenge to the country’s long-established regime.
The Pheu Thai party, led by Yingluck Shinawatra, the youngest sister of exiled fugitive former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, secured a resounding triumph, winning 265 seats in the 500-member assembly, while the ruling Democrat Party mustered just 159.
The return to power of Pheu Thai is extraordinary – and not only because Yingluck will be Thailand’s first female prime minister.
The establishment-aligned courts dissolved the party’s two previous governments, and banned scores of its leading politicians from office for five years.
Pheu Thai’s victory thus suggests that a previously marginalized electorate has been permanently awakened.
A similar majority of the Thai electorate voted for Thaksin’s parties and their pro-poor populist platforms in January 2001, February 2005, April 2006, and December 2007, defying a military coup, a coup-induced constitution, judicial interventions, and army coercion and repression.
The recent election marked a profound break from the past.
In the second half of the twentieth century, Thai elections seemed to alternate with military coups.
Voters were bought and sold like commodities. After elections, voters hardly ever saw or heard from their MPs, who typically went on to engage in corruption and graft in Bangkok – eventually losing legitimacy and paving the way for military coups.
A new constitution and elections invariably ensued. This vicious cycle of coups, constitutions, and elections defined Thai politics for decades.
That pattern reflected Cold War imperatives.
The pillars of the Thai state – nation, religion, and the king – struck a unifying, collective chord, and the resulting stability enabled economic development. While growth was so concentrated that popular resentment simmered, communism was kept at bay.
Challenges to the established order, with the military-monarchy-bureaucracy triumvirate as its anchor, were repeatedly put down.
Back then, Thai schoolchildren sang martial songs each morning, and Thais knew their place in the rigidly elitist pecking order, which was reinforced by socialization and indoctrination in classrooms and living rooms, where only state-controlled media could enter.
Thais were more like obedient subjects than informed citizens.
Dissenting views found little traction.
The rise of Thaksin’s Thai Rak Thai party in 2001 changed all that.
The party pursued a scientific approach to elections, relied on expensive polling by foreign experts, and offered a clear agenda and strong leadership. It was the first post-Cold War party to capture Thais’ collective imagination.
The voices of neglected swaths of the electorate, particularly in the rural north and northeast of the country, began to count.
Vote-buying became increasingly insufficient. A bond between party and voters – a bond based on policy – took root.
By 2001, the Cold War was long over. Political leaders who dissented from the status quo could no longer easily be jailed on communism-related charges.
The advent of the Internet had made it harder for the authorities to shape Thai minds, as media sources multiplied and the resulting diffusion of information undermined the effectiveness of state propaganda.
Moreover, new international norms had come to the fore: external powers that previously turned a blind eye to coups, military dictatorships, and repression now rallied around democracy and human rights.
Thailand’s demographics also changed.
The Cold War curriculum of induced unity and stability has no relevance for today’s schoolchildren; indeed, most university students nowadays were born after the Cold War ended.
These factors fostered a new political environment, and Thaksin, who was a telecommunications tycoon at the time, was well positioned to seize the opportunity.
He overhauled the bureaucracy, delivered on his promises to the poor, mapped out an industrial strategy, and re-designed an overstretched foreign policy agenda, among other innovative measures.
Of course, Thaksin’s rule had a dark underside: corruption, legislated conflicts of interest, cronyism, human rights violations, and abuse of power, among other evidence of misrule.
Such is Thaksin’s mixed legacy.
The opportunities, hopes, and dreams delivered to the downtrodden and the vision and plans for Thailand’s future were enmeshed with his own venality.
But, while Thaksin committed many infractions, his gravest “sin” was to have changed the way Thais think and behave.
Some see this change as usurpation; others view it as Thailand’s deliverance into the twenty-first century.
Thaksin’s adversaries in Thailand’s entrenched regime were unwilling to accede to his policy innovations and populism.
For them, doing so would be tantamount to admitting that most people in this hospitable, well-endowed kingdom had been kept poor by design all along.
For his part, Thaksin has sought to portray the recent election results as being all about him.
But he is best viewed as a self-serving, unwitting agent of political modernization.
It is these twenty-first-century dynamics and changes, underpinned by an increasingly assertive citizenry, with which the Thai establishment must come to terms if the country is to move forward.
A “Third Way” for Confronting Russia
PARIS – “Let’s engage Russia if we can, but contain it if we must.”
These two alternatives already defined Western strategy toward Russia in the mid-1990’s.
Since then, Russia may have changed dramatically, but not our questions about it.
What do you do when your big neighbor widens the gap that exists between its culture, which is European, and its political system, which is becoming increasingly “Asian,” at least in the bad old sense of “Oriental despotism”?
Should the best answer to the return of Russia’s imperial ambitions be a modern version of a Holy Alliance of stability designed to contain the world’s new maverick?
Or is a latter-day Yalta Conference, aimed at redrawing the political boundaries of Europe, necessary?
Could the answer be a bit of both?
If Russia is becoming what revolutionary France was under Napoleon, or reverting to Soviet form – shorn of a totalitarian ideology but with an appetite for conquest and re-conquest – what is needed is not the “league of democracies” advocated by some conservatives in America.
What is needed, instead, is a “stability league” that includes prominent actors like China, India, and other countries that are more interested in economic growth than in “rocking the boat” of the international system.
Such a strategy implies, first of all, a solid partnership with China, not because it is evolving in the direction of democracy, but because it is a status-quo power.
Such a strategy could lead to the opening of negotiations with Iran, and of course to a further closing of ranks within NATO.
The message to the Kremlin here would be crystal clear. “Do not fool yourself.
Nationalism and imperialism will lead you nowhere; you cannot expand geographically without serious costs to your economic growth and your personal enrichment.
Europe may be weak and divided, America may no longer be what it was, but with your falling population and the sad state of your economy beyond oil and gas, you simply are not equipped to be in the league of great global powers.
China is; you are not.”
But the containment argument fails, because the Kremlin can still make mischief around the world by acting with Syria or Venezuela in an irresponsible manner.
More importantly, rallying the world solely against Russia would mean taking Russia’s great power pretensions too seriously.
For example, many Asians believe that Russia is a problem for Europe, but no longer for the world.
At the Cold War’s end, Japan remained obsessed with Russia as the heir to the Soviet Union.
Today, the Japanese are so concerned with China that they have little time for fears about Russia.
The other alternative to a rebirth of “containment” would consist in accepting the Russian argument, or more precisely, Russian “emotions.”
It would mean saying, in effect, “We have unnecessarily humiliated you over the last ten years.
From NATO enlargement to the grant of independence to Kosovo, we have deliberately ignored your sensitivities and your interests.
Let’s sit down together like Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin at Yalta and redesign a twenty-first-century map of Europe.
What do you want back?
What do we keep?”
This approach might recognize Russia’s droit de regard on the future evolution of the Caucasus.
Indeed, while talking tough under the guidance of Nicolas Sarkozy’s France, which currently holds the EU presidency, Europe has de facto resigned itself to Georgia’s dismemberment.
Russian troops are to remain in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
The West is not about to declare war on Russia for the sake of a Georgia whose credibility has been greatly eroded by its president’s irresponsible behavior.
As for Ukraine, it may one day become part of the European Union, but its future is not in NATO.
Yet, between all-out containment, which is very unlikely and not necessarily desirable or realistic, and accommodation which borders on appeasement, which would be dangerous for Europe’s future, a third way, based on a few firm principles, must be found.
These principles are clear.
First, Ukraine’s territorial integrity is not negotiable.
This has been said many times, but repetition does not diminish its importance.
Russia without Ukraine is a manageable nation-state; Russia with Ukraine is an unmanageable empire.
Second, even if the West condemns Georgia’s irresponsibility and incorporates into its policy Russia’s sensitivities on the complex historical feelings related to its ex-imperial territories, the Kremlin’s shameless brutality is unacceptable.
After all, this is Europe more than six decades after World War II, and nearly 20 years after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The use of force to settle scores and impose one nation’s will upon another cannot be accepted passively.
In the short term, time may be on Russia’s side.
In the long run – economically, demographically, politically, strategically – time is on “our” side, if we stick to our values and our principles.
At Home in Guantánamo Bay
GUANTÁNAMO BAY – I write this from the United States Detention Center at Guantánamo Bay, where I have been held without charge for almost seven years.
My detention here is the result of being in the wrong place at the wrong time.
More than two years ago, I was notified that I was cleared for release.
I would have been happy about this news if I did not come from Uzbekistan, a country with one of the worst human rights records in the world.
It is not safe for me to go home.
My journey to Guantánamo began in December 1998, after I finished my mandatory service in the Uzbek army.
Uzbekistan, a former Soviet Republic, is a poor country without many employment opportunities.
After several months of job hunting, I joined my brother in a business venture buying and selling apples, honey, and other goods in neighboring Tajikistan.
I lived in a community of Uzbeks, and met my wife, Fatima, another Uzbek, while living there.
We had a child, and my mother came from Uzbekistan to join us.
Unfortunately, there were some in Tajikistan who didn’t like having a bunch of Uzbeks living in their country.
So, one day, in November 1999, the Tajik authorities rounded up 200-300 Uzbeks and said they were taking us back to Uzbekistan.
Instead, they dumped us in Afghanistan.
There, we met a group of Afghan Uzbeks who helped us to settle in Mazar-i-Sharif.
I began working as a traveling salesman, selling goat’s milk, hens, roosters, and sheep.
In the fall of 2001, when fighting broke out between the Taliban and the Northern Alliance, I could not travel and was stranded at a roadside teahouse for several weeks.
One day, Northern Alliance soldiers came to the teahouse and offered to give me a ride to Mazar-i-Sharif. Instead, they drove me to Bagram Air Base and handed me over to the Americans stationed there.
I found out later that the Americans were offering bounties of several thousand dollars for Taliban and “foreign fighters.”
At first, I was happy to be in American hands.
I held the US in high regard and figured that it would be only a matter of time before they realized that I was innocent and let me go.
But they didn’t.
They held me in Bagram, then Khandahar, and eventually Guantánamo Bay.
The Americans now realize that I ended up here by mistake and have told me that they want to let me go.
But where can I go?
Members of the Uzbek security service visited me here at Guantánamo and accused me of being a member of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan.
When I told them that I didn’t know anything about this group, they warned that once I was back in their custody, they would make me cooperate.
It is not hard to imagine what those ways are.
Torture, beating, and other mistreatment of Uzbek detainees are widespread.
Sometimes people who are taken into Uzbek custody are never heard from again.
I am not alone.
I am one of several dozen of the Guantánamo who cannot return to our native countries because we would likely be tortured and abused.
Our only hope of getting out of this prison is that another country decides to provide safe haven to men like us – men who did nothing wrong and never should have been detained here in the first place.
A Time to Build
Any good international investment banker knows that the end of April is a bad time to come peddling his services, for that is when the world’s finance ministers return home from the IMF meetings in Washington, chastened that risks to the global economy could spill over into their own backyards.
Ministers are too busy recovering from their trauma to think about paying fat fees for big new international bond issues.
Who wants to build up debt if there might be a financial crisis around the corner?
Better to keep socking away US Treasury bills, even if the return is far lower than on most other investments.
Or is it?
With today’s global economy in the middle of a sustained and increasingly balanced expansion, has the time come to start considering upside risks?
In particular, should governments, especially those that are endlessly building up dollar reserves, instead start thinking about how to build up their roads, bridges, ports, electric grids, and other infrastructure?
Has the time come to start laying the groundwork to sustain future growth, especially in poorer regions that have not yet shared in today’s prosperity?
Don’t get me wrong, I am not arguing for fiscal profligacy.
But the balance of risks has shifted over the past few years.
Yes, within the next three to five years, there will probably be another global recession.
And, yes, there will probably be another rash of financial crises – perhaps in Central Europe, which now looks like Asia did before its 1997 crisis.
Recent jitters about Iceland’s gaping trade deficit and Brazil’s new finance minister rippled around the world, reminding global investors that while many emerging markets are gradually moving towards investment-grade status, most are not there yet.
But the risks are two-sided, and sound economic policy is just as much about capitalizing on good times as avoiding bad ones.
Economic gurus at places like the World Bank have developed a ridiculously long list of steps that countries should take to raise their growth rates (the so-called “extended Washington Consensus”).
Like maintaining good health, it is not enough to concentrate on a single component.
But if there is one area where obvious opportunities exist, and where policy can really make a difference, it would have to be infrastructure investment.
India’s infrastructure problems are legendary, with airports and railroads that are comically inadequate.
However, aside from a few countries – including China, of course, but also Spain – low infrastructure spending is epidemic.
Even the United States has infrastructure that is hobbled by neglect, with collapsing bridges and a dangerously overburdened electrical grid.
Land-rich Brazil, too, is a case study in the consequences of under-investment.
Its infrastructure systems might be adequate to support the country’s tepid 3-4% growth rates, but they are hardly adequate to support the 6-7% rates that it ought to be enjoying amidst the current global boom.
Russia, despite Siberia’s massive oil and gas riches, isn’t even investing enough to support healthy growth in its energy industries, much less human development in the country’s impoverished areas (including hapless Siberia).
True, government infrastructure spending is often wasted.
My hometown of Boston recently managed to spend an astounding $15 billion dollars to move a few highways underground.
And that so-called “Big Dig” looks like a model of efficiency next to many of Japan’s infamous bridges to nowhere.
But there are ways to waste less.
Transparency in procurement works wonders.
So, too, does private sector involvement.
The Nobel laureate economist William Vickrey argued tirelessly in favor of privately financed toll roads.
Private oversight can often produce better and more efficient construction, and, in theory, toll roads help alleviate traffic congestion.
(Ironically, Vickery died while sitting in a traffic jam.)
Even China, which has added more than 50,000 kilometers of roads and dozens of airports over the past five years, makes use of private financing.
True, countries that have not cleaned up their fiscal act, such as India, must not recklessly plunge ahead with big government projects without counterbalancing reforms to ensure sustainability.
Fiscal prudence and stable inflation rates are cornerstones of today’s relatively healthy global economic environment.
But for countries that have scope to invest more, particularly those that are holding a surfeit of precious development dollars in idle US Treasury bills, the time may be ripe to reassess the balance of risks.
The IMF is absolutely right to remind ministers each April of downside risks.
Countries’ need for better infrastructure is no license to throw prudence out the window.
But when the world’s finance ministers recover from their April shock therapy, they also need to look at the opportunities.
A Time to Dare
NEW YORK – The upcoming G-20 meeting is a make-or-break event.
Unless it introduces practical measures to support the countries at the periphery of the global financial system, global markets will suffer another round of decline, just as they did after United States Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner’s failure in February to produce practical measures to recapitalize America’s banking system.
The current financial crisis is different from all the others we have experienced since World War II.
On previous occasions, whenever the financial system came to the brink of a breakdown, the authorities got their act together and pulled it back from the brink.
This time the system actually broke down in the aftermath of Lehman Brothers’ collapse last September, and it had to be put on artificial life support.
Among other measures, both Europe and the US have effectively guaranteed that no other important financial institution will be allowed to fail.
This step was necessary, but it produced unintended adverse consequences: many other countries, from Eastern Europe to Latin America, Africa, and Southeast Asia, could not offer similarly convincing guarantees.
Abetted by the determination of national financial authorities at the center of the world economy to protect their own institutions, capital fled from the periphery. Currencies fell, interest rates rose, and credit default swaps soared.
When the history of this crisis is written, it will be recorded that – in contrast to the Great Depression – protectionism first prevailed in finance rather than trade.
The International Financial Institutions (IFIs) are now faced with a novel task: to protect the periphery countries from a storm that emanated from the center.
They are used to dealing with governments; now they must learn to deal with the collapse of the private sector.
The US has recognized that only using the credit of the state to the fullest extent possible can reverse the collapse of credit in the private sector.
Germany, traumatized by the memory of hyperinflation in the 1920’s and the consequent rise of Hitler in the 1930’s, is reluctant to sow the seeds of future inflation by incurring too much debt.
This will be sufficient to enable the IMF to come to the aid of specific countries in trouble, but it will not provide a systemic solution without conditionality.
Such a solution is readily available in the form of Special Drawing Rights (SDR).
The mechanism exists and has already been used on a small scale.
SDRs are highly complicated and difficult to grasp, but they boil down to the international creation of money.
Countries that are in a position to create their own money do not need them, but the periphery countries do.
Rich countries should therefore lend their allocations to the countries in need.
This would not create a budget deficit for rich countries.
Recipient countries would have to pay the IMF a very low interest rate: the composite average treasury bill rate of all convertible currencies.
They would have free use of their own allocations, but the IFIs would supervise how the borrowed allocations are used to ensure that the borrowed funds are well spent. It is difficult to think of a scheme where the cost/benefit ratio is so favorable.
In addition to the one-time increase in the IMF’s resources, there ought to be substantial annual SDR issues, say, $250 billion, as long as the global recession lasts.
To make the scheme counter-cyclical, the SDR issues could be callable in tranches when the global economy overheats.