Recent developments in Iraq allegedly point to a fundamental clash between Sunnis and Shiites in the region and bear witness to malevolent Iranian interferences.
But is Iraq really symptomatic of a greater Shia scheme?
True, sectarian tensions between Sunnis and Shiites in Iraq have escalated since the fall of Saddam.
But contrary to common perception, Iraqi Shiites do not form a homogenous block that opposes the supposedly unified Sunnis.
Indeed, the contrary is true.
In the light of Iraqi nationalism that crosses sectarian boundaries, it is farfetched to consider the Iraqi Shia merely proxies of Iran.
Instead, what we are witnessing in Iraq today is not ever increasing friction between religious communities but escalating internal power struggles within the Sunni and Shiite communities.
Ongoing violence in Basra and the fighting between Sunni “Awakening Councils” and Al Qaida in Iraq demonstrate this.
In fact, the current escalation points to an increasing political struggle between the federalist position of Shia Prime Minister Nouri Al Maliki and the centralist position of Shiite cleric Moqtada al Sadr.
This struggle will ultimately define the political structure of Iraq.
Here is where Sunni-Shiite cooperation comes in.
Widely unnoticed, Iraqi Sunni and Shia centralists have managed in the last couple of months to form a united parliamentary platform that leaves sectarian tensions behind.
More than a hundred followers of Ayad Allawi, Al Sadr, and others have joined their ranks.
This supra-sectarian platform calls for a central government administration of Iraq’s natural resources and the postponement of the looming referendum to settle the status of the city of Kirkuk.
Change within the government is also noteworthy.
Sunni ministers who had been boycotting the government since last year have returned to their posts.
Thus, Iraq is seeing both escalating intra-sectarian violence and cautious steps towards inter-sectarian alliances.
And what about Iran?
Contrary to the blame games being played out in the US, Iran cannot be accused of an unrestrained aggressive stance toward Iraq.
Of course, no Iranian decision-maker is interested in a US-success in Iraq that might well put regime-change in Iran back on the agenda.
But the rationale behind Iran’s policy of economic, social and military engagement seems to be first and foremost, defensive.
Memories of Iraq’s eight year war of aggression against Iran in the 1980’s have not faded.
From Iran’s perspective, any future threat originating from Iraq needs to be averted by ensuring the participation in Iraq’s government of Shiites and Kurds. 
These complexities are lost on many observers when matched up against the convenient and catchy rhetoric of the “Shia Crescent.”
But they have not gone unnoticed among ordinary Arabs.
A recent poll by the University of Maryland indicates that a large majority of Arabs in the region consider Iranian President Mahmud Ahmadinejad one of the three most popular political leaders worldwide.
Only 11% identified Iran as the biggest threat to their security.
So if a Shia threat organized by Iran really does exist, why is it being ignored by those that it purportedly targets – the Sunni Arab majorities?
Rather than objectively describing the actual political situation in the Middle East, the notion of a fundamental Iranian threat is being used to continue unconditional Western support for increasingly unstable regimes.
Moreover, the overstatement of the threat posed by Iran is also being used as a convenient excuse for political inflexibility and stagnating reform processes throughout the region.  
But exaggerating the supposed Shia threat has a price.
Continuous talk of a “Sunni-Shia divide” might ultimately develop into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Alarmist rhetoric may, in the end, jeopardize rather than protect the status quo in the region.
The Naked Euro
LONDON – Dramatic challenges, and mediocre responses: that is the history of the European Union. All too rarely does the EU rise to the level of events, which is why Europe is fading economically and geopolitically.
The 1958 Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community, was Europe’s great leap forward. But the decision to create a common market without a common government was simply storing up trouble for the future.
Everything since – enlargement to 27 member states and the creation of the 16-member eurozone – has widened the gap between rhetoric and reality. Euroland has gone on promising far more than its history enables it to deliver.
The Greek financial crisis is the latest example of the gap between reality and rhetoric.
At root, it is a crisis of “enlargement,” in this case enlargement of the eurozone.
Unprecedented effort at fiscal discipline in the 1990’s – helped in Greece by creative accounting – enabled Portugal, Italy, Greece, and Spain (disobligingly known as the PIGS) to meet the entry criteria in 2002. But once in, the pressure was off.
Most of the Mediterranean countries continued on their spendthrift ways, confident that the markets would not call them to account.
Now Wolfgang Schauble, Germany’s Finance Minister, has said enough is enough.
True, Germany ultimately acquiesced in a deal that would provide, if needed, a combination of bilateral loans from eurozone members and IMF financing to prevent a Greek default.
But that deal is a stopgap measure, and affects only Greece.
Schauble advocates a longer-term solution: a European Monetary Fund (EMF) to provide emergency lending to countries at risk of default on their sovereign debt.
Emergency lending would come with a “prohibitive price tag,” “strict conditions,” and “mandatory penalties” in the event of non-compliance.
Translated into ordinary language, this means that the state finances of a country that was granted help from the EMF would be outsourced, for a time, to external commissioners, much as happened in the nineteenth century to Latin American states that wanted their debts re-financed.
Milton Friedman predicted the single currency would fall apart after a decade or two; this has now become more likely than not.
After all, Schauble knows that the conditions he proposes would be politically unacceptable, so he says that any country unable to meet them “should, as a last resort, exit the monetary union, while being able to remain a member of the EU.”
Germany might even exit itself, if it cannot bring its weaker partners to heel.
The Mediterranean crisis has exposed the eurozone’s long-standing flaw: the absence of a single government.
Because the euro-zone is not an “optimal currency area,” it needs tools to deal with so-called “asymmetric shocks” – shocks that affect some members more than others.
But it lacks those tools, especially a Treasury with powers to tax and borrow, and a central bank that can act as lender of last resort to its member banks.
Schauble’s proposal has both an economic and a geopolitical dimension.
Economically, it exposes the deep divide between those who believe that external imbalances are the fault of those who spend too little and those who believe that they are the fault of those who spend too much.
John Maynard Keynes wanted to force surplus countries to either spend or lend.
But the older doctrine that it was a deficit country’s duty to “put its house in order” survived.
The one concession to Keynes was the creation of the International Monetary Fund in 1944 in order to provide short-term assistance to deficit countries under strict conditions.
This, in essence, is the German proposal today in the narrower context of the euro-zone.
Schauble’s view is an expression of Germany’s long-standing deflationary outlook.
Germany’s fiscally conservative establishment would like other EU countries with large budget deficits to return to economic health through fiscal discipline, reduced domestic demand, and high export growth.
The problem, German leaders believe, is not their country’s high saving rate, but other euro-zone members’ excessive spending.
Martin Wolf of The Financial Times disagrees.
He also points the finger at China.
Both countries have massive surpluses of savings over investment and huge trade surpluses.
Both parade their fiscal virtue and insist that deficit countries stop their irresponsible spending.
Wolf rightly calls this argument economically incoherent.
Piling up savings in one place imposes unemployment on the rest.
High savers should consume more, allowing the big spenders to export more and start living within their means without dooming them to hair-shirted stagnation.
Frugality is no virtue if no one is willing to spend.
But the main impact of Schauble’s bombshell is on the geopolitics of the EU.
Europe’s political elite view the Union as one of the poles in a multi-polar world.
But what is Europe?
Less than a federation, more than a confederation, it lacks any center of gravity, any fixed frontiers.
When an American, Chinese, or Russian leader wants to speak to Europe, whom does he call?
Without internal coherence or external shape, Europe is little more than a geographical expression.
The implication of Schauble’s proposition, therefore, is that Euroland should shrink to a governable dimension.
In essence, it recapitulates the contrast between the Greater Germany dreamed of by idealists in 1848 and the Smaller Germany created by Bismarck in 1871.
Like the little boy who was unafraid to declare the emperor naked, Schauble has pointed the finger of realism at the aspirational rhetoric in which all European leaders are still compelled to clothe their utterances.
He has broken with the taboo against calling into doubt any aspect of the European project.
For those who prefer solid construction to wishful thinking, his words are to be welcomed.
The Narrative Structure of Global Weakening
NEW HAVEN – Recent indications of a weakening global economy have led many people to wonder how pervasive poor economic performance will be in the coming years.
Are we facing a long global slump, or possibly even a depression?
A fundamental problem in forecasting nowadays is that the ultimate causes of the slowdown are really psychological and sociological, and relate to fluctuating confidence and changing “animal spirits,” about which George Akerlof and I have written.
We argue that such shifts reflect changing stories, epidemics of new narratives, and associated views of the world, which are difficult to quantify.
In fact, most professional economists do not seem overly glum about the global economy’s prospects.
For example, on September 6, the OECD issued an interim assessment on the near-term global outlook, written by Pier Carlo Padoan, that blandly reports “significant risks” on the horizon – the language of uncertainty itself.
The problem is that the statistical models that comprise economists’ toolkit are best applied in normal times, so economists naturally like to describe the situation as normal.
If the current slowdown is typical of other slowdowns in recent decades, then we can predict the same kind of recovery.
For example, in a paper presented last spring at the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC, James Stock of Harvard University and Mark Watson of Princeton University unveiled a new “dynamic factor model,” estimated using data from 1959 to 2011.
Having thus excluded the Great Depression, they claimed that the recent slowdown in the United States is basically no different from other recent slowdowns, except larger.
Their model reduces the sources of all recessions to just six shocks – “oil, monetary policy, productivity, uncertainty, liquidity/financial risk, and fiscal policy” – and explains most of the post-2007 downturn in terms of just two of these factors: “uncertainty” and “liquidity/financial risk.”
But, even if we accept that conclusion, we are left to wonder what caused large shocks to “uncertainty” and to “liquidity/financial risk” in recent years, and how reliably such shocks can be predicted.
When one considers the evidence about external economic shocks over the past year or two, what emerges are stories whose precise significance is unknowable.
We only know that most of us have heard them many times.
Foremost among those stories is the European financial crisis, which is talked about everywhere around the globe.
The OECD’s interim assessment called it “the most important risk for the global economy.”
That may seem unlikely: Why should the European crisis be so important elsewhere?
Part of the reason, of course, is the rise of global trade and financial markets.
But connections between countries do not occur solely through the direct impact of market prices.
Interacting public psychology is likely to play a role as well.
This brings us to the importance of stories – and very far from the kind of statistical analysis exemplified by Stock and Watson.
Psychologists have stressed that there is a narrative basis to human thinking: people remember – and are motivated by – stories, particularly human-interest stories about real people.
Popular stories tend to take on moral dimensions, leading people to imagine that bad outcomes reflect some kind of loss of moral resolve.
The European crisis began with a Greek meltdown story, and it appears that the entire global economy is threatened by events in a country of only 11 million people.
But the economic importance of stories bears no close relation to their monetary value (which can be measured only after the fact, if at all). It depends, instead, on their story value.
The Greek crisis story began in 2008 with reports of widespread protests and strikes when the government proposed raising the retirement age to address a pension funding shortfall.
Reports began to appear in global news media portraying an excessive sense of entitlement, with Greeks taking to the streets in protest, even though the increase was modest (for example, women with children or in hazardous jobs would be able to retire with full benefits at just 55, up from 50).
That story might have invited some gossip outside of Greece, but it gained little purchase on international attention until the end of 2009, when the market for Greek debt started to become increasingly unsettled, with rising interest rates causing further problems for the government.
This augmented news reports about Greek profligacy, and thus closed a negative feedback loop by attracting intensifying public interest, which eventually fueled crises in other European countries.
Like a YouTube video, the Greek story went viral.
One might object that most people outside of Europe surely were not following the European crisis closely, and the least informed have not even heard of it.
But opinion leaders, and friends and relatives of the least informed in each country, were following it, and their influence can create an atmosphere that makes everyone less willing to spend.
The Greek story seems connected in many people’s minds with the stories of the real-estate and stock-market bubbles that preceded the current crisis in 2007.
These asset bubbles were inflated by lax lending standards and an excessive willingness to borrow, which seemed similar to the Greek government’s willingness to take on debt to pay lavish pensions.
Thus, people saw the Greek crisis not just as a metaphor, but also as a morality tale.
The natural consequence was to support government austerity programs, which can only make the situation worse.
The European story is with us now, all over the world, so vivid that, even if the euro crisis appears to be resolved satisfactorily, it will not be forgotten until some new story diverts public attention.
Then as now, we will not be able to understand the world economic outlook fully without considering the story on people’s minds.
The Nation-State Reborn
CAMBRIDGE – One of our era’s foundational myths is that globalization has condemned the nation-state to irrelevance.
The revolution in transport and communications, we hear, has vaporized borders and shrunk the world.
New modes of governance, ranging from transnational networks of regulators to international civil-society organizations to multilateral institutions, are transcending and supplanting national lawmakers.
Domestic policymakers, it is said, are largely powerless in the face of global markets.
The global financial crisis has shattered this myth.
Who bailed out the banks, pumped in the liquidity, engaged in fiscal stimulus, and provided the safety nets for the unemployed to thwart an escalating catastrophe?
Who is re-writing the rules on financial-market supervision and regulation to prevent another occurrence?
Who gets the lion’s share of the blame for everything that goes wrong?
The answer is always the same: national governments.
The G-20, the International Monetary Fund, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have been largely sideshows.
Even in Europe, where regional institutions are comparatively strong, it is national interest and national policymakers, largely in the person of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who have dominated policymaking.
Had Merkel been less enamored of austerity for Europe’s debt-distressed countries, and had she managed to convince her domestic electorate of the need for a different approach, the eurozone crisis would have played out quite differently.
Yet even as the nation-state survives, its reputation lies in tatters. The intellectual assault on it takes two forms.
First, there is the critique by economists who view governments as an impediment to the freer flow of goods, capital, and people around the world. Prevent domestic policymakers from intervening with their regulations and barriers, they say, and global markets will take care of themselves, in the process creating a more integrated and efficient world economy.
But who will provide the market’s rules and regulations, if not nation-states?
Laissez-faire is a recipe for more financial crises and greater political backlash.
Moreover, it would require entrusting economic policy to international technocrats, insulated as they are from the push and pull of politics – a stance that severely circumscribes democracy and political accountability.
In short, laissez-faire and international technocracy does not provide a plausible alternative to the nation-state.
Indeed, the erosion of the nation-state ultimately does little good for global markets as long as we lack viable mechanisms of global governance.
Second, there are cosmopolitan ethicists who decry the artificiality of national borders.
As the philosopher Peter Singer has put it, the communications revolution has spawned a “global audience” that creates the basis for a “global ethics.”
If we identify ourselves with the nation, our morality remains national.
But, if we increasingly associate ourselves with the world at large, our loyalties will expand, too.
Similarly, the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen speaks of our “multiple identities” – ethnic, religious, national, local, professional, and political – many of which cross national boundaries.
It is unclear how much of this is wishful thinking and how much is based on real shifts in identities and attachments.
Survey evidence shows that attachment to the nation-state remains quite strong.
A few years ago, the World Values Survey questioned respondents in scores of countries about their attachments to their local communities, their nations, and to the world at large.
Not surprisingly, those who viewed themselves as national citizens greatly outnumbered those who regarded themselves as world citizens.
But, strikingly, national identity overshadowed even local identity in the United States, Europe, India, China, and most other regions.
The same surveys indicate that younger people, the highly educated, and those who identify themselves as upper class, are more likely to associate themselves with the world.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to identify any demographic segment in which attachment to the global community outweighs attachment to the country.
As large as the decline in transport and communications costs has been, it has not obliterated geography.
Economic, social, and political activity remains clustered on the basis of preferences, needs, and historical trajectories that vary around the globe.
Geographical distance is as strong a determinant of economic exchange as it was a half-century ago.
Even the Internet, it turns out, is not as borderless as it seems: one study found that Americans are much more likely to visit Web sites from countries that are physically close than from countries that are far away, even after controlling for language, income, and many other factors.
The trouble is that we are still in the grasp of the myth of the nation-state’s decline.
Political leaders plead impotence, intellectuals dream up implausible global-governance schemes, and the losers increasingly blame immigrants or imports.
Talk about re-empowering the nation-state and respectable people run for cover, as if one has proposed reviving the plague.
To be sure, the geography of attachments and identities is not fixed; indeed, it has changed over the course of history.
That means that we should not entirely dismiss the likelihood that a true global consciousness will develop in the future, along with transnational political communities.
But today’s challenges cannot be met by institutions that do not (yet) exist.
For now, people still must turn for solutions to their national governments, which remain the best hope for collective action.
The nation-state may be a relic bequeathed to us by the French Revolution, but it is all that we have.
The Nation State Revisited
It has become fashionable to claim that the nation state has lost its place.
Globalization, it is said, means that nations can no longer control their own affairs.
They must join with others, as in the European Union or ASEAN or Mercosur, and they must increasingly rely on global institutions like the United Nations, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization.
But such a view is risky.
Indeed, on closer inspection, it proves to be dubious, when not simply wrong.
The nation state, with both its strengths and weaknesses, is alive and well.
To begin with its strengths, the nation state remains the only political space in which the constitution of liberty thrives.
The democratic credentials of organizations like the EU are doubtful, and entirely absent in the case of the UN and other world institutions.
Moreover, despite the frequent search for new identities, European or Latin American or otherwise, and despite many references to a new cosmopolitanism, or even a “world civil society,” most people feel at home in their own country – the nation state of which they are citizens.
Migration is generally migration to other countries.
Many countries are currently debating the integration of migrants.
What does it take to be British or German or American?
Such debates about immigration make sense only if we recognize that citizenship is defined by and for nations.
This is, for most people, the positive side of the nation state.
The nation state has been, and continues to be, the relevant unit of belonging and civic involvement for most human beings for more than two centuries.
It is the context in which we find our liberties safeguarded or destroyed. Certainly, the countries freed from communism in 1989 felt that restoring national sovereignty and recovering liberty were bound together.
Yet there is, and always has been, another, uglier face of the nation state: nationalism.
The nationalist impulse can be aggressive or defensive, directed against others or inward-looking.
Either way, it vitiates all attempts to create an international community of open societies.
This was the problem in Iraq: a nation state had become a disturber of peace in the region and beyond.
More recently, a less violent but equally worrying phenomenon has gained ground, the revival of national protectionism.
The Doha Round of trade negotiations is stalled because developed countries do not want to open their markets to cheaper products from developing countries, which in turn try to protect what nascent industries they have.
Many would prefer privileged relationships to open trade.
In this regard, the EU has often obliged.
But now the nationalist bug has infected the EU itself.
France, Spain, and Poland have attempted to keep major industries firmly in “national hands.”
Suddenly, the single European market is forgotten, and a return to fragmented markets is taking root.
Consider, for example, the European Commission’s so-called “services directive.”
Although freedom of movement for labor is one of the single market’s “four freedoms,” many EU countries are trying to protect their domestic labor markets by suspending this freedom for as long as possible.
Germany, in particular, argues that the high unemployment resulting from reunification in 1990 requires it to close its labor market to the new member states to its east.
Such trends are dangerous.
Historically, protectionism has often led to economic conflict, which can rapidly turn into more serious clashes.
The signs are not good, even in Europe.
A recent summit of EU leaders addressed energy policy – one area where cooperation is not only highly desirable, but necessary.
Yet even German Chancellor Angela Merkel – clearly a pro-European – went to the meeting with the explicit intention of barring the creation of other European powers in this field.
The German-Russian agreement to build a gas pipeline bypassing Poland and Lithuania, with former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder leading the effort, has already harmed Polish-German relations, to say nothing of European cooperation.
For a time, the pendulum of political opinion may have swung too far against the nation state and its role. This is one reason why so many people have felt estranged from their political leaders.
But it would be unfortunate – indeed, dangerous – if the pendulum now swung back to old-fashioned nationalism.
Nation states are welcome; they are important elements of a liberal world order. But they have to be open to cooperation and coordination with others.
We must be vigilant in resisting the start of a trend reminiscent of developments in the early years of the twentieth century ­­– a trend that quickly led to global disaster.
Central Banks’ Outdated Independence
BUENOS AIRES – The global financial crisis has raised fundamental questions regarding central banks’ mandates.
Over the past few decades, most central banks have focused on price stability as their single and overriding objective.
This focus supported the ascendancy of “inflation-targeting” as the favored monetary policy framework and, in turn, led to operational independence for central banks.
The policy was a success: the discipline imposed by strict and rigorous concentration on a sole objective enabled policymakers to control – and then conquer – inflation.
But, as a consequence of this narrow approach, policymakers disregarded the formation of asset- and commodity-price bubbles, and overlooked the resulting banking-sector instability.
This, by itself, calls for a review of the overall efficacy of inflation-targeting.
Moreover, after the financial crisis erupted, central banks were increasingly compelled to depart from inflation targeting, and to implement myriad unconventional monetary policies in order to ameliorate the consequences of the crash and facilitate economic recovery.
With advanced economies struggling to avoid financial collapse, escape recession, reduce unemployment, and restore growth, central banks are being called upon to address, sometimes simultaneously, growing imbalances.
This has triggered a search for a radical redefinition of central banks’ objectives – and has cast doubt on the appropriateness of maintaining their independence.
In particular, central banks’ behavior during the crisis has called into question whether inflation-targeting is an effective framework in the presence of systemic shocks, and, more broadly, whether it can be sustained throughout economic cycles.
After all, a policy regime that sets aside its only goal during a crisis seems to lack the ability to cope with unexpected challenges.
Critics identify this “crisis straitjacket syndrome” as the main problem with single-minded inflation targeting.
While theoretical arguments can be made to justify recent departures from policy, the reality is that in the post-crisis world, advanced-country central banks’ goals are no longer limited to price stability.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has essentially adopted a quantitative employment target, with nominal GDP targets and other variations under discussion in other countries.
And financial stability is again a central-bank responsibility, including for the more conservative European Central Bank.
This shift toward multiple policy objectives inevitably reduces central-bank independence.
Some analysts have recently claimed that this is because the pursuit of GDP growth, job creation, and financial stability, as well as the establishment of priorities when there are tradeoffs, clearly requires political decisions, which should not be made by unelected officials alone.
Moreover, by pushing interest rates toward zero, the current policy of quantitative easing (increasing money supply by buying government securities) has strong, often regressive, income effects.
Opponents of central-bank independence contend that, given the allocational and distributional consequences of current monetary-policy interventions, central banks’ decision-making should be subject to political control.
But this argument neglects an important point.
While it is true that multiple policy targets tend to increase the political sensitivity of central banks’ decisions, concentrating only on price stability also has important distributional consequences and political implications.
But this argument becomes irrelevant when ensuring price stability is no longer monetary policymakers’ sole task.
The second argument for institutional independence is that central banks have a clear comparative advantage in dealing with monetary issues, and can therefore be trusted to pursue their targets independently.
But this advantage does not extend to other policy areas.
Given that central banks are likely to continue to pursue multiple objectives for a long time, their independence will continue to erode.
As long as governments do not encroach excessively on central-bank decision-making, this development will restore balance in policymaking and support policy coordination, particularly in times of stress.
To ensure a positive outcome, policymakers should develop a fully transparent framework with well-defined “rules of engagement.”
A strict framework for allowing, and at the same time limiting, government’s involvement in central-bank decision-making is particularly crucial in emerging markets, given that, in most of them, central-bank independence has contributed not only to the eradication of inflation, but also to institution-building.
Central-bank independence is a peculiar institutional innovation.
Seemingly irrefutable theoretical models underlie a paradigm that has changed in significant ways, and that, if preserved, is bound to cause serious political problems.
Like it or not, policymakers must accept that central-bank independence will continue to weaken, and they should prepare to cope with the consequences.
Currency War and Peace
WASHINGTON, DC – Much of the hype surrounding last month’s meeting in Moscow of G-20 finance ministers and central bankers was dedicated to so-called “currency wars,” which some developing-country officials have accused advanced countries of waging by pursuing unconventional monetary policies.
But another crucial issue – that of long-term investment financing – was largely neglected, even though the endgame for unconventional monetary policy will require the revitalization or creation of new long-term assets and liabilities in the global economy.
The collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008 drove up risk premia and triggered panic in financial markets, weakening assets in the United States and elsewhere, and threatening to provoke a credit crunch.
In order to avoid asset fire-sales – which would have led to the disorderly unraveling of private-sector balance sheets, possibly triggering a new “Great Depression” or even bringing down the eurozone – advanced countries’ central banks began to purchase risky assets and increase lending to financial institutions, thus expanding the money supply.
While fears of meltdown have dissipated, these policies have been maintained or extended, with policymakers citing the fragility of the ongoing economic recovery and the absence of other, equally strong policy levers – such as fiscal policy or structural reforms – that could replace monetary policy quickly enough.
But several years of ultra-loose monetary policy in the advanced countries has led to significant liquidity spillover abroad, putting excessive upward pressure on higher-yielding developing countries’ currencies.
With developing countries finding it difficult to deter massive capital inflows or mitigate the effects – owing to economic constraints, like high inflation, or to domestic politics – the “currency wars” metaphor, coined in 2010 by Brazil’s finance minister, Guido Mantega, has resonated widely.
Moreover, only a small portion of the liquidity created by unconventional monetary policy has been channeled toward households and the small and medium-size enterprises that generate most new jobs.
Instead, crisis-affected global financial entities have used it to support their efforts to deleverage and to rebuild their capital, while large corporations have been building large cash reserves and refinancing their debt under favorable conditions.
As a result, economic growth and job creation remain lackluster, with the availability of investment finance for long-term productive assets – essential to sustainable growth – severely limited.
Some believe that the elimination of macro-financial tail risks, the gradual strengthening of global economic recovery, and the increase in existing asset prices will eventually convince cash hoarders to increase their exposure to new ventures in advanced economies.
But such optimism may not be warranted.
In fact, at the recent G-20 meeting, the World Bank presented an Umbrella Report on Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and Development.
The report, based on analysis from various international organizations, highlights several areas of concern.
For starters, banks’ current retrenchment of long-term investment financing is likely to persist.
After all, many of the advanced-country banks, especially in Europe, that dominated such investment – for example, financing large-scale infrastructure projects – are undergoing deep deleveraging and rebuilding their capital buffers.
So far, other banks have been unable to fill the gap.
Furthermore, the effect of internationally agreed regulatory reforms – most of which have yet to be implemented – will be to increase banks’ capital requirements while shrinking the scale of maturity transformation risks that they can carry on their balance sheets.
The “new normal” that results will likely include scarcer, more expensive long-term bank lending.
The World Bank report also points out that, as a consequence of banking retrenchment, institutional investors with long-term liabilities – such as pension funds, insurers, and sovereign wealth funds – may be called upon to assume a greater role in funding long-term assets.
But, to facilitate this shift, appropriate financing vehicles must be developed; investment and risk-management expertise will have to be acquired; regulatory frameworks will have to be improved; and adequate data and investment benchmarks will be needed.
These investors must focus on the small and medium-size enterprises that banks often neglect.
Finally, local-currency bond markets – and, more generally, domestic capital markets – in emerging economies must be explored further, in order to lengthen the tenure of financial flows.
Local-currency government-debt markets have performed fairly well during the crisis, while local-currency corporate-debt markets have played a more modest role as a vehicle for longer-term finance.
This suggests that domestic reforms aimed at reducing issuance costs, improving disclosure requirements, enhancing creditors’ rights frameworks, and tackling other inhibiting factors could bring high returns.
Anxiety over unconventional monetary policies and “currency wars” must not continue to dominate global policy discussions, especially given last month’s pledge by G-20 leaders not to engage in competitive currency devaluations.
Instead, global leaders should work to maximize the liquidity that unconventional policy measures have generated, and to use it to support investment in long-term productive assets.
Such an approach is the only way to place the global economy’s recovery on a sustainable footing.
Inequality is Killing Capitalism
LONDON – It is generally agreed that the crisis of 2008-2009 was caused by excessive bank lending, and that the failure to recover adequately from it stems from banks’ refusal to lend, owing to their “broken” balance sheets.
A typical story, much favored by followers of Friedrich von Hayek and the Austrian School of economics, goes like this: In the run up to the crisis, banks lent more money to borrowers than savers would have been prepared to lend otherwise, thanks to excessively cheap money provided by central banks, particularly the United States Federal Reserve.
Commercial banks, flush with central banks’ money, advanced credit for many unsound investment projects, with the explosion of financial innovation (particularly of derivative instruments) fueling the lending frenzy.
This inverted pyramid of debt collapsed when the Fed finally put a halt to the spending spree by hiking up interest rates.
(The Fed raised its benchmark federal funds rate from 1% in 2004 to 5.25% in 2006 and held it there until August 2007).
As a result, house prices collapsed, leaving a trail of zombie banks (whose liabilities far exceeded their assets) and ruined borrowers.
The problem now appears to be one of re-starting bank lending.
Impaired banks that do not want to lend must somehow be “made whole.”
This has been the purpose of the vast bank bailouts in the US and Europe, followed by several rounds of “quantitative easing,” by which central banks print money and pump it into the banking system through a variety of unorthodox channels.
(Hayekians object to this, arguing that, because the crisis was caused by excessive credit, it cannot be overcome with more.)
At the same time, regulatory regimes have been toughened everywhere to prevent banks from jeopardizing the financial system again.
For example, in addition to its price-stability mandate, the Bank of England has been given the new task of maintaining “the stability of the financial system.”
This analysis, while seemingly plausible, depends on the belief that it is the supply of credit that is essential to economic health: too much money ruins it, while too little destroys it.
But one can take another view, which is that demand for credit, rather than supply, is the crucial economic driver.
After all, banks are bound to lend on adequate collateral; and, in the run-up to the crisis, rising house prices provided it.
The supply of credit, in other words, resulted from the demand for credit.
This puts the question of the origins of the crisis in a somewhat different light.
It was not so much predatory lenders as it was imprudent, or deluded, borrowers, who bear the blame.
So the question arises: Why did people want to borrow so much?
Why did the ratio of household debt to income soar to unprecedented heights in the pre-recession days?
Let us agree that people are greedy, and that they always want more than they can afford.
Why, then, did this “greed” manifest itself so manically?
To answer that, we must look at what was happening to the distribution of income.
The world was getting steadily richer, but the income distribution within countries was becoming steadily more unequal.
Median incomes have been stagnant or even falling for the last 30 years, even as per capita GDP has grown.
This means that the rich have been creaming off a giant share of productivity growth.
And what did the relatively poor do to “keep up with the Joneses” in this world of rising standards?
They did what the poor have always done: got into debt.
In an earlier era, they became indebted to the pawnbroker; now they are indebted to banks or credit-card companies.
And, because their poverty was only relative and house prices were racing ahead, creditors were happy to let them sink deeper and deeper into debt.
Of course, some worried about the collapse of the household savings rate, but few were overly concerned.
In one of his last articles, Milton Friedman wrote that savings nowadays took the form of houses.
To me, this view of things explains much better than the orthodox account why, for all the money-pumping by central banks, commercial banks have not started lending again, and the economic recovery has petered out.
Just as lenders did not force money on the public before the crisis, so now they cannot force heavily indebted households to borrow, or businesses to seek loans to expand production when markets are flat or shrinking.
In short, recovery cannot be left to the Fed, the European Central Bank, or the Bank of England.
It requires the active involvement of fiscal policymakers.
Our current situation requires not a lender of last resort, but a spender of last resort, and that can only be governments.
If governments, with their already-high level of indebtedness, believe that they cannot borrow any more from the public, they should borrow from their central banks and spend the extra money themselves on public works and infrastructure projects.
This is the only way to get the big economies of the West moving again.
But, beyond this, we cannot carry on with a system that allows so much of the national income and wealth to pile up in so few hands.
Concerted redistribution of wealth and income has frequently been essential to the long-term survival of capitalism.
We are about to learn that lesson again.
Nuclear Disarmament’s Asian Pivot
WASHINGTON, DC – In 2009, US President Barack Obama pledged to seek a world without nuclear weapons.
But, while he delivered on his promise to negotiate a New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with Russia a year later, progress has since stalled.
To break the deadlock, the current bilateral framework for negotiation, which has remained largely unchanged since the Cold War, must be transformed into a trilateral framework that includes China.
To be sure, such a move would significantly complicate negotiations.
After all, while decades of bilateral dialogue have given the United States and Russia a good sense of each other’s strategic perspectives – including the issues on which they disagree – China’s perception of strategic stability is unfamiliar.
But trilateral dialogues, catalyzed by skillful US diplomacy, could also serve as an opportunity to manage the countries’ strategic relations, which currently are characterized by contradictions and mistrust.
Russia seeks China’s support in opposing American missile-defense systems, and calls for the involvement of all nuclear states in future strategic arms-control talks, but then cites concerns about China’s military modernization to justify its refusal to negotiate with NATO on tactical nuclear-weapon reduction.
China, which has never adopted legally binding limits on its nuclear weapons or strategic nuclear-delivery vehicles, rejects Russia’s call to join negotiations – a stance that the US supports until the Russian and US nuclear arsenals move closer in size to those of China.
At the same time, US officials deny that their country’s missile-defense programs are directed against Russia or China, but refuse to offer a legally binding guarantee.
And the US Department of Defense is developing a robust program of long-range conventional strike weapons, which China and Russia cite to justify their efforts to strengthen their offensive nuclear forces.
Although multilateral cooperation on nuclear issues has been effective in some cases, such as in ratifying the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, it has been inadequate in others, such as in easing tensions with Iran and North Korea.
In fact, even when China, Russia, and the US share the same agenda, their differing diplomatic tactics often undermine their ability to achieve their objectives.
For example, the three countries’ policies are inadvertently contributing to proliferation pressures in Asia and Europe.
US pledges to defend Japan against a nuclear attack from China or North Korea have played a decisive role in dissuading the Japanese from seeking their own nuclear weapons.
Given this, a Chinese nuclear surge – even one that did not lead to US-China parity – could undermine the credibility of American deterrence commitments, possibly motivating Japan to launch its own nuclear program.
Similarly, some of NATO’s newer members, many of which are former Soviet-bloc states, are anxious about the prospect of Russian rearmament.
As a result, they oppose efforts to reduce the number of American nuclear weapons in Europe, part of NATO’s “nuclear sharing” policy.
Perhaps the biggest obstacle to initiating a trilateral dialogue is Chinese resistance to formal nuclear arms-control agreements, which is rooted in the memory of Cold War-era nonproliferation initiatives aimed partly at preventing China from developing its own nuclear deterrent.
Since then, Chinese officials have insisted that they do not belong in US-Russian strategic-arms talks, because the two countries’ nuclear arsenals dwarf theirs.
But, as the US and Russia reduce their nuclear stockpiles, this excuse is becoming less valid, and China’s exclusion from negotiations is becoming an increasingly significant hindrance to disarmament.
Securing a binding commitment from China’s government to limit its nuclear development is crucial to reassuring the US and Russia that further strategic-weapons cuts will not undermine global or regional stability.
Several recent developments could help to minimize obstacles to trilateral cooperation.
China’s new leadership is further removed from Maoist-era reflexive opposition to nuclear negotiations; Russian leaders’ confidence in their economic and military resurgence is waning; and both countries are increasingly frustrated by the lack of progress in nuclear talks with North Korea and Iran.
Meanwhile, faced with a large federal budget deficit, many American voters would welcome reduced spending on nuclear weapons.
The US should capitalize on this situation, leveraging Russian concerns and interests to induce China to join strategic arms-control efforts.
China might be willing to make a unilateral, but enforceable, commitment not to augment its nuclear arsenal, if Russia and the US reduce theirs further.
Determining the circumstances that might induce such restraint – and the conditions that would be needed to sustain it – is crucial to reinvigorating nuclear disarmament efforts.
With Russia ostensibly on board, it is up to the US to initiate a transformation in the nuclear-negotiation framework – and that means convincing China to participate.
The Nemesis of Turkish Power
PARIS – A few days ago, Turkey’s Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan told Al Jazeera, the pan-Arab television network, that he would use his warships to prevent Israeli commandos from again boarding Gaza-bound ships, as they did last year.
And in a speech in Cairo, he declared support for the United Nations’ recognition of a Palestinian state “an obligation.”
So, will a “Turkish Summer” be the first, if not the main, strategic result of the “Arab Spring”?
Is the Middle East faced with a neo-Ottoman Turkey’s irresistible rise to regional power?
And could the world be witnessing the “Orientalization” of Turkey?
The Arab revolutions, following on the European Union’s resounding “No, Yes, But” to Turkey’s membership bid, have reinforced among Turks the attraction of the Orient while liberating their mix of nationalistic and religious impulses.
Indeed, Erdoğan makes more references to God in his public statements nowadays than he ever did in the past.
Over the last few years, the Western world has been asking itself, with a mixture of guilt and apprehension, “Who lost Turkey”?
But is Turkey, enthralled by its economic and diplomatic successes, now running the risk of losing itself?
Turkey’s government was no better at anticipating the changes in the Arab world than were local regimes and Western powers.
At the end of 2010, Erdoğan was the (last) recipient of a human-rights prize granted by Libya’s Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Turkey has also tried, desperately at times, to maintain good relations with Bashar al-Assad’s regime in Syria, despite the Syrian government’s abominable behavior.
Turkey’s position was, to say the least, perceived badly by the “Arab street.”
A major reason for Turkey’s tougher position towards Israel, one suspects, is Erdoğan’s attempt to rebalance the country’s regional image.
Despite its difficulty in grasping the reality and depth of the Arab revolutionary process, Turkey is nonetheless more than ever a key player in the region.
It may not be a model in the strict sense of the term, but it is at least a source of inspiration throughout the region, even though much of its record is ambiguous in both essence and performance.
In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe, the “exoticism” of the Ottoman Empire was used as a mirror to project Europeans’ own shortcomings and insecurities.
In France, one spoke of “Turqueries,” such as in Moliere’s play “The Bourgeois Gentilhomme.”
Today, it is the Arab world that tends to use Turkey the way that Europe did in the past.
This time, however, it is modernity, not exoticism, that is the source of fascination.
But, because of its secular tradition (now being challenged by the current regime), its non-Arab identity, its behavior towards its Kurdish minority, and the ambivalence of the Ottoman legacy, Turkey is as much a counter-model as a model.
It is a mirror in which the Arab world projects its fears, as well as its hopes.
At a strategic level, Turkey is correct in thinking that the Arab revolutionary process has weakened its direct rivals.
Iran, for example, is on the verge of losing the faithful junior partner that it had in Syria.
But what will happen if Turkey has to live next to a nuclear-armed Iran?
Will it have to get the bomb, too?
Likewise, while Egypt is in the midst of a messy revolution, and must give priority to internal change, it also intends to regain a more visible and influential role within the Palestinian national movement(s) and in the region as a whole.
The “Middle Empire” of the Middle East will no longer remain a sleeping giant.
Of course, Turkey is less destabilized than its Arab rivals and partners by a revolutionary process that does not directly challenge it.
After all, Turkey is already a functioning democracy.
Turkey is also much less worried about its future than Israel is.
Compared with the small Jewish state, Turkey has an expanding population and a deep awareness of its historical, religious, and cultural affinities with its neighbors.
These important assets make Turkey an “indispensable nation” in the region.
So, what threatens Turkey today is Turkey itself.
Turkey is not “Asian” only in terms of economic energy and rapid growth: it is also Asian in a more political sense, with the rising temptation of a form of “Oriental despotism.”
Indeed, for many years, domestic critics of Erdoğan’s government have been denouncing what they describe as the “Putinization” of the regime.
Turkey, not the European Union, is currently making its presence felt in the world.
But the course of history may change rapidly.
In reality, Turkey needs Europe as much as Europe needs Turkey.
Europe is for Turkey “a principle of moderation” and an enticement to remain democratic.
Turkey is for Europe, beyond its demography, “a principle of energy” and a cure for pessimism – even if, as Erdoğan is showing, self-confidence can easily turn into hubris.
The Neuroeconomics Revolution
NEW HAVEN – Economics is at the start of a revolution that is traceable to an unexpected source: medical schools and their research facilities.
Neuroscience – the science of how the brain, that physical organ inside one’s head, really works – is beginning to change the way we think about how people make decisions.
These findings will inevitably change the way we think about how economies function.
In short, we are at the dawn of “neuroeconomics.”
Efforts to link neuroscience to economics have occurred mostly in just the last few years, and the growth of neuroeconomics is still in its early stages.
But its nascence follows a pattern: revolutions in science tend to come from completely unexpected places.
A field of science can turn barren if no fundamentally new approaches to research are on the horizon.
Scholars can become so trapped in their methods – in the language and assumptions of the accepted approach to their discipline – that their research becomes repetitive or trivial.
Then something exciting comes along from someone who was never involved with these methods – some new idea that attracts young scholars and a few iconoclastic old scholars, who are willing to learn a different science and its different research methods.
At a certain moment in this process, a scientific revolution is born.
The neuroeconomic revolution has passed some key milestones quite recently, notably the publication last year of neuroscientist Paul Glimcher’s book Foundations of Neuroeconomic Analysis –&#160;a pointed variation on the title of Paul Samuelson’s 1947 classic work, Foundations of Economic Analysis, which helped to launch an earlier revolution in economic theory.
And Glimcher himself now holds an appointment at New York University’s economics department (he also works at NYU’s Center for Neural Science).
To most economists, however, Glimcher might as well have come from outer space.
After all, his doctorate is from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine’s neuroscience department.
Moreover, neuroeconomists like him conduct research that is well beyond their conventional colleagues’ intellectual comfort zone, for they seek to advance some of the core concepts of economics by linking them to specific brain structures.
Much of modern economic and financial theory is based on the assumption that people are rational, and thus that they systematically maximize their own happiness, or as economists call it, their “utility.”
When Samuelson took on the subject in his 1947 book, he did not look into the brain, but relied instead on “revealed preference.”
People’s objectives are revealed only by observing their economic activities.
Under Samuelson’s guidance, generations of economists have based their research not on any physical structure underlying thought and behavior, but only on the assumption of rationality.
While Glimcher and his colleagues have uncovered tantalizing evidence, they have yet to find most of the fundamental brain structures.
Maybe that is because such structures simply do not exist, and the whole utility-maximization theory is wrong, or at least in need of fundamental revision.
If so, that finding alone would shake economics to its foundations.
Another direction that excites neuroscientists is how the brain deals with ambiguous situations, when probabilities are not known, and when other highly relevant information is not available.
It has already been discovered that the brain regions used to deal with problems when probabilities are clear are different from those used when probabilities are unknown.
This research might help us to understand how people handle uncertainty and risk in, say, financial markets at a time of crisis.
John Maynard Keynes thought that most economic decision-making occurs in ambiguous situations in which probabilities are not known.
He concluded that much of our business cycle is driven by fluctuations in “animal spirits,” something in the mind – and not understood by economists.
Of course, the problem with economics is that there are often as many interpretations of any crisis as there are economists.
An economy is a remarkably complex structure, and fathoming it depends on understanding its laws, regulations, business practices and customs, and balance sheets, among many other details.
Yet it is likely that one day we will know much more about how economies work – or fail to work – by understanding better the physical structures that underlie brain functioning.
Those structures – networks of neurons that communicate with each other via axons and dendrites – underlie the familiar analogy of the brain to a computer – networks of transistors that communicate with each other via electric wires.
The economy is the next analogy: a network of people who communicate with each other via electronic and other connections.
The brain, the computer, and the economy: all three are devices whose purpose is to solve fundamental information problems in coordinating the activities of individual units – the neurons, the transistors, or individual people.
As we improve our understanding of the problems that any one of these devices solves –&#160;and how it overcomes obstacles in doing so – we learn something valuable about all three.
Bubbles Forever
But, once again, people there told me about an ongoing real-estate bubble, and my driver showed me around the seaside resort town of Cartagena, pointing out, with a tone of amazement, several homes that had recently sold for millions of dollars.
The Banco de la República, Colombia’s central bank, maintains a home price index for three main cities – Bogotá, Medellín, and Cali.
The index has risen 69% in real (inflation-adjusted) terms since 2004, with most of the increase coming after 2007.
That rate of price growth recalls the US experience, with the S&P/Case-Shiller Ten-City Home Price Index for the US rising 131% in real terms from its bottom in 1997 to its peak in 2006.
This raises the question: just what is a speculative bubble?
The Oxford English Dictionary defines a bubble as “anything fragile, unsubstantial, empty, or worthless; a deceptive show.
From 17th c. onwards often applied to delusive commercial or financial schemes.”
The problem is that words like “show” and “scheme” suggest a deliberate creation, rather than a widespread social phenomenon that is not directed by any impresario.
Maybe the word bubble is used too carelessly.
Eugene Fama certainly thinks so.
Fama, the most important proponent of the “efficient markets hypothesis,” denies that bubbles exist.
As he put it in a 2010 interview with John Cassidy for The New Yorker, “I don’t even know what a bubble means.
These words have become popular.
I don’t think they have any meaning.”
In the second edition of my book Irrational Exuberance, I tried to give a better definition of a bubble.
A “speculative bubble,” I wrote then, is “a situation in which news of price increases spurs investor enthusiasm, which spreads by psychological contagion from person to person, in the process amplifying stories that might justify the price increase.”
This attracts “a larger and larger class of investors, who, despite doubts about the real value of the investment, are drawn to it partly through envy of others’ successes and partly through a gambler’s excitement.”
That seems to be the core of the meaning of the word as it is most consistently used.
Implicit in this definition is a suggestion about why it is so difficult for “smart money” to profit by betting against bubbles: the psychological contagion promotes a mindset that justifies the price increases, so that participation in the bubble might be called almost rational.
But it is not rational.
The story in every country is different, reflecting its own news, which does not always jibe with news in other countries.
For example, the current story in Colombia appears to be that the country’s government, now under the well-regarded management of President Juan Manuel Santos, has brought down inflation and interest rates to developed-country levels, while all but eliminating the threat posed by the FARC rebels, thereby injecting new vitality into the Colombian economy.
That is a good enough story to drive a housing bubble.
Because bubbles are essentially social-psychological phenomena, they are, by their very nature, difficult to control.
Regulatory action since the financial crisis might diminish bubbles in the future.
But public fear of bubbles may also enhance psychological contagion, fueling even more self-fulfilling prophecies.
One problem with the word bubble is that it creates a mental picture of an expanding soap bubble, which is destined to pop suddenly and irrevocably.
But speculative bubbles are not so easily ended; indeed, they may deflate somewhat, as the story changes, and then reflate.
It would seem more accurate to refer to these episodes as speculative epidemics.
We know from influenza that a new epidemic can suddenly appear just as an older one is fading, if a new form of the virus appears, or if some environmental factor increases the contagion rate.
Similarly, a new speculative bubble can appear anywhere if a new story about the economy appears, and if it has enough narrative strength to spark a new contagion of investor thinking.
This is what happened in the bull market of the 1920’s in the US, with the peak in 1929.
We have distorted that history by thinking of bubbles as a period of dramatic price growth, followed by a sudden turning point and a major and definitive crash.
In fact, a major boom in real stock prices in the US after “Black Tuesday” brought them halfway back to 1929 levels by 1930.
This was followed by a second crash, another boom from 1932 to 1937, and a third crash.
Speculative bubbles do not end like a short story, novel, or play.
There is no final denouement that brings all the strands of a narrative into an impressive final conclusion.
In the real world, we never know when the story is over.
The New Age Divide
LONDON – So what does 2009 hold in store for us?
As ever, the unpredictable – a terrorist atrocity or a rash decision by a national leader – will take its toll.
But much of what happens tomorrow will be a result of history.
In the last century, the world’s population increased four-fold, and the number of people living in cities thirteen-fold.
The world’s output grew by a factor of forty, water use by nine, energy use by thirteen, and the emission of carbon dioxide by seventeen.
The twenty-first century has to live with the consequences of all that, good and bad.
Some of the factors that will shape our lives appear to tug in different directions.
The age profiles of our societies are changing dramatically.
Asia and Europe have experienced sharp falls in fertility rates.
The figures in Hong Kong, Singapore, and South Korea are even more remarkable than those in Catholic European countries like Spain, Italy, and Poland.
At the same time, people are living longer, so that in a generation the number of elderly dependents in some countries will outgrow that of the young.
We have been accustomed to societies with a demographic structure that resembles a pyramid – a broad youth base tapering to an elderly tip.
But now the structure is more like the profile of a skyscraper, more or less the same from top to bottom.
Our older populations have to cope with ever younger technology.
This expands educational and employment opportunities.
Many students today are being prepared for jobs that do not yet exist.
Moreover, some sorts of knowledge can rapidly become redundant.
Indeed, half of what a student learns in the first year of a four-year technical course will be out of date by the third year. Change itself accelerates.
Its results are magnified. Its benefits and its disadvantages penetrate more deeply.
Every month there are 31 billion searches on Google.
It took radio 38 years to reach an audience of 50 million. Facebook did that in two years.
We usually reckon that it is easier for young, unformed minds to handle changes like these.
How does someone like me, at university in the early 1960’s, adapt and cope?
How will older societies manage new technology and remain dynamic?
The biggest challenge for all of us, young and old, next year and for the indefinite future, will result from a different sort of change that is unlikely to respond simply to technological determinism.
It results from the way we have been living for two centuries.
If older leaders do not produce the right answers soon, younger generations will reap the whirlwind – sometimes literally.
2009 is supposed to see the conclusion of an agreement on global warming and climate change to succeed and build on the Kyoto Protocol.
Copenhagen is the venue for the meeting.
Optimists cheer the departure of the Bush administration and assume that the arrival of the Obama presidency, which unlike its predecessor is not in denial about the science of global warming, will unlock the prospect of a deal.
Pessimists note that our mounting economic woes around the world are being used as an excuse for inaction on cuts in carbon emissions.
But continuing to use energy inefficiently will not mitigate the painful effects of the global economic crisis.
If we make today’s problems the excuse for failure to save the environment, we will simply pile up much bigger – and potentially catastrophic – problems tomorrow.
China, the biggest of the emerging economies, clearly understands this.
Whether India does as well seems to me rather more doubtful.
China faces its own environmental dangers, for example, water stress.
It does not want to see its industries outdated and uncompetitive.
China will work for a global consensus on climate change.
The big question is whether it will be able to impose tougher environmental standards throughout the whole country.
For America, the problem is also mainly one of domestic politics.
There will be no worthwhile American offer on the environment until there is a deal in Congress.
This year’s task may be to reach a global understanding in Copenhagen that is not too prescriptive, but which is more than aspirational and into which an American domestic political agreement can be incorporated once Obama achieves it.
But all of this sensitive diplomacy could be wrecked if, in response to rising unemployment, there is an outbreak of trade protectionism involving America, Europe, and China.
That is when the economic and environmental agendas could fatally collide.
So young and old alike should hold onto their hats in the exciting but dangerous years ahead.