If this spending is directed toward low-carbon goods, technologies, and services, we will be on our way to creating more resilient societies.
More and more industries appreciate this.
At the Climate Summit that I convened last September at the UN in New York, financial institutions, commercial and national banks, insurance companies, and pension funds vowed to mobilize more than $200 billion by the end of this year for action to address climate change.
They envisioned a host of new initiatives, including issuing so-called green bonds and shifting assets to clean-energy portfolios.
In a particularly important move, the insurance industry, representing $30 trillion in assets and investments, committed to creating a Climate Risk Investment Framework for industry-wide adoption by the end of the year.
It is time to stop addressing development and humanitarian emergencies separately.
Disaster-risk reduction lies at the nexus of development assistance, which seeks to advance better living conditions, and humanitarian aid, which begins after a disaster hits.
Starting our international calendar with the Sendai meeting on disaster-risk reduction sends a clear signal that the world is ready to integrate its strategies.
I have seen the human toll of disasters – from earthquakes in China and Haiti to floods in Pakistan and Bangladesh to Superstorm Sandy, which affected the Caribbean and North America, even inundating the lower floors of the UN facilities in New York.
When business, civil society, and government team up to help countries withstand disasters, they save lives, boost stability, and create opportunities that enable markets and people alike to flourish.
Sustainable profits.
Sustainable livelihoods.
Sustainable development.
It all starts in Sendai.
Global Economic Cooperation or Bust
According to estimates by the United Nations, the global economy expanded by 3.8% last year, continuing the strong performance recorded since 2003.
Led by China and India, developing countries were prominent among the best performing economies, expanding by 6.5% on average in 2006.
But can this apparently benign pattern of global growth be sustained, particularly since growth has been accompanied by ever-widening global financial imbalances?
Average annual growth in the least developed countries, many in Africa, reached almost 7% last year.
The world’s largest economy, the United States, expanded by 3.2 %, and growth also recovered in previously sluggish Japan and Europe.
These trends are remarkable in light of the shocks from the surge in oil prices, the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, international terrorism, and the breakdown of multilateral trade negotiations.
Strong economic performance reflects strong domestic demand in the US, owing to low borrowing costs and rising asset prices.
This lifted manufactured exports around the world and kept inflation down, which in turn boosted demand for energy and raw materials from the developing world, pushing up commodity prices and benefiting many poor countries.
The savings generated in East Asia and the major oil exporters have increased global liquidity, helping to finance the US current account deficit, which has now reached unprecedented levels.
But the outlook for 2007 is for weakening global economic growth.
The UN’s World Economic Situation and Prospects 2007 cautions that a weaker housing market will undermine US growth.
Consequently, global economic expansion will slow, as no other major country is set to take over as the main engine of growth.
With slowing world economic growth, US financing needs could cause a drop in investors’ confidence in the future of US-based assets, precipitating a sharp dollar depreciation.
The UN report observes that national economic policies and existing multilateral settings are not designed to mitigate effectively the risk of a global slowdown or to address global imbalances.
In Europe and Japan, for example, monetary and fiscal policies have been tightening in response to domestic concerns, further slowing the world economy.
The build-up of official reserves in East Asia and other developing countries will provide them with extra means to deal with possible external shocks.
However, it has also limited the expansion of domestic demand and import growth, exacerbating rather than redressing the global imbalances.
Of course, no single government can bear all the costs of the policies needed to correct today’s global imbalances.
But an internationally agreed set of policies could help reduce the risk of weaker growth in the major economies, maintain confidence in the stability of international financial markets, and avoid a hard landing for the dollar.
This would require, for instance, stimulating growth in Europe, Asia, and the major oil exporters in order to offset the contractionary effect on the world economy of adjustment in the US, which should include more restrictive fiscal policies, less private consumption, and higher domestic savings to reduce its external deficit.
Exchange rates should be realigned in a coordinated fashion to stimulate exports from deficit countries and import demand from surplus countries.
This is not just a matter of revaluing the Chinese currency, as argued by some US policymakers, but requires gradual adjustment of most major currencies against the dollar in conjunction with concerted fiscal and monetary policy adjustments in the rest of the world.
Existing platforms, such as the G-8 summits, are unsuitable to achieve this course of action, mainly because key players from the developing world are not included.
The multilateral surveillance mechanisms launched last year by the IMF are a step in the right direction, but only if they become part of an institutionalized multilateral mechanism of surveillance and policy coordination.
To be credible as a mediator of this mechanism, the IMF itself would need reform, including a substantial change of voting power to bring the influence of developing countries in line with the weight they carry nowadays in the global economy.
Modest steps in that direction were taken during the IMF meetings in Singapore last September.
Such a new platform should also be used to work towards structural reform of the international monetary system aimed at reducing its excessive reliance on the US dollar as a reserve currency.
Such reforms should work towards developing a multilaterally agreed multi-currency reserve system or even, in the longer term, a world currency based on the Special Drawing Rights issued by the IMF.
The mere possibility of an imminent hard landing for the dollar – and with it, for the US and world economy – should be alarming enough to mobilize concerted action.
Coordination will surely deliver more satisfactory outcomes than what any one country can achieve on its own.
Try Everything
BERKELEY – When it became clear in late 2008 that the global economy was headed toward a crash at least as dangerous as the one that had initiated the Great Depression, I was alarmed, but also hopeful.
We had, after all, seen this before.
And we also had a model for how to mitigate the damage; unfortunately, policymakers left it on the shelf.
For three and a half years following the start of the Great Depression, US President Herbert Hoover’s top priority was to balance the budget, trying – but ultimately failing – to restore business confidence.
In 1933, newly elected President Franklin D. Roosevelt changed course, adopting a simple yet radical strategy: try everything that might boost demand, increase production, or reduce unemployment – and then keep doing the things that work.
Roosevelt abandoned attempts to balance the budget, increased the money supply, and initiated deficit spending.
He took the United States off the gold standard, had the government hire workers directly, and offered loan guarantees to those in danger of losing their homes.
He cartelized the oil industry and instituted aggressive antitrust policies to break up monopolies.
To be sure, Roosevelt’s New Deal policies sometimes conflicted with one another, and quite a few of them were counterproductive.
But, by trying everything, and then scaling up the most successful policies, Roosevelt was ultimately able to turn the economy around.
And so, in late 2008, the way forward seemed obvious: recapitalize the banks, guarantee loans, use the government-backed housing lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to resolve underwater mortgages, drop short-term interest rates to zero and use quantitative easing to prevent deflation or dangerously low inflation, and embrace deficit spending.
Then, as events evolved, we would reinforce those policies that seemed to be working and gradually drop those that seemed to be ineffective or counterproductive.
But that was not what we did.
Instead, each proposal faced its own opposition.
Some worried that recapitalizing the banks would reward the very institutions that had caused the problem.
Others fretted that resolving underwater mortgages would reward feckless borrowers.
Still others raised concerns about expansionary fiscal and monetary policy.
And some favored one set of polices (say, resolving underwater mortgages and recapitalizing the banks), while opposing all the others (for example, deficit spending and raising inflation expectations).
Six years on, the economy has yet to fully recover and the problem persists.
In an article published on Christmas Day in the Wall Street Journal, the usually wise economist Martin Feldstein makes the case for a set of policies designed to stimulate demand, including increasing investment tax credits and shifting the corporate-tax burden to firms that do not spend very much.
Feldstein’s ideas are promising; and, in line with the lessons of the Great Depression, they are definitely worth trying.
The trouble is the rhetoric surrounding his proposals.
The article’s headline, “The Fed’s Needless Flirtation With Danger,” is followed by warnings that quantitative easing could “increase the risk of financial instability.”
Instead of simply promoting his policies, Feldstein presents them as a “safe and effective alternative” to other approaches.
His proposals, he argues, are not an additional arrow in the quiver, but replacements for “traditional Keynesian policies&hellip;[that] increase budget deficits and national debt.”
The result is that Feldstein’s contribution to solving our economic difficulties is, at best, unproductive.
Though he presumably hopes that his commentary will increase the likelihood that his preferred policies are adopted, the more likely real-world effect will be to diminish support for existing policies without marshaling support for a coalition that can implement effective replacements.
I would be remiss if I did not note that I have sometimes been part of the problem.
When I look back at everything I have written since 2008, I find that I, too, have sometimes been too ready to push my favorite recipes at the expense of others.
As policymakers continue to seek a path out of the ongoing malaise, it would be wise to remember Roosevelt’s words before he led the US out of a very similar crisis.
“The country needs and&hellip;demands bold, persistent experimentation,” he said in 1932.
“Take a method and try it.
If it fails, admit it frankly, and try another.
But above all, try something.”
New Year’s Resolutions for the Global Economy
STANFORD – Over the last year, global growth has been anemic – and the forecast is only slightly better for 2016.
Something must be done to boost incomes and expand opportunities for people everywhere.
Here are some economic resolutions that could bring good cheer in the new year and beyond.
Let us begin in Europe.
Despite the European Central Bank’s monetary accommodation, a sharp depreciation of the euro, and negative short-term interest rates, the European economy remains in the doldrums.
In 2016, Europe’s leaders must stop expecting monetary policy to solve their problems, and instead pursue faster, firmer resolutions to the myriad crises they face, from the intertwined growth, banking, currency, and governance crises to the escalating refugee crisis, which is threatening free movement across internal borders.
They must pursue supply-side fiscal, structural, labor-market, and regulatory reforms, with common-sense solutions for the struggling periphery economies’ fiscal crises and the stronger economies’ medium-term debt woes topping the agenda.
In Latin America, the situation is more varied.
After a decade of progress (with some exceptions, notably Venezuela), the region is facing serious challenges, stemming partly from a sharp decline in global commodity prices.
Indeed, plummeting oil prices helped to push the region’s largest economy, Brazil, into its worst recession in decades, while a major corruption scandal at Petrobras, the state oil company, has thrown the country’s politics into disarray, with President Dilma Rousseff now facing impeachment.
This makes the pursuit of economy-saving resolutions exceedingly difficult.
The new leftist finance minister will probably make things worse.
Political instability is undermining economic prospects elsewhere, too.
In Ecuador, where President Rafael Correa, who seems intent on imitating Venezuelan Chavismo, has eliminated term limits on his office, high inflation is a growing risk.
In Latin America’s second- and third-largest economies, however, new leadership offers reason for hope.
President Enrique Peña Nieto’s decision to open Mexico’s deep-water oil deposits to international energy companies will help the country overcome declining production, lagging technology, and corruption at Pemex, the national oil company.
Nieto also recognizes the imperative of improving Mexico’s education system, and thus is taking on the powerful teachers’ union.
In Argentina, newly elected President Mauricio Macri is nothing like his anti-business, anti-American predecessor Cristina Kirchner, who pillaged the central bank, channeling funds toward favored local governments, and even fudged national statistics to obscure skyrocketing inflation.
Among Macri’s resolutions are market-oriented reforms, and clearing the many economic land mines that Kirchner planted.
He is off to a good start, having freed the peso from its official peg, reduced taxes, and moved toward freer trade.
Venezuela also has reason for hope.
The opposition, having won a supermajority in parliament, defeating the ruling socialists for the first time in 17 years, should be able to limit the harm caused by the policies of President Nicolás Maduro, heir to Hugo Chávez.
But if opposition forces are to turn the economy around, they will need to win the presidency in 2019.
In Asia, all eyes are on China, the epicenter of a growth slowdown that has reverberated throughout the region (and beyond).
The remarkable growth spurt of the last three decades has degraded the natural environment considerably, produced vast excess capacity in basic industries like cement and steel, and left the banking system saddled with bad loans.
China’s government has committed to reform, but its efforts are lagging.
The rebalancing of its economy from exports to domestic demand remains a major challenge, not least because its consumers are slow to cooperate.
And the government maintains significant control over major companies, even some that are listed on public stock markets.
To engineer the soft landing that Asia needs, China’s leaders must redouble their reform efforts.
One key resolution should be to dispense state-owned companies’ profits directly to the population, to consume the proceeds or invest them elsewhere.
Japan, for its part, has sunk back into recession, despite Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s large and costly economic-revitalization strategy.
The Japanese, like many of their neighbors, hope that enactment of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal – which would, among other things, lower tariffs on thousands of commodities and reduce non-tariff barriers – will provide a much-needed boost.
Africa has been a less visible success story in the last decade.
Despite the many difficulties the continent faces, foreign investment and trade (not aid) provide major opportunities for growth and development.
A resolution to break the scientifically illiterate opposition to genetically modified food would help boost agriculture and exports to Europe substantially.
In North America, Canada’s new center-left prime minister, Justin Trudeau, will be tempted to expand government spending and regulation. But he must not loosen the strings of the public purse too much.
Thanks to the collapse in oil prices, western Canada is in the early stages of a serious downturn.
Fortunately, there is room for Trudeau to meet the demands of his supporters, without wasteful spending.
To this end, he should press America’s next president to pursue the implementation of the TPP in a way that protects NAFTA; to maintain a sound monetary policy; and to reverse President Barack Obama’s veto of the Keystone Pipeline.
These steps would also be in the interest of the United States.
In fact, US efforts to promote free trade should go beyond the TPP to target the revitalization of the moribund Doha Round of multilateral trade liberalization.
Both monetary- and fiscal-policy normalization are critical.
And the US must capitalize on its expanded energy production, such as by enabling exports of oil and natural gas, to reduce its European allies’ dependence on Russian energy.
But perhaps America’s most important New Year’s resolution should be to return to global leadership – a role that has gradually eroded over the last decade, with devastating consequences.
That erosion, rooted in deep political fissures that are evident in the current presidential election campaign, is disturbing global economic, financial, and security arrangements that depend on American leadership.
The US may have a lot on its plate, but unless it leads effectively, the challenges it faces will only grow.
To escape this mess, four principles should guide the way.
First, global economic progress depends on high global saving and investment.
Second, saving and investment flows should be viewed as global, not national.
Third, full employment depends on high investment rates that match high saving rates.
Fourth, high private investments by business depend on high public investments in infrastructure and human capital.
Let’s consider each.
First, our global goal should be economic progress, meaning better living conditions worldwide.
Indeed, that goal has been enshrined in the new Sustainable Development Goals adopted last September by all 193 members of the United Nations.
Progress depends on a high rate of global investment: building the skills, technology, and physical capital stock to propel standards of living higher.
In economic development, as in life, there’s no free lunch: Without high rates of investment in know-how, skills, machinery, and sustainable infrastructure, productivity tends to decline (mainly through depreciation), dragging down living standards.
High investment rates in turn depend on high saving rates.
A famous psychological experiment found that young children who could resist the immediate temptation to eat a marshmallow, and thereby gain two marshmallows in the future, were likelier to thrive as adults than those who couldn’t.
Likewise, societies that defer instant consumption in order to save and invest for the future will enjoy higher future incomes and greater retirement security.
(When American economists advise China to boost consumption and cut saving, they are merely peddling the bad habits of American culture, which saves and invests far too little for America’s future.)
Second, saving and investment flows are global.
A country such as China, with a high saving rate that exceeds local investment needs, can support investment in other parts of the world that save less, notably low-income Africa and Asia.
China’s population is aging rapidly, and Chinese households are saving for retirement.
The Chinese know that their household financial assets, rather than numerous children or government social security, will be the main source of their financial security.
Low-income Africa and Asia, on the other hand, are both capital-poor and very young.
They can borrow from China’s high savers to finance a massive and rapid build-up of education, skills, and infrastructure to underpin their own future economic prosperity.
Third, a high global saving rate does not automatically translate into a high investment rate; unless properly directed, it can cause underspending and unemployment instead.
Money put into banks and other financial intermediaries (such as pension and insurance funds) can finance productive activities or short-term speculation (for example, consumer loans and real estate).
Great bankers of the past like J.P. Morgan built industries like rail and steel.
Today’s money managers, by contrast, tend to resemble gamblers or even fraudsters like Charles Ponzi.
Fourth, today’s investments with high social returns – such as low-carbon energy, smart power grids for cities, and information-based health systems – depend on public-private partnerships, in which public investment and public policies help to spur private investment.
This has long been the case: Railroad networks, aviation, automobiles, semiconductors, satellites, GPS, hydraulic fracturing, nuclear power, genomics, and the Internet would not exist but for such partnerships (typically, but not only, starting with the military).
Our global problem today is that the world’s financial intermediaries are not properly steering long-term saving into long-term investments.
The problem is compounded by the fact that most governments (the US is a stark case) are chronically underinvesting in long-term education, skill training, and infrastructure.
Private investment is falling short mainly because of the shortfall of complementary public investment.
Shortsighted macroeconomists say the world is under-consuming; in fact, it is underinvesting.
The result is inadequate global demand (global investments falling short of global saving at full employment) and highly volatile short-term capital flows to finance consumption and real estate.
Such short-term flows are subject to abrupt reversals of size and direction.
The 1997 Asian financial crisis followed a sudden stop of capital inflows to Asia, and global short-term lending suddenly dried up after Lehman Brothers collapsed in September 2008, causing the Great Recession.
Now China is facing the same problem, with inflows having abruptly given way to outflows.
The mainstream macroeconomic advice to China – boost domestic consumption and overvalue the renminbi to cut exports – fails the marshmallow test.
It encourages overconsumption, underinvestment, and rising unemployment in a rapidly aging society, and in a world that can make tremendous use of China’s high saving and industrial capacity.
The right policy is to channel China’s high saving to increased investments in infrastructure and skills in low-income Africa and Asia.
China’s new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and its One Belt, One Road initiative to establish modern transport and communications links throughout the region are steps in the right direction.
These programs will keep China’s factories operating at high capacity to produce the investment goods needed for rapid growth in today’s low-income countries.
China’s currency should be allowed to depreciate so that China’s capital-goods exports to Africa and Asia are more affordable.
More generally, governments should expand the role of national and multilateral development banks (including the regional development banks for Asia, Africa, the Americas, and the Islamic countries) to channel long-term saving from pension funds, insurance funds, and commercial banks into long-term public and private investments in twenty-first-century industries and infrastructure.
Central banks and hedge funds cannot produce long-term economic growth and financial stability.
Only long-term investments, both public and private, can lift the world economy out of its current instability and slow growth.
The Economic Consequences of Drug Resistance
LONDON – When British Prime Minister David Cameron asked me in July to lead an effort to find solutions to the growing global problem of antimicrobial resistance, my first question was: “What is that?”
I soon learned that, as bacteria and parasites develop resistance to existing drugs, like antibiotics and antimalarial medications, the world is at risk of losing its battle against infectious diseases.
So my next question was: “Why me?
Don’t you need a scientist?”
It turns out that the problem of rising antimicrobial resistance is as much about economics as it is about science or medicine.
Left unchecked, it will kill millions of people every year, and have serious adverse economic consequences for the world.
For developing economies, including most of the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) and MINT (Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Turkey) countries, the risk is particularly large.
Recent research, by an independent review on antimicrobial resistance, which I chair, has modeled the phenomenon’s likely impact on the world economy.
It suggests that if we fail to address antimicrobial resistance, the problem will grow worse.
By 2020, if we allow resistance to rise by 40%, global GDP will be 0.5% smaller than it otherwise would have been.
By 2030, it will be 1.4% smaller.
By 2050, the economic shortfall will reach 3%.
The accumulated loss of global output over the next 35 years will total $100 trillion – more than one and a half times annual world GDP today.
Already, 60,000 people die every year from causes related to antimicrobial resistance in the United States and Europe – some ten times the worldwide death toll from the ongoing Ebola crisis.
By 2050, if the problem is allowed to continue to grow, antimicrobial resistance will kill more than ten million people per year.
That is more than the number of people who currently die of cancer, and greater than the number of deaths from&nbsp;diabetes, lung cancer, road traffic accidents, diarrhoeal disease, and HIV combined.
The economic costs from the resulting panic, including a collapse of travel and trade, could be devastating.
Rising rates of antimicrobial resistance will have a particularly severe impact on India, Indonesia, and Nigeria (as well as the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa).
Countries like China and Brazil, which have been successful in reducing malaria rates, could see their hard work undermined by an increase in resistance to antimalarial drugs.
The research we commissioned was based on the limited data available.
It does not take into account the damage from drug-resistant illnesses outside of hospitals or the impact of escalating healthcare costs.
Nor does it include the drop in living standards from the loss of life-enhancing treatments – for example, knee or hip replacements, cancer treatment, and caesarean sections – that rely on antibiotics to prevent infections.
The broad-brush research we conducted shows that such treatments – many of which would not be possible without effective antibiotics – add around 4% of benefit in terms of GDP.
One of my goals is to persuade policymakers at the United Nations to agree to a set of rules and policies to stop the growth of antimicrobial resistance.
In addition to highlighting the scale of the problem, the review is seeking to find ways to reduce drug resistance and to stimulate the production of new antibiotics to compensate for the loss of those that are now or will become ineffective.
Some solutions to reduce resistance will require cutting-edge technology.
We must encourage policymakers to support the development of the best diagnostics.
Quicker, more accurate diagnoses will curb the current overreliance on antibiotics – a key requirement for combating resistance.
We also must develop tools to identify and halt outbreaks of resistant diseases at an early stage.
Data provided by diagnostic devices could be a potent weapon in containing these outbreaks.
Other solutions are low tech, requiring little more than common sense.
We need to start washing our hands thoroughly and often.
We need to stop demanding antibiotics from our doctors.
And, when antibiotics are called for, we need to finish the prescribed course.
As we try to prevent resistance to existing drugs, we will also need to examine the impact of antibiotics in agriculture.
Developing new antibiotics is a challenge, because pharmaceutical companies seem to need incentives to conduct the required research.
The review will study whether market incentives can be changed.
If they cannot, more dramatic alternatives to boost early innovation by university labs and small companies could be sought, perhaps through a targeted fund.
As the review research shows, the stakes of inaction on antimicrobial resistance are high.
Now is the time to search for bold, clear, and practical long-term solutions.
Are the Good Times Over?
STANFORD – In the 25 years before the Great Recession of 2008-2009, the United States experienced two brief, mild recessions and two strong, long expansions.
Globally, incomes grew briskly; inflation abated; and stock markets boomed.
Moreover, the recovery from the last major slump, in the early 1980s, brought about a quarter-century of unprecedentedly strong and stable macroeconomic performance.
This time, however, the return to growth has been much more difficult.
America’s recovery since the Great Recession, has been inconsistent, with growth repeatedly picking up and then sputtering out.
In fact, the US has not experienced three consecutive quarters of 3% growth in a decade.
Though lower oil prices are helping consumers, this gain is partly offset by less energy investment, and the effects of the stronger dollar will be even larger.
The US is not alone. Though most European economies are now growing again, aided by lower oil prices and currency depreciation, the pace of expansion remains anemic.
Similarly, Japan’s recovery remains fragile, despite strong efforts by the government. Even the major emerging economies, which were supposed to serve as global growth engines in the years ahead, are struggling: China and India have downshifted, and Brazil and Russia are contracting.
When a boom or bust lasts for such a long time, it begins to seem like it will continue indefinitely.
Six years after the crisis, some prominent economists are asking whether insufficient investment and/or waning gains from technological innovation have pushed the global economy into a “new normal” of lower growth and slow, if any, gains in living standards.
Some economists call this “secular stagnation” – a fancy way of saying that the good times are gone for good.
Are they right?
Total economic growth amounts to roughly the sum of the growth of work hours (an increase in the number of workers or the amount of hours that they work) and productivity (output per hour of work).
If productivity improves by one percentage point in a year, the improvement of living standards over the subsequent generation would be augmented by one-third.
Over time, a productivity improvement of even a fraction of a percentage point would be immensely consequential.
Productivity can be enhanced by capital investment, technological innovation, and improvements in the knowledge and skills of the labor force, though economists disagree on which has the largest impact.
According to my research with Larry Lau, technology has played the largest role boosting productivity in the G-7 economies since World War II.
Given this, America’s declining productivity growth – which has averaged just 0.7% annually since 2010 – has led some observers to blame the slowdown on inadequate technological advances.
These pessimists, such as the economist Robert Gordon, claim that new innovations are unlikely to improve productivity as fundamentally as electricity, automobiles, and computers did in the last century.
Optimists counter that smart phones, Big Data, and expected advances in nanotechnology, robotics, and biosciences are harbingers of a new era of technology-driven productivity improvements.
It may be impossible to predict the next “killer app,” they argue, but it will always be developed.
Both sides cite Moore’s Law, named for Intel’s co-founder, Gordon Moore, who noticed that the density of transistors on a chip could be doubled every 18 months.
The pessimists claim that this is becoming harder and more expensive; the optimists hold that the law will remain valid, with chips moving to three dimensions.
Clearly, the trajectory of technological progress is difficult to predict.
In fact, the main commercial value of new technology is not always apparent even to the inventor.
When Guglielmo Marconi made the first transatlantic wireless transmission over a century ago, he was competing with the telegraph in point-to-point communication; he never envisioned popular mass-broadcast radio.
Thomas Edison designed the phonograph to help the blind – and filed a lawsuit to prevent it from being used to play music.
Complicating matters further is the fact that the next wave of productivity-enhancing technological developments are likely to occur in sectors such as health care, where their economic impact is difficult to measure.
Economists believe that many improvements in health-care quality – such as more effective treatments for cataracts or cardiac disease – are not accurately reflected in real GDP, and are incorrectly reported as price increases.
Better measures for these changes are essential for an accurate assessment of economic progress.
To be sure, technology-driven growth carries some risks.
While old fears that automation and artificial intelligence would cause widespread structural unemployment have never been borne out, technology and globalization have put downward pressure on wages for all but the most skilled workers in the advanced economies.
Capital’s share of national income has increased, while labor’s share has fallen.
But implementing policies that restrict potentially productivity-enhancing technologies would be a grave mistake.
To encourage more robust growth and the associated improvements in living standards, governments should ensure that the private sector has sufficient incentives for innovation, entrepreneurship, and investment in physical and human capital.
For example, officials could cut red tape, rein in deficits and debt, enact tax policies conducive to capital formation, reform the education system, and invest in research and development.
Of course, no one should expect a return to the pre-crisis boom years, given the demographic pressures that almost all major economies – including China – are facing.
But these incentives stand the best chance of continuing the flow of productivity-enhancing technology, from startups to the research divisions of established companies in industries from technology to energy to health care.
In Search of Growth Strategies
MILAN – In 2008, the Commission on Growth and Development, which I had the privilege of chairing, produced a report updating our knowledge about sustainable growth patterns.
Then, as now, one thing is clear: the policies that underpin multi-decade periods of high growth, structural transformation, rising employment and incomes, and dramatic reductions in poverty are mutually reinforcing.
The impact of each is amplified by the others.
They are ingredients in recipes that work – and, as with recipes, missing items can substantially undermine the outcome.
To understand the weak, deteriorating, and fragile growth patterns seen today in many countries and in the global economy as a whole, one should compare what is actually happening with what reasonably comprehensive growth strategies might look like.
Of course, there are many policies that sustain high growth, and to some extent they are country-specific.
But a few key ingredients are common to all known successful cases.
The first is high levels of public and private investment.
In successful developing countries, investment is at or above 30% of GDP.
The public-sector component (infrastructure, human capital, and the economy’s knowledge and technology base) is in the 5-7% range.
And the public- and private-sector investments are complementary: The former raises the rate of return to the latter, and hence its level.
Private domestic and foreign investment is influenced by a host of other factors that affect risks and returns. These include the skills of the workforce, the security of property rights and related legal institutions, ease of doing business (for example, the process and time required for starting a business), and the absence of rigidities in its product and factor markets (those for labor, capital, and raw materials).
Above all, the investment climate is positively influenced by stability – both competent and alert macroeconomic management and political effectiveness and continuity.
Conversely, uncertainty about growth, or the commitment to a reasonably coherent reform agenda, will produce adverse impacts on investment.
A second common ingredient of sustainable growth strategies is that financing these relatively high levels of investment comes from domestic savings.
Substantial reliance on external savings (as reflected in persistent high current-account deficits) seems to end badly – in debt crises and major growth setbacks.
Openness to the global economy with respect to trade and investment is critical as well.
Foreign direct investment, for example, is a key channel for transmitting and adapting the accumulated stock of global technology and knowhow.
And export competitiveness is raised as investment pours into the construction of links in global supply chains.
The capital account is a more complicated story.
Generally, successful developing economies have managed it to prevent excessive volatility, including volatility resulting from external shocks or imbalances and from excessive reliance on external financing.
In addition, most successful countries manage the exchange rate to keep it in line with productivity growth, using a combination of capital controls, monetary policy, and reserve accumulation or decumulation.
Both over- and undervalued currencies have different adverse effects, though persistent overvaluation is more problematic for stability and growth.
Finally, inclusiveness is also a key component of successful development strategies.
Growth patterns that systematically exclude subgroups founder on the loss of political and social cohesion and, ultimately, on the loss of support for the strategy.
By contrast, income inequality that is not too extreme, and that does not arise from corruption or privileged access to markets, is understood and accepted.
The provision of high-quality basic services like education and health care is viewed as crucial for equality of opportunity and intergenerational mobility.
Against that backdrop, one can assess current growth patterns in the global economy and its various parts.
For starters, public-sector investment is broadly below levels needed to restore and sustain growth, partly owing to fiscal constraints in overly indebted countries.
Absent defaults, the normal way to reduce sovereign-debt overhangs is with nominal growth.
But growth-oriented policies have been absent, beyond whatever monetary policy can contribute, and inflation is broadly below targets.
And large pools of savings in sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, and insurance companies have not yet been successfully deployed at scale on the public-sector side, presumably because of blockages in the intermediation channels related to risk and incentives.
Private-sector investment (in tangible and intangible assets) is also below growth-sustaining levels (though there are contrary trends in some high-growth technology sectors).
Contributing factors include a shortage of aggregate demand, high levels of uncertainty about policies and regulatory agendas, and growing doubts about key drivers of global growth like China.
In addition, depending on the economy in question, stalled tax reform and policy-induced structural rigidities in product and factor markets are having adverse effects.
With respect to inclusiveness, much useful recent analysis focuses on technology-driven shifts in economic structure and labor markets on the demand side, and globalization, which has left education and skills mismatches on the slower-moving supply side.
Job polarization and rising patterns of income inequality are in part the result of these forces, with adverse effects on final demand and, more important, on the resources that individuals and families have to invest in their own human capital.
In short, a reasonably comprehensive strategy for restoring country-level and global growth would include measures to elevate and remove obstacles to public and private investment, thereby contributing to aggregate demand.
It would also include a variety of reforms to strengthen private investment incentives. And it would include an inclusiveness agenda directed at structural disequilibrium in labor markets and potentially destructive income inequality.
Thus far, with few exceptions, such comprehensive growth strategies have been missing.
If those strategies were not just implemented, but also synchronized across major economies, each would be amplified through positive international spillovers via trade – a clear role for the G-20.
In the absence of such an approach, one can foresee an extended period of low and fragile growth, at best, with downside risks stemming from increased leverage in a prolonged low-interest-rate and deflationary environment.
A worse outcome – and all too plausible – is further deterioration in the political and social cohesion that forms the foundation for vigorous policy responses.
At that point, stagnation becomes a trap.
In Praise of Global Imbalances
SINGAPORE – In recent weeks, there has been a chorus of opinion arguing for a sharp increase in global investment, particularly in infrastructure.
Former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers asserted that public investment really is a free lunch, while IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde has argued that an investment boost is needed if the world economy is to “overcome a new mediocre.”
These comments suggest that the world has been under-investing for many years.
In fact, according to International Monetary Fund data, the current overall global investment rate, at 24.5% of world GDP, is near the top of its long-term range.
The issue is not a lack of overall investment, but the fact that a disproportionate share of it comes from China.
China’s share of world investment has soared from 4.3% in 1995 to an estimated 25.8% this year.
By contrast, the United States’ share, which peaked at 36% in 1985, has fallen to less than 18%.
The decline in Japan’s share has been more dramatic, from a peak of 22% in 1993 to just 5.7% in 2013.
China dominates global investment because it saves and invests nearly half of its $10.5 trillion economy.
But this investment rate is likely to decline sharply over the next 5-10 years, because the country already boasts new infrastructure, has excess manufacturing capacity in many sectors, and is trying to shift economic activity to services – which require less investment.
Moreover, China’s rapidly aging population and declining working-age population will reduce long-term investment demand.
Because the current-account balance is the difference between the investment and savings rates, the decline in investment will generate large surpluses unless savings also decline.
And the experience of other aging societies, such as Germany and Japan, suggests that domestic investment falls faster than savings rates.
Thus, China can expect large external surpluses to transform the country from the world’s workshop into its main financier.
Indeed, the scale of capital outflows could be so large that long-term capital will remain cheap even after the world’s major central banks tighten monetary policy. How the world absorbs those surpluses will define the next period of global economic expansion.
Emerging markets may be able to take some advantage of this low-cost financing.
India would undoubtedly benefit, though it is unlikely to absorb a significant portion of China’s excess savings.
India’s share of world investment is only 3.4%; and even a large expansion will not compensate for a small decline in Chinese investment.
Furthermore, East Asia’s growth model has been sustained ultimately by mobilizing rising domestic savings and pumping out exports.
So, although India might initially absorb some international capital, it might ultimately prefer to build foreign reserves by running small external deficits or even a surplus.
Other emerging countries are also unlikely to absorb much of China’s capital.
Notwithstanding its advocacy of public investment spending, even the IMF accepts that a sudden increase in public investment is more likely to cause developing-country indebtedness than growth.
That is why calls by the IMF and others to scale up public infrastructure spending are really aimed at developed countries.
Yet this, too, may prove insufficient.
Germany’s investment-savings gap is so large that, even if it increases domestic investment, the most we can expect from Europe is that it does not add to the global savings glut.
Only a revival in US infrastructure investment can create a sustained global economic recovery.
The US has the necessary scale to absorb China’s surplus, and its inadequate infrastructure provides plenty of avenues for fruitful investment.
Ironically, the IMF’s new investment mantra ultimately leads back to large global imbalances.
But, far from decrying this as a major failure of global policy coordination, economists should accept imbalances as the natural state of the world and try to manage the resulting distortions.
Indeed, almost every period of globalization and prosperity has been accompanied by symbiotic imbalances.
They have always caused economic distortions and political complaints, but many have endured for surprisingly long periods.
Consider, for example, the Indo-Roman trade that drove the world economy in the first and second centuries AD.
India ran a current-account surplus while the Romans complained about the loss of gold, yet the system endured.
Similarly, the first Bretton Woods system was sustained with European capital, and Bretton Woods 2 was fueled by Asian capital, with the US providing the deficits in both cases.
There is no reason why Bretton Woods 3 should not experience similar imbalances.
But if, for whatever reason, the global economy fails to take off, we will have to reconcile ourselves to a long period of mediocre growth in which cheap capital depresses yields, drives up asset prices, inflates bubbles, and seeks out trophy assets.
These are not the sort of imbalances to which the world’s policymakers should aspire.
Out of Ammunition to Combat Recession?
STANFORD – Economic forecasts for 2017 project continued frailty in the global economy, and subpar growth for most countries and regions.
Obvious economic problems include Europe’s weak banks, China’s distorted property market, political uncertainty in the West, historically high private and public debt – 225% of GDP, according to the International Monetary Fund – and the reluctance of heavily indebted Greece and Portugal to comply with IMF programs.
Additional global economic risks, such as a major oil-market disruption that could drive prices up, are not as obvious, and thus receive less attention.
Economists call such events “shocks” precisely because they come unexpectedly and can have far-reaching consequences.
Unprecedented long-term monetary stimulus and massive spikes in public-debt burdens have left governments poorly equipped to manage the next economic downturn when – not if – it arrives.
The next recession probably will not be as bad as the last one, but advanced economies will be far better prepared for it if they undergo gradual monetary-policy normalization and fiscal consolidation in the meantime.
With respect to monetary policy, the United States’ unemployment rate, at around 5%, is close to what most economists consider full employment, and the Federal Reserve is widely expected to raise its target interest rate again in December. But the Fed is moving at a very slow pace.
The European Central Bank will likely extend its bond-purchasing program; but it has reason to question the results of its quantitative-easing policy, given that eurozone unemployment still averages around 10%, indicating a sizeable output gap.
Meanwhile, the Japanese economy continues to limp along, with the Bank of Japan now “managing the yield curve” in yet another attempt to raise inflation and growth from their current low levels.
In terms of fiscal policy, most advanced economies’ public finances are suffering because policymakers have failed to implement sufficient supply-side structural reforms to control public-pension growth, reform growth-inhibiting taxes, and liberalize labor markets.
These fiscal-policy failures have put too much of the burden on central banks, even though growth would more likely accelerate with productivity-enhancing supply-side measures.
Lately, the economists who are most influential with left-leaning politicians seem hopeful that growth, employment, and incomes will rise if policymakers embrace massive new deficit-financed spending to create demand for goods and services.
They argue that with borrowing costs so low, deficit spending is virtually free, and we need not worry about high debt levels.
But this argument ignores the typically large gap between what economists devise and what politicians promise, and what public-spending programs actually deliver.
As ECB President Mario Draghi has put it, “There aren’t many public investments with a high rate of return.”
Governments should certainly cut taxes and fund initiatives that pass rigorous cost-benefit tests; but broad new spending programs usually do not yield a significant or immediate economic boost.
For starters, spending generally occurs well into the future, when economic conditions are projected to be better.
As President Barack Obama, referring to his signature 2009 stimulus bill, eventually admitted, “the shovels weren’t ready.”
Similarly, Japan has attempted government spending stimulus for decades, with little to show for it in terms of overall economic growth.
To be sure, large deficits can be benign or even desirable during recessions and wars, or when used to finance productive public investments; and in a deep, long-lasting downturn, with interest rates at or near zero, a well-timed, sensible fiscal response can theoretically help in the short term.
But studies show that the multiplier effect of government spending – when it may increase GDP by more than the expenditure – shrinks rapidly after a few quarters, and then turns negative.
In fact, the multiplier effect can even be negative during economic expansions when central banks maintain zero-interest rates and households expect taxes to rise when interest rates do.
Because new government purchases can devolve into counterproductive political boondoggles that spur little economic growth, another proposal one often hears is to expand government transfer payments.
Leaving aside the fact that transfer payments are already fiscally unsustainable in most countries (because they were adopted and expanded under better economic and demographic conditions), could they lift the economy?
A recent study addresses this very question.
According to former Obama administration Chief Economist Christina Romer and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, even permanent transfer-payment increases provide stimulus for only a few months, and the effect does not spread to employment.
The study concludes that the benefits from transfers are “much less persistent, and much smaller overall, than those of tax changes.”
In economies where stimulus programs are carefully vetted and can be implemented quickly, any temporary government spending should be coupled with gradual fiscal consolidation, to minimize economic risk and long-term costs.
As history and theory indicate, this fiscal consolidation should happen through reduced future spending growth, especially on transfer payments.
Economic policymakers should heed this lesson so that they can gradually re-arm themselves; otherwise, they could be left with no firepower when they most need it.
Two Cheers for the New Normal
JAKARTA – The conventional wisdom about the state of the world economy goes something like this: Since the start of the 2007-2008 financial crisis, the developed world has struggled to recover, with only the United States able to adjust.
Emerging countries have fared better, but they, too, have started to flounder lately.
In a bleak economic climate, the argument goes, the only winners have been the wealthy, resulting in skyrocketing inequality.
That scenario sounds entirely right – until, on closer examination, it turns out to be completely wrong.
Start with economic growth.
But 3.4% is hardly disastrous by historical standards.
To be sure, all of the large, developed economies are growing more slowly than they did when their economic engines were roaring.
But it is only the eurozone that has badly disappointed in recent years.
I had assumed, when I made my projections in 2010, that the region’s poor demographics and weak productivity would prevent it from growing at more than 1.5% a year.
Instead, it has managed only a meager 0.3%.
For Japan, the US, and the United Kingdom, the prospects are brighter.
It should be relatively straightforward for them to grow at an average rate that outpaces that of the last decade – a period that includes the peak of the financial crisis.
In addition, the dramatic drop in the price of crude oil will serve as the equivalent of a large tax cut for consumers.
Indeed, I am rather baffled by the IMF’s decision to downgrade its growth forecast for much of the world.
If anything, with oil prices falling, an upward revision seems warranted.
Another factor supporting a more positive outlook is the rebalancing that has occurred between the US and China, the world’s two largest economies.
Each entered the financial crisis with huge current-account imbalances.
The US was running a deficit of more than 6.5% of its GDP, and China had a surplus of close to 10% of its GDP.
Today, the US deficit has fallen to about 2%, and the Chinese surplus is less than 3%.
Given that their intertwined imbalances were key drivers of the financial crisis, this is a welcome development.
It has recently become fashionable to disparage the economic performance of the large emerging countries, particularly China and the other BRIC economies (Brazil, Russia, and India).
But it is hardly a surprise that these countries are no longer growing as fast as they once did.
In 2010, I predicted that China’s annual growth would slow to 7.5%.
It has since averaged 8%.
India’s performance has been more discouraging, though growth has picked up since early 2014.
The only real disappointments are Brazil and Russia, both of which have struggled (again, not surprisingly) with much lower commodity prices.
Their lethargic performance, together with the eurozone’s, is the main reason why the world economy has not managed the 4.1% growth that optimists like me thought was feasible.
The conventional wisdom on wealth and inequality is similarly mistaken.
From 2000 to 2014, global GDP more than doubled, from $31.8 trillion to over $75 trillion.
Over the same period, China’s nominal GDP soared from $1.2 trillion to more than $10 trillion – growing at more than four times the global rate.
In 2000, the BRIC economies’ combined size was about a quarter of US GDP.
Today, they have nearly caught up, with a combined GDP of more than $16 trillion, just short of America’s $17.4 trillion.
Indeed, since 2000, the BRICs have been responsible for nearly a third of the rise in nominal global GDP.
And other emerging countries have performed similarly well.
Nigeria’s economy has grown 11-fold since 2000, and Indonesia’s has more than quintupled.
Since 2008, these two developing giants have contributed more to global GDP growth than the EU has.
Statistics like these utterly disprove the idea that global inequality is growing.
Gaps in income and wealth may be shooting up within individual countries, but per capita income in developing countries is rising much faster than in the advanced economies.
Indeed, that is why one of the key targets of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals – to halve the number of people living in absolute poverty – was achieved five years ahead of the deadline.
None of this is meant to deny that we are living in challenging and uncertain times.
But one thing is clear: economically, at least, the world is continuing to become a better place.
Global Energy Realism
MADRID – Energy has become a focal point of global policymaking.
As falling oil prices grab headlines worldwide, US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping have signed a major climate-change deal, and October’s European Council decisions could signal real progress toward a serious European Union energy policy.
This momentum should be maintained in the coming year, culminating in December’s United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP21) in Paris.
But, in order to establish a global energy system that meets growing demand within the constraints of carbon neutrality, we must avoid the pitfalls that have plagued past responses.
In particular, we must strike the proper balance between ideology and realism, the public and private sectors, and long- and short-term considerations.
And, critically, we must follow through on our commitments.
When it comes to ideology and realism, the European Union is perhaps the best example of an imbalanced approach, as Europeans’ tendency to lead with their hearts, rather than their heads, has undermined effective action.
The knee-jerk rejection of nuclear power by some EU member countries has led to sharp increases in coal usage.
Renewables have been pursued with a sort of missionary zeal, regardless of their effectiveness or feasibility.
And the EU’s “20/20/20 targets” – a 20% reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions, a 20% share for renewables, and a 20% increase in energy efficiency, all by 2020 – was more of a mantra than a policy.
Bridging the gap between the public and private sectors is vital to finance the construction of an efficient global energy system.
The International Energy Agency estimates that by 2040, the annual investment required in energy-supply infrastructure alone will total $2 trillion, up 20% from current levels.
Over the next 26 years, some $51 trillion will be needed.
This is just part of the overall infrastructure investment shortfall, which stands at $1 trillion annually – far more than what governments can afford.
That is why governments must build innovative partnerships with private-sector actors, while recognizing that energy, as a public good, must be subject to appropriate regulation and oversight.
There have been some notable moves in this direction, though it remains to be seen whether they will translate into real action.
China has spearheaded the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
More important, the World Bank, the G-20, and the EU recently launched initiatives aimed at directing the financing power of business toward infrastructure development.
The World Bank’s Global Infrastructure Facility is an open platform that brings together multilateral development banks, national governments, and private finance to shepherd infrastructure projects to completion and to fill in gaps that have hampered investment.
Pivotal to sparking this investment is the mitigation of associated political risks, especially through an enhanced role for the Bank’s Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.
Similarly, at last month’s summit in Brisbane, the G-20 created a new Global Infrastructure Hub to facilitate information-sharing, thereby streamlining infrastructure projects.
And, the EU’s Connecting Europe Facility has allocated €5.85 billion ($7.2 billion) from now until 2020 to help kick-start private investment in infrastructure projects linking member countries’ energy systems.
Of course, the need for private-sector involvement extends beyond investment.
The private sector is also better situated to research and develop new production methods that limit demand for fossil fuels.
To spur such action, the public sector should offer funds or guarantees, which, though risky, could offer huge benefits.
US government funding of research into hydraulic fracturing – the technology now driving the surge in America’s oil and gas production – dates back to the 1970s.
This brings us to the need to balance short-term imperatives with long-term vision.
Energy projects and policies today must account for the projected increase in emerging-market demand, while ensuring sufficient investment in future generating capacity.
For example, over the next 25 years, 60% of the EU’s generating capacity is due to retire – contributing to demand for $2.2 trillion of energy investment.
Furthermore, with US tight-oil production expected to peak in the early 2020s, new sources must be developed, such as in Iraq.
Given the long lead time for bringing new projects onstream, efforts to address the coming shortfall must begin today.
In all of these efforts, there is one common imperative: matching words with deeds.
The world does not need more commitments and pledges; it needs action.
Yet many countries continue to issue weak declarations that fail to produce genuine progress.
Once again, this problem is particularly pervasive in Europe.
The maxims of today – the need for diverse suppliers, enhanced interconnection, greater efficiency, and a sensible energy mix – have been discussed for at least a decade.
In fact, despite the seemingly unending stream of new energy initiatives and projects, Europe has made little progress; its energy situation may even be worse.
Repackaging the same old strategies – here one need look no further than European Commission President Jean Claude Juncker’s much-hyped €300 billion investment package – simply will not work.
With attention focused on COP21 next December, the coming year will be an exceptional opportunity to build a sound global energy system.
Europe, which has prided itself on its energy leadership, should set an example by developing – and then implementing – a realistic long-term strategy that involves the private sector.
Keuangan Global dan Pemanasan Global
NEW DELHI/LONDON – Sejak tahun 2008 ketika krisis keuangan global hampir menghancurkan ekonomi dunia, reformasi keuangan menjadi salah satu agenda utama bagi pembuat kebijakan.
Namun seiring dengan pergeseran upaya yang awalnya dilakukan para pemimpin untuk memperbaiki permasalahan di masa lalu, hingga kini memposisikan sistem keuangan untuk masa mendatang, mereka harus bergulat dengan adanya ancaman baru terhadap stabilitas, khususnya ancaman-ancaman yang timbul dari perubahan iklim.
Kondisi ini menjadi alasan mengapa sejumlah besar pemerintah, regulator, pembuat standar dan pelaku pasar mulai memasukkan aturan-aturan mengenai keberlanjutan ke dalam sistem keuangan.
Di Brasil, bank sentral menganggap integrasi faktor-faktor lingkungan hidup dan sosial ke dalam manajemen risiko sebagai cara memperkuat ketahanan.
Di negara-negara seperti Singapura dan Afrika Selatan, perusahaan yang terdaftar di bursa efek wajib mengungkapkan kinerja lingkungan hidup dan sosial, suatu persyaratan yang semakin dipandang perlu oleh investor dan regulator untuk menjalankan pasar keuangan yang efisien.
Prakarsa semacam ini barangkali dulu dinilai sebagai ceruk periferal “hijau”.
Kini, prakarsa ini dianggap sebagai inti dari penerapan sistem keuangan.
Di Bangladesh, upaya bank sentral untuk menunjang pembangunan ekonomi meliputi refinancing yang rendah biaya bagi bank yang memberikan pinjaman kepada proyek-proyek demi memenuhi tujuan efisiensi energi, energi terbarukan, atau pengelolaan limbah.
Di United Kingdom, saat ini Bank of England tengah mempelajari dampak perubahan iklim terhadap sektor asuransi sebagai bagian dari wewenang utamanya untuk mengawasi ketahanan dan kelayakan lembaga keuangan.
Di Tiongkok, investasi tahunan terhadap industri hijau dapat mencapai 320 miliar dolar dalam waktu lima tahun ke depan, pemerintah sendiri hanya mampu memberikan 10-15% dari jumlah keseluruhan.
Guna mencegah kekurangan dana, Peoples’s Bank of China baru-baru ini merumuskan laporan bersama dengan United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) yang memuat serangkaian rekomendasi yang komprehensif demi pembentukan “sistem keuangan hijau” di Tiongkok.
Di India, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (Federasi KADIN India) telah membentuk kelompok kerja “obligasi hijau (green bond)” yang baru untuk mempelajari bagaimana pasar surat utang di India akan mampu menghadapi tantangan pembiayaan infrastruktur pintar.
Perubahan peraturan yang terkini akan menawarkan potensi cukup besar bagi dana investasi yang sudah terdaftar untuk mengeluarkan modal bagi energi bersih.
Sejauh ini, upaya tersebut hanya mempengaruhi sebagian kecil dari aset sebesar 305 triliun dolar yang dimiliki bank, investor, lembaga keuangan, dan perseorangan dalam sistem keuangan global.
Namun upaya ini akan diterapkan secara lebih luas sebab pemberi modal dan regulator sudah mengakui dampak besar yang berasal dari gangguan lingkungan hidup.
Konsekuensi yang dialami sekarang dipandang buruk.
Berdasarkan hasil tinjauan UNEP terhadap 116 negara dari total 140 negara, persediaan sumber daya alam yang menyokong pembentukan nilai sudah berkurang.
Kerugian terhadap manusia dan dampak ekonomis dari peningkatan karbon tinggi yang terus-menerus meliputi dampak kesehatan yang buruk, bertambahnya gangguan terhadap infrastruktur, serta keamanan air dan pangan, juga tingginya ketidakstabilan pasar yang utamanya terjadi di negara-negara berkembang.
Kerusakan ini akan semakin parah dan risiko akan sulit dikelola jika emisi gas rumah kaca tidak diturunkan ke tingkat emisi nol/netral antara tahun 2055 dan 2070.
Seiring dengan ancaman perubahan iklim yang semakin nyata, pembiayaan atas upaya tanggap perubahan iklim menjadi semakin perlu.
Negara-negara maju telah berkomitmen untuk mengeluarkan dana sebesar 100 miliar dolar sebagai aliran dana tahunan bagi negara-negara berkembang pada tahun 2020, namun diperlukan upaya tambahan.
Selain itu, kita perlu menempatkan kesulitan keuangan yang diakibatkan dari perubahan iklim ke dalam konteks yang lebih luas pada lingkup ekonomi hijau dan pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Tugas bagi mereka yang berwenang mengatur sistem keuangan ialah memfasilitasi transisi yang teratur untuk mengalihkan investasi tinggi karbon menjadi investasi rendah karbon serta investasi yang awalnya berupa aset-aset yang rentan menjadi memiliki daya tahan.
Berdasarkan prakarsa New Climate Economy, dana sebesar 89 triliun dolar akan dimanfaatkan untuk investasi infrastruktur global pada tahun 2030 – dengan dana tambahan sebesar 4,1 triliun dolar diperlukan untuk menjadikan investasi tersebut bersifat rendah karbon dan tahan lama.
Agar mampu menggerakkan modal yang diperlukan, pembuat kebijakan perlu mengendalikan kekuatan sistem keuangan.
Ruang lingkup manajemen risiko perlu diperluas agar keberlanjutan dan risiko jangka panjang yang disebabkan oleh perubahan iklim akan termuat di dalam aturan-aturan kehatian-hatian bagi perbankan, lembaga asuransi, dan investasi.
Pembentukan “bank hijau (green banks)” yang baru dapat membantu pengumpulan dana dari pasar utang dan pasar ekuitas.
Transparansi perlu ditingkatkan melalui pelaporan korporat yang lebih baik dan pengungkapan yang lebih luas oleh lembaga keuangan.
Profesionalisme dalam keahlian dan insentif keuangan perlu dilengkapi kembali dan diperbaiki agar mencerminkan prioritas-prioritas terbaru.
Peluang yang menjanjikan dalam kerja sama internasional kini mulai terbuka.
Sebagai contoh, sejumlah menteri luar negeri dan gubernur bank sentral yang tergabung dalam kelompok G-20 baru-baru ini meminta Dewan Stabilitas Keuangan (Financial Stability Board) untuk mempelajari cara agar sektor keuangan dapat menghadapi perubahan iklim.
Tindakan-tindakan sebagaimana dijelaskan sebelumnya tidak hanya mampu menguatkan keamanan iklim, tetapi juga menciptakan sistem keuangan yang lebih efektif, efisien dan kokoh.
Global Finance’s Supply-Chain Revolution
HONG KONG – In March 2011, the catastrophic earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear disaster that hit Japan halted production of key components on which many global supply chains depend.
The sudden disruption of these essential materials from the production process forced a reassessment of how these supply chains function.
But such vulnerabilities are not confined to the manufacturing sector.
The finance industry, too, has suffered its own near “supply chain” meltdown in recent times.
The failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008 not only roiled global financial markets, but also brought global trade practically to a standstill as wholesale banks refused to fund each other for fear of counterparty failure.
The simple banking system of the past, one based on retail savings being concentrated in order to fund the credit needs of borrowers, had evolved into a highly complex – and global – supply chain with knock-on risks of disruption comparable to those seen in Japan last spring.
Financial supply chains and those in the manufacturing sector share three key features – architecture, feedback mechanisms, and processes – and their robustness and efficiency depend upon how these components interact.
In today’s financial architecture, as with other supply chains, interdependent networks tend to concentrate in powerful hubs.
For example, just two financial centers, London and New York, dominate international finance, and only 22 players conduct 90% of all global foreign-exchange trading.
Such concentration is very efficient, but it also contributes to greater systemic risks, because, if the leading hubs fail, the whole system can collapse.
Open feedback mechanisms ensure a supply chain’s ability to respond to a changing environment, but, in the case of financial supply chains, feedback mechanisms can amplify shocks until the whole system blows up.
The Lehman Brothers collapse triggered just such an explosion, with the financial system saved only by government bailouts.
Finally, the processes within supply chains, and the feedback interactions between them, can make the system greater or smaller than the sum of its parts.
Since a complex network comprises linkages between many sub-networks, individual inefficiencies or weaknesses can have an impact on the viability of the whole.
Like manufacturing supply chains in the wake of the Japanese disruption, financial supply chains face formidable pressures to re-engineer and adapt as the global economic balance shifts towards emerging markets.
As that happens, billions of consumers will enter these countries’ middle classes, new social networks will evolve, and climate change will become a growing factor in global commerce.
In addition, major regulatory reforms will impose new and higher costs on the financial sector.
Banks and other institutions are also under pressure to devise new financial products that can help the real sector to manage more complex risks and enable investment in areas such as green technology and infrastructure for developing economies.