Since crowds took to the streets of Tunis, Cairo, Benghazi, and other Arab cities, toppling decades-old regimes, spectators and analysts have wondered where the Arab world is headed.
But they have focused almost exclusively on the events’ political dimension: Who are the leaders, and what are their demands?
In fact, the persistence, intensity, and frequency of protests – exemplified in September, when local militia in Benghazi killed US Ambassador to Libya J. Christopher Stevens – demonstrate the role that the culture and psychology of crowds are playing in determining the Arab world’s trajectory.
After decades of authoritarian rule, citizens, frustrated with discredited institutions and paralyzed political parties, have begun to employ social media to organize civil resistance.
As a result, countries affected by the Arab Spring now face political spheres that are shaped by crowd dynamics, rather than by genuine political or ideological movements.
Indeed, much of what is happening in the Arab world today can be best understood through the study of crowds.
Crowds are the opposite of organizations; rather than being dominated by rigid hierarchies, they are often led by individuals with no formal rank.
And, unlike political movements, crowds tend to form quickly and organically, like dark clouds gathering to form a storm, and their objectives are immediate: surround this police station, seize that ministry, etc.
In “crowd politics,” emotions often supersede goals.
Lebanon was perhaps the first Arab country to experience crowd politics.
After Prime Minister Rafic Hariri was assassinated in February 2005, crowds led by various political parties filled Martyrs’ Square in downtown Beirut.
But non-organized crowds eventually eclipsed structured groups, becoming a dominant force in Lebanese politics.
In fact, Lebanon’s two competing political coalitions, the March 8 alliance and the March 14 alliance, take their names from major crowd gatherings that occurred on those dates in 2005.
Lebanon’s experience reveals the discord between the psychology of crowds and the goals of the political elites who rally behind them – a conflict that can also be seen in Egypt’s Tahrir Square, Tunisia’s Sidi Bouzid, and Tripoli, Libya, where crowds have stormed the parliament building several times in the last few months.
This discord is threatening to derail these countries’ burgeoning democratic processes, owing to growing competition between what Le Bon called the “sovereignty of the crowds” and the sovereignty of political elites.
Under these conditions, the real challenge facing the Arab Spring countries, at least in the short term, is not ideological, but institutional.
Governments must find a way to prevent small groups from using the crowd effect as political capital, thereby causing crowd sizes to become more decisive than the number of ballots cast.
But traditional democratic institutions, such as political parties, parliaments, and consultation committees, are not experienced in coping with such challenges.
Social media are both part of the problem and part of the solution.
Unlike Eastern Europe in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, the crowds of the Arab Spring formed on the Internet before hitting the streets – the first movement of its kind.
The Arab Spring, following the lead of Iran’s Green Movement in 2009, ushered in the era of “iCrowds” – attracted, mobilized, and organized through social media.
But social media can also be used effectively to demobilize people, by reducing the chasm between the psychology and power of political leadership and that of the masses.
The emerging political class must improve its understanding of iCrowd politics, and learn to harness the power of tools like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, blogs, apps, and text messages.
In the United States, President Barack Obama’s election campaigns recognized this opportunity, using social media extensively to communicate political messages, and to energize and mobilize supporters.
Once in office, Obama launched the White House app, designed to give citizens a new way to connect with their leaders in Washington, including updates on the latest events, insight into administration initiatives, and access to high-resolution photos and live streams of White House events.
Private enterprises, too, benefit from an understanding of iCrowd politics.
In their research, Quy Huy and Andrew Shipilov of INSEAD have shown that business leaders who use social media build so-called “emotional capital” within their employees.
This helps leaders to develop and maintain human bonds with a large group of people, despite the power gap, while making it easier for employees to identify with the organization.
For the Arab world’s new political elites, the lesson is clear: crowd dynamics cannot be ignored.
When observed carefully, social media can be interpreted like clouds portending storms.
If detected early enough, solutions can be found to diffuse tempestuous crowds before they inundate fragile new institutions.
Death by Masculinity
LONDON – News media are constantly reporting ways that everyday activities can damage our health.
But perhaps the most far-reaching yet neglected global health risk stems from gender norms.
Despite overwhelming evidence that gender-based stereotypes and expectations can adversely impact health, gender-related health issues are largely ignored or misunderstood, with international health organizations often limiting gender-specific efforts to women or, even more narrowly, to mothers.
And yet, according to the World Health Organization, in all but three countries worldwide, women can expect to outlive men, by up to seven years in Japan or by as little as a year in the poorer countries of Sub-Saharan Africa.
Women’s longer life expectancy has long been linked to differences in “biological pre-disposition,” with theories ranging from the protection afforded by women’s lower iron levels to the absence of “extra” genes on men’s Y chromosome.
But some of the most obvious factors shortening men’s lives are to be found in a more pedestrian, yet politically sensitive, area: the differences in the “appropriate” behaviors for men and women, as dictated by society and reinforced by the market.
Data published in The Lancet last year show that the top ten most burdensome global diseases are more common in men than women, and often by a large margin.
For example, men die from lung cancer at more than twice the rate of women.
Likewise, road injuries and alcohol-related death and disability are responsible for the loss of three times as many potential years of healthy life in men than in women.
These disparities can be explained largely by the fact that men are exposed to more risks than women.
While there may be a biological component to men’s propensity for risk taking (especially among young men), gender norms reinforce risky or unhealthy behaviors by associating them with masculinity.
Understanding and exploiting gender norms offers commercial benefits.
Given that social norms in much of the world discourage women from smoking, drinking alcohol, and, in extreme cases, driving cars and motorcycles, advertisers in these industries tend to target men.
For example, alcoholic-beverage producers are leading sponsors of men’s professional sports, but rarely sponsor women’s sporting events.
Moreover, advertisers often promote a “live fast, die young” philosophy in order to encourage men to ignore their product’s health risks.
While three of the original “Marlboro men” died from lung cancer, their macho spirit endures in tobacco-product advertising in many low- and middle-income countries.
Differences in health outcomes are exacerbated further by women’s tendency to use health-care services more than men.
Some of this additional use is due to women’s needs for family-planning or prenatal services, seeking either to prevent or promote reproduction.
But even when health-care use would be expected to be equal, such as care for HIV/AIDS in Africa, gender-based expectations impede HIV-positive men from obtaining antiretroviral drugs proportionate to their needs.
Although gender norms are clearly undermining men’s health worldwide, key international organizations continue to disregard the problem or address only those issues that are specific to girls and women when devising strategies to improve global health.
The Global Health Initiative, for example, uses American-taxpayer money to offset the “gender-related inequalities and disparities [that] disproportionately compromise the health of women and girls.”
To be sure, girls and women are less powerful, less privileged, and have fewer opportunities than men worldwide.
But that does not justify disregarding the evidence.
After all, an approach that focuses on the half of the population that takes fewer risks and uses health-care services more frequently cannot be expected to eliminate gender inequalities.
Coping with the emerging social and economic burdens associated with poor health – not least those stemming from aging populations in many countries – requires a new approach to replace the unbalanced, unproductive model that currently prevails.
It is time to exchange the gender norms that are undermining men’s health for a social, cultural, and commercial emphasis on healthier lifestyles for everyone.
Gender norms are not static.
Societies, cultures, and potential markets change.
For example, patterns of alcohol consumption in Europe are beginning to shift.
While men continue to drink more – and more often – than women, the frequency with which girls and boys report being drunk is now about the same.
As Asian and African markets open up, similar social changes may follow as alcohol and tobacco advertisers seek new customers. We need to act now to bring gender justice to global health.
According to the Roman philosopher Cicero, “In nothing do men approach so nearly to the gods, as in giving health to men.”
The multi-billion-dollar global health industry appears to have turned Cicero’s maxim on its head, focusing instead on “giving health to women.”
But emphasizing the health of one gender undermines gender equality and misses the point of global health initiatives, which is – or should be – to improve health outcomes for all.
Asia’s Resource Scramble
NEW DELHI – Competition for strategic natural resources – including water, mineral ores, and fossil fuels – has always played a significant role in shaping the terms of the international economic and political order.
But now that competition has intensified, as it encompasses virtually all of Asia, where growing populations and rapid economic development over the last three decades have generated an insatiable appetite for severely limited supplies of key commodities.
Asia is the world’s most resource-poor continent, and overexploitation of the natural resources that it does possess has created an environmental crisis that is contributing to regional climate change.
For example, the Tibetan Plateau, which contains the world’s third-largest store of ice, is warming at almost twice the average global rate, owing to the rare convergence of high altitudes and low latitudes – with potentially serious consequences for Asia’s freshwater supply.
In other words, three interconnected crises – a resource crisis, an environmental crisis, and a climate crisis – are threatening Asia’s economic, social, and ecological future.
Population growth, urbanization, and industrialization are exacerbating resource-related stresses, with some cities experiencing severe water shortages, and degrading the environment (as anyone who has experienced Beijing’s smog can attest).
Fossil-fuel and water subsidies have contributed to both problems.
Faced with severe supply constraints, Asian economies are increasingly tapping other continents’ fossil fuels, mineral ores, and timber.
But water is extremely difficult –&#160;and prohibitively expensive – to import.
And Asia has less fresh water per person than any continent other than Antarctica, and some of the world’s worst water pollution.
Likewise, food scarcity is a growing problem for Asian countries, with crop yields and overall food production growing more slowly than demand.
At the same time, rising incomes are altering people’s diets, which now include more animal-based proteins, further compounding Asia’s food challenges.
The intensifying competition over natural resources among Asian countries is shaping resource geopolitics, including the construction of oil and gas pipelines.
China has managed to secure new hydrocarbon supplies through pipelines from Kazakhstan and Russia.
But this option is not available to Asia’s other leading economies – Japan, India, and South Korea – which are not contiguous with suppliers in Central Asia, Iran, or Russia.
These countries will remain dependent on oil imports from an increasingly unstable Persian Gulf.
Furthermore, China’s fears that hostile naval forces could hold its economy hostage by interdicting its oil imports have prompted it to build a massive oil reserve, and to plan two strategic energy corridors in southern Asia.
The corridors will provide a more direct transport route for oil and liquefied gas from Africa and the Persian Gulf, while minimizing exposure to sea-lanes policed by the United States Navy.
One such corridor extends 800 kilometers from the Bay of Bengal across Burma to southern China.
In addition to gas pipelines – the first is scheduled to be completed this year – it will include a high-speed railroad and a highway from the Burmese coast to China’s Yunnan province, offering China’s remote interior provinces an outlet to the sea for the first time.
The other corridor – work on which has been delayed, owing to an insurrection in Pakistan’s Baluchistan province – will stretch from the Chinese-operated port at Gwadar, near Pakistan’s border with Iran, through the Karakoram mountains to the landlocked, energy-producing Xinjiang province.
Notably, in giving China control of its strategic Gwadar port in February, Pakistan has permitted the Chinese government to build a naval base there.
Given the significant role that natural resources have historically played in global strategic relations – including driving armed interventions and full-scale wars – increasingly murky resource geopolitics threatens to exacerbate existing tensions among Asian countries.
Rising dependence on energy imports has already been used to rationalize an increased emphasis on maritime power, raising new concerns about sea-lane safety and vulnerability to supply disruptions.
This partly explains the current tensions between China and Japan over their conflicting territorial claims to islands in the East China Sea, which occupy an area of only seven square kilometers, but are surrounded by rich hydrocarbon reserves.
Disputes in the South China Sea involving China and five of its neighbors, and in southern Asia, are equally resource-driven.
While strategic competition for resources will continue to shape Asia’s security dynamics, the associated risks can be moderated if Asia’s leaders establish norms and institutions aimed at building rule-based cooperation.
Unfortunately, little progress has been made in this area.
For example, 53 of Asia’s 57 transnational river basins lack any water-sharing or cooperative arrangement.
Indeed, Asia is one of only two continents, along with Africa, where regional integration has yet to take hold, largely because political and cultural diversity, together with historical animosities, have hindered institution-building.
Strained political relations among most of Asia’s sub-regions make a region-wide security structure or more effective resource cooperation difficult to achieve.
This could have significant implications for Asia’s ostensibly unstoppable rise – and thus for the West’s supposedly inevitable decline.
After all, Asian economies cannot sustain their impressive economic growth without addressing their resource, environmental, and security challenges – and no single country can do it alone.
Developing Economies’ Long-Term Financing Shortfall
WASHINGTON, DC – Since the global financial crisis, “banking” has practically become a swear word.
But, while banks undoubtedly have the capacity to inflict serious damage on economies and livelihoods, a well-run financial system can offer significant benefits.
A growing body of evidence, highlighted in the World Bank Group’s recent Global Financial Development Report,shows that financial institutions and markets have a profound influence on economic development, poverty alleviation, and the stability of economies worldwide, and that a pragmatic assessment of the state’s role in finance is warranted.
On the surface, the most unusual feature of the ongoing financial crisis is that developed economies have been affected much more strongly and directly than developing economies, many of which have learned from previous crises, put their fiscal houses in order, made progress on structural reforms, and improved supervision and regulation.
But this distinction misses the larger point: the quality of policy matters much more than the level of economic development.
Some financial systems in developed economies – for example, in Australia, Canada, and Singapore – have shown remarkable resilience, while others have gotten into trouble.
At the same time, the focus on financial reform in developed economies, while warranted, has contributed to complacency in developing economies.
For example, many are facing their own version of the “too big to fail” problem – which the crisis reinforced – but have done little to address it.
Moreover, measures taken during the crisis may have helped to mitigate financial contagion, but some do not support robust long-term development of the sector.
Many developing economies weathered the crisis at the cost of massive direct state intervention, while their financial sectors lack breadth and access.
The financial crisis has had a particularly profound impact on the supply of finance at longer maturities.
To some extent, this is understandable, given the focus on short-term liquidity and capital flows.
But the sharply decreased availability of longer-term funding is heightening financial-sector vulnerabilities.
While developing economies’ share of the global economy has risen from roughly one-third to one-half over the last decade, developed economies continue to dominate the supply of long-term funding.
The mismatch between the time horizon of available funding and that of investors and entrepreneurs, particularly those in developing economies, is a source of vulnerability that acts as an impediment to growth.
Several factors have diminished investors’ willingness to extend long-term credit.
The financial crisis reduced private financiers’ risk appetite, making long-term exposures unappealing.
Net private capital flows, particularly to developing economies, have become more volatile.
Private capital, which accounts for more than 90% of capital flows to developing economies, will remain the dominant source of long-term financing.
But the availability of long-term capital appears to have been impaired, as traditional providers of equity to infrastructure projects, for example, have become less able or willing to invest.
Financing from banks has also been constrained owing to deleveraging, particularly by European banks.
The new Basel III package of global banking reforms may increase funding costs further for some borrowers, while reducing the availability of finance, especially for longer-term debt.
Institutional investors, such as pension funds and life-insurance companies, with more than $70 trillion in assets, are a major additional source of long-term capital.
While such investment in long-term productive assets like infrastructure is essential to generating the income that these investors demand, less than 1% of pension-fund assets are allocated directly to infrastructure projects.
Meanwhile, net savings in developing economies are increasing, and low yields in developed economies are providing an incentive for investors to channel more resources to productive investment in these countries.
Recently, several banks have been able to issue long-term bonds at affordable rates.
Another promising development is the growth of local-currency bond markets.
These markets can become a strong source of financing for longer-term domestic investment, including in infrastructure, thereby reducing currency risk for borrowers and investors.
But strong and sustainable development of these markets cannot occur without institutional and regulatory reforms that ensure an attractive environment, as well as capacity-building in both the public and private sectors to facilitate further market development.
Investors’ willingness to make capital available over the longer term for infrastructure development, job creation, and economic growth depends on their perceptions of various kinds of risk.
Policymakers can manage these perceptions by improving public-sector governance, ensuring sound macroeconomic management, promoting a transparent and supportive legal framework for private-sector activity, building debt-management capacity, and protecting investors from expropriation.
Moving away from a one-size-fits-all approach to financial reform means committing the time and effort needed to understand the political economy, as well as establishing partnerships with representatives from government, civil society, and the private sector.
Such tailored solutions are essential to bolstering economic performance in developed and developing economies alike.
India’s Patently Wise Decision
NEW YORK – The Indian Supreme Court’s refusal to uphold the patent on Gleevec, the blockbuster cancer drug developed by the Swiss pharmaceutical giant Novartis, is good news for many of those in India suffering from cancer.
If other developing countries follow India’s example, it will be good news elsewhere, too: more money could be devoted to other needs, whether fighting AIDS, providing education, or making investments that enable growth and poverty reduction.
But the Indian decision also means less money for the big multinational pharmaceutical companies.
Not surprisingly, this has led to an overwrought response from them and their lobbyists: the ruling, they allege, destroys the incentive to innovate, and thus will deal a serious blow to public health globally.
These claims are wildly overstated.
In both economic and social-policy terms, the Indian court’s decision makes good sense.
Moreover, it is only a localized effort at rebalancing a global intellectual-property (IP) regime that is tilted heavily toward pharmaceutical interests at the expense of social welfare.
Indeed, there is a growing consensus among economists that the current IP regime actually stifles innovation.
The impact of strong IP protection on social welfare has long been considered ambiguous.
The promise of monopoly rights can spur innovation (though the most important discoveries, like that of DNA, typically occur within universities and government-sponsored research labs, and depend on other incentives).
But there often are serious costs as well: higher prices for consumers, the dampening effect on further innovation of reducing access to knowledge, and, in the case of life-saving drugs, death for all who are unable to afford the innovation that could have saved them.
The weight given to each of these factors depends on circumstances and priorities, and should vary by country and time.
Advanced industrialized countries in earlier stages of their development benefited from faster economic growth and greater social welfare by explicitly adopting weaker IP protection than is demanded of developing countries today.
Even in the United States, there is growing concern that so-called hold-up patents and me-too patents – and the sheer thicket of patents, in which any innovation is likely to become entangled in someone else’s IP claims – are diverting scarce research resources away from their most productive uses.
India represents only about 1-2% of the global pharmaceutical market.
But it has long been a flashpoint in battles over expansion of pharmaceutical companies’ global IP rights, owing to its dynamic generics industry and its willingness to challenge patent provisions both domestically and in foreign jurisdictions.
The revocation of patent protection for medicines in 1972 greatly expanded access to essential medicines, and led to the growth of a globally competitive domestic industry that is often called the “pharmacy of the developing world.”
For example, production of anti-retroviral drugs by Indian generic manufacturers such as Cipla has reduced the cost of life-saving AIDS treatment in Sub-Saharan Africa to just 1% of the cost a decade ago.
Much of this globally valuable capacity was built under a regime of weak – in fact, non-existent – protection for pharmaceutical patents.
But India is now bound by the World Trade Organization’s TRIPS agreement, and has revised its patent laws accordingly, causing widespread anxiety in the developing world about the implications for global provision of affordable medicines.
Indeed, the Gleevec decision is still only a small reversal for Western pharmaceuticals.
Over the last two decades, lobbyists have worked to harmonize and strengthen a far stricter and globally enforceable IP regime.
As a result, there are now numerous overlapping protections for pharmaceutical companies that are very difficult for most developing countries to contest, and that often pit their global obligations against their domestic obligations to protect their citizens’ lives and health.
According to the Indian Supreme Court, the country’s amended patent law still places greater weight on social objectives than in the US and elsewhere: the standards of non-obviousness and novelty required to obtain a patent are stricter (especially as they pertain to medicines), and no “evergreening” of existing patents – or patent protection for incremental follow-up innovations – is allowed.
The court thus reaffirmed India’s primary commitment to protecting its citizens’ lives and health.
There is a curious incoherence in the argument that the Indian decision undermines property rights.
A critical institutional foundation for well-functioning property rights is an independent judiciary to enforce them.
India’s Supreme Court has shown that it is independent, interprets the law faithfully, and does not easily succumb to global corporate interests.
It is now up to the Indian government to use the TRIPS agreement’s safeguards to ensure that the country’s intellectual-property regime advances both innovation and public health.
Globally, there is growing recognition of the need for a more balanced IP regime.
But the pharmaceutical industry, trying to consolidate its gains, has been pushing instead for an ever stronger and more imbalanced IP regime.
Countries considering agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership or bilateral “partnership” agreements with the US and Europe need to be aware that this is one of the hidden objectives.
What are being sold as “free-trade agreements” include IP provisions that could stifle access to affordable medicines, with a potentially significant impact on economic growth and development.
Emerging Markets’ Feminine Future
LONDON – According to the United Nations, 70% of women worldwide experience violence in their lifetime.
The World Bank adds that women aged 15-44 are more likely to experience rape or domestic violence than cancer, car accidents, war, or malaria.
Such indicators are even more alarming in emerging markets, where discrimination and gender inequality are particularly prevalent.
This partly reflects the failure of public policy to ameliorate the distributive consequences of rapid economic growth.
With the informal sector continuing to play a major role in emerging economies, women often have access to only unreliable and transitory employment that offers casual and irregular wages.
Meanwhile, unprecedented urbanization has disrupted traditional family structures, further undermining the role that women can play in economies and societies.
The damaging impact of active gender discrimination – such as bride burning and female infanticide – is clear.
But passive discrimination – tolerating rules and institutions that deny women equal say in reproductive decisions, equal access to education and employment, equal pay for equal work, equal rights before the law, and equal political influence – is similarly destructive.
In all of its forms, gender discrimination makes women vulnerable to sexual slavery, trafficking, and forced marriage, deprives women of their inalienable rights, and diminishes their quality of life.
At the same time, it stunts the capacity of boys and men to understand women’s plight, thus diminishing their motivation to change the situation.
While these issues are global, they are most urgent in emerging markets, where they are undermining the social and economic progress on which the rest of the world increasingly relies.
In the wake of the global economic crisis, emerging markets have become the engines of worldwide growth.
But these countries face growing constraints to sustainability, social cohesion, and political stability, including erosion of their international competitiveness, environmental degradation, weaknesses (including corruption) in national, local, and corporate governance, wasted human capital, and growing social, economic, and gender inequality.
Failure to make full use of women’s talents undermines emerging markets’ economic development, while the marginalization and abuse of women threatens their social advancement and impairs their political stability.
With most countries worldwide facing continued economic uncertainty, the international community has a vested interest in emerging economies’ resilience, collective capacity to sustain global demand for goods and services, and ability to confront the challenges, such as gender inequality, that threaten their success.
The importance of overcoming these barriers to development was emphasized at a recent symposium (of which I was the chair) at Green Templeton College, Oxford.
Fifty leaders from government, business, civil society, and academia identified gender inequality as the most urgent constraint to sustainable growth, social cohesion, and political stability, and agreed on the steps needed to address the issue effectively.
First and foremost, national policymakers must take concrete, comprehensive action to ensure that women are forced to abandon neither productive nor reproductive activities.
To this end, governments should implement measures that guarantee, directly or indirectly, affordable child- and elder-care support systems for working parents.
Moreover, private employers should be encouraged to build supportive workplaces by implementing creative solutions to common constraints.
For example, MAS Holdings in Sri Lanka has incorporated into the workplace nursing stations, on-site banking, and company buses that ease employees’ commutes and facilitate participation in sports programs.
Such measures not only lead to increased productivity; they also bolster loyalty, morale, and thus employee retention.
At the same time, it is crucial that women enjoy total reproductive autonomy and sexual sovereignty.
This can be achieved only with the provision of universal and unfettered access to reproductive and other relevant health-care services.
But even healthy reproduction has a dark side.
Neonaticide (killing infants that are less than one day old), infanticide (killing infants that are more than one day old), and the practice of disposing of female children in favor of male offspring are not only barbaric; they have led to imbalanced gender ratios in many emerging markets.
Policymakers must enforce criminal sanctions against these practices.
Subsequently, educational programs for children and adults should be launched, in collaboration with religious groups, in order to improve public understanding of gender inequality.
By promoting a shift in public perceptions, such programs can catalyze fundamental behavioral changes.
International action is also crucial.
The World Bank and regional development banks should be encouraged to incorporate gender-equality criteria into their eligibility criteria for loans and credit to emerging-market governments and private-sector corporations.
Such a clear economic link would help to motivate local policymakers to take strong action, while helping to bolster public support for policies promoting gender equality.
The international community has a profound stake in the future performance of emerging markets.
In order to bolster these countries’ social and economic advancement, the development agenda in the coming years should include a robust commitment to promoting gender equality.
The Impotence of the Federal Reserve
CAMBRIDGE – The United States Federal Reserve’s recent announcement that it will extend its “Operation Twist” by buying an additional $267 billion of long-term Treasury bonds over the next six months - to reach a total of $667 billion this year - had virtually no impact on either interest rates or equity prices.
The market’s lack of response was an important indicator that monetary easing is no longer a useful tool for increasing economic activity.
The Fed has repeatedly said that it will do whatever it can to stimulate growth. This led to a plan to keep short-term interest rates near zero until late 2014, as well as to massive quantitative easing, followed by Operation Twist, in which the Fed substitutes short-term Treasuries for long-term bonds.
These policies did succeed in lowering long-term interest rates.
The yield on ten-year Treasuries is now 1.6%, down from 3.4% at the start of 2011.
Although it is difficult to know how much of this decline reflected higher demand for Treasury bonds from risk-averse global investors, the Fed’s policies undoubtedly deserve some of the credit.
The lower long-term interest rates contributed to the small 4% rise in the S&amp;P 500 share-price index over the same period.
The Fed is unlikely to be able to reduce long-term rates any further.
Their level is now so low that many investors rightly fear that we are looking at a bubble in bond and stock prices.
The result could be a substantial market-driven rise in long-term rates that the Fed would be unable to prevent.
A shift in foreign investors’ portfolio preferences away from long-term bonds could easily trigger such a run-up in rates.
Moreover, while the Fed’s actions have helped the owners of bonds and stocks, it is not clear that they have stimulated real economic activity.
The US economy is still limping along with very slow growth and a high rate of unemployment.
Although the economy has been expanding for three years, the level of GDP is still only 1% higher than it was nearly five years ago, when the recession began.
The GDP growth rate was only 1.7% in 2011, and it is not significantly higher now.
Indeed, recent data show falling real personal incomes, declining employment gains, and lower retail sales.
The primary impact of monetary easing is usually to stimulate demand for housing and thus the volume of construction.
But this time, despite historically low mortgage interest rates, house prices have continued to fall and are now more than 10% lower in real terms than they were two years ago.
The level of real residential investment is still less than half its level before the recession began.
The Fed has noted that structural problems in the housing market have impaired its ability to stimulate the economy through this channel.
Business investment is also weak, even though large corporations have very high cash balances.
With so much internal liquidity, these businesses are not sensitive to reductions in market interest rates.
At the same time, many very small businesses cannot get credit, because the local banks on which they depend have inadequate capital, owing to accrued losses on commercial real-estate loans.
These small businesses, too, are not helped by lower interest rates.
The Fed’s monetary easing did temporarily contribute to a weaker dollar, which boosted net exports.
But the dollar’s decline has more recently been reversed by the global flight to safety by investors abandoning the euro.
Even if the US economy continues to stumble in the months ahead, the Fed is unlikely to do anything more before the end of the year.
The next policy moves to help the economy must come from the US Congress and the administration after the November election.
Nonetheless, what needs to be done is already clear.
The cloud of a sharp rise in personal and corporate income-tax rates, now scheduled to occur automatically at the start of 2013, must be removed.
The projected increase in the long-term fiscal deficit must be reversed by stemming the growth in transfers to middle-class retirees.
Fundamental tax reform must strengthen incentives, reduce distorting “tax expenditures,” and raise revenue.
Finally, the relationship between government and business, now quite combative, must be improved.
If these things happen in 2013, the US economy can return to a more normal path of economic expansion and rising employment.
At that point, the Fed can focus on its fundamental mandate of preventing a rise in the rate of inflation.
Until then, it is powerless.
Why Bo Stole the Show
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – As show trials go, the drama featuring Bo Xilai, the once-swaggering, media-savvy former Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chief of Chongqing, veered anomalously into improvisation.
Before the proceedings began, the conventional wisdom was that Bo’s trial had been carefully scripted and rehearsed to portray a forlorn and penitent sinner confessing his crimes and apologizing to the Party.
But the historic five-day trial dispelled any notion that Bo would go quietly to his cell in Beijing’s infamous Qincheng Prison, where China’s fallen top leaders are incarcerated.
He challenged the prosecution vigorously, defending himself with a feistiness that surprised nearly all who read the transcripts released by the court in real time on the trial’s first day.
Bo dismissed one of his accusers as having “sold his soul.”
He characterized testimony given by his wife, Gu Kailai, now serving a suspended death sentence for murdering the British businessman Neil Heywood in 2011, as “comical” and “fictional,” and he called her “crazy.”
Throughout the trial, Bo flatly denied most of the corruption charges, often professed ignorance of the facts, and claimed to be unable to recall any details of the matters in question.
He even retracted his confession to the CCP’s anti-graft agency, blaming mental stress for his admission that he accepted bribes from a man he called “soulless” in court.
In his closing statement, he dropped a bombshell: he claimed that Wang Lijun, his former police chief and henchman (and a “vile character”), was secretly in love with his wife.
The trial transcripts create an impression of a man who, had he not gone into politics, would have excelled as a trial lawyer.
Bo made the prosecution look sloppy and incompetent.
However, anyone who believes that the courtroom drama in the provincial capital of Jinan will determine the trial’s outcome (the verdict and sentence will be announced in September) is seriously mistaken.
The CCP’s leaders have already decided that Bo is guilty and must spend years in jail (the scale of Bo’s alleged bribe-taking ensures a sentence of 15-20 years).
A logical question to ask, then, is why the Party allowed an unprecedented degree of openness at the trial.
The two most recently purged Politburo members were tried in secret, as were Bo’s wife, and his former police chief.
The optimistic view is that China’s new leadership wants to demonstrate its commitment to the rule of law and fairness.
But that is a naive interpretation.
While the trial proceedings on the first day were refreshingly open by Chinese standards, that quickly changed.
Transcripts were not released in real time on subsequent days, and they omitted some crucial details (for example, Bo claimed that the Party’s representatives threatened to execute his wife and prosecute his son if he refused to cooperate).
Perhaps worried that Bo’s defiant behavior was winning the public-relations battle, the official media also launched a media blitz savaging Bo’s character and all but pronouncing him guilty.
Even more disturbing, on the second day of the trial, the Chinese police formally arrested Xu Zhiyong, a human-rights lawyer who was leading a campaign to force mandatory disclosure of the wealth of senior officials and their family members.
The Chinese government has also begun a ferocious crackdown on social media, arresting prominent activists on dubious charges.
So there must be a different – and more political – interpretation of the Chinese government’s handling of Bo’s trial.
It is worth recalling that purging him was a deeply divisive affair at the CCP’s highest levels.
His patrons and allies could not save him, but they were well positioned to demand that his trial be conducted as openly as possible.
Given Bo’s gift for dazzling an audience, his allies must have felt confident that a spirited defense would serve him well, both legally and politically.
Bo certainly did not disappoint.
He could have groveled his way through the trial, like other senior Party officials brought down by corruption scandals, and as most defendants have done in the long grim history of communist show trials beginning with Stalin.
But Bo apparently is not accepting his political demise as a final act – in his closing statement, he told the court that he wanted to keep his Party membership (he was expelled anyway) – and a comeback calculus may well have motivated his spirited performance.
Bo understands that he should not be perceived as a pitiful loser who gutlessly besmirches his honor.
By appearing dignified, defiant, and forceful, Bo evidently sought to preserve his image among his allies and supporters as a strong leader.
Denouncing himself in order to gain leniency – in a case that he portrayed as a grievous miscarriage of justice – would have made him look like a coward.
Bo may be heading to jail, but he retains some chance of political rehabilitation should things change dramatically in China.
His botched – but riveting – trial may be over, but the Bo Xilai show will go on.
Economic Rebalancing Acts
LONDON – We all know how the global economic crisis began.
The banks over-lent to the housing market.
The subsequent burst of the housing bubble in the United States caused banks to fail, because banking had gone global and the big banks held one another’s bad loans.
Banking failure caused a credit crunch.
Lending dried up and economies started shrinking.
So governments bailed out banks and economies, producing a sovereign debt crisis.
With everyone busy deleveraging, economies failed to recover.
Much of the world, especially Europe, but also the slightly less sickly US, remains stuck in a semi-slump.
So how do we escape from this hole?
The familiar debate is between austerity and stimulus.
“Austerians” believe that only balancing government budgets and shrinking national debts will restore investor confidence.
The Keynesians believe that without a large fiscal stimulus – a deliberate temporary increase of the deficit – the European and US economies will remain stuck in recession for years to come.
I am one of those who believe that recovery from the crisis requires fiscal stimulus.
I don’t think monetary policy, even unorthodox monetary policy, can do the job.
Confidence is too low for commercial banks to create credit on the scale needed to return to full employment and the pre-crisis growth trend, however many hundreds of billions of whatever cash central banks pour into them.
We are learning all over again that the central bank cannot create whatever level of credit it wants!
So, like Paul Krugman, Martin Wolf, and others, I would expand fiscal deficits, not try to shrink them.
I advocate this for the old-fashioned Keynesian reason that we are suffering from a deficiency of aggregate demand, that the multiplier is positive, and that the most effective way to reduce the private and public debts a year or two down the line is by taking steps to boost growth in national income now.
But the argument between austerians and Keynesians over how to encourage sustained recovery intersects with another debate.
Simply put, what kind of post-recovery economy do we want?
This is where economics becomes political economy.
Those who believe that all was fine with the pre-crisis economy except for banks making crazy loans are convinced that preventing such crises in the future requires only banking reform.
The new reform orthodoxy is “macro-prudential regulation” of commercial banks by the central bank.
Some would go further and either nationalize the banks or break them up.
But their horizon of reform is similarly confined to the banking sector, and they rarely ask what caused the banks to behave so badly.
In fact, it is possible to regard excessive bank lending as a symptom of deeper economic flaws.
The economist Thomas Palley sees it as a means of offsetting growth in income inequality, with access to cheap credit replacing the broken welfare guarantee of social democracy.
So reform requires redistribution of wealth and incomes.
Redistributive measures go quite well with stimulus policies, because they may be expected to increase aggregate demand in the short term (owing to lower-income households’ higher propensity to consume) and minimize the economy’s dependence on debt financing in the long term.
Initial damage to the confidence of the business class caused by higher taxes on the wealthy would be balanced by the prospect of&#160;higher overall consumption.
Others argue that we should try to rebalance the economy not just from rich to poor, but also from energy-wasting to energy-saving.
The premise of the green economic agenda is that we have reached the ecological limits of our current growth model, and that we will need to find ways of living that reduce demands on non-renewable sources of energy.
So stimulus policies should aim to stimulate not just demand per se; they must focus, instead, on stimulating ecologically-friendly demand.
For example, greens advocate free municipal transport in major cities.
In general, they argue, we need more care, not more cars, so stimulus money should go to health, education, and the protection of the environment.
The truth is that any fiscally-driven recovery policy is bound to have reformist implications.
That is why the austerians are so against it, and why even those who accept the theoretical case for a stimulus insist on implementing it through monetary policy alone.
Re-balancing the economy from gas-guzzling to energy-saving – and from private to public consumption – is bound to alter the goal of economic policy.
Maximizing GDP growth will no longer be the top priority; rather, it should be something we might want to call “happiness,” or “well-being,” or the “good life.”
The radical case is that the pre-crisis economy crashed not because of preventable mistakes in banking, but because money had become the sole arbiter of value.
So we should be energetic in seeking recovery, but not in a way that simply reproduces the structural flaws of the past.
As Dani Rodrik has well put it: “If economics were only about profit maximization, it would be just another name for business administration.
It is a social discipline, and society has other means of cost accounting beside market prices.”
The Incredible Vanishing Asset
ROME – Back in the late 1980’s, I attended a conference on “revenue management,” or the art of pricing airline seats to get maximize yield.
Too high, and you lost business; too low, and you got less than people were willing to pay.
Most of the speakers were from the airline industry, which already knew the tricks.
Many of the listeners were from the hotel business; they were just learning.
As a customer, I felt as if I had penetrated the enemy’s strategy session.
Over the years, I watched as more and more markets picked up two related concepts: time-based pricing and more efficient use of so-called “vanishing assets” – or capital goods that generate revenue only as they are used.
In the old days, before computers, it was hard to manage complex pricing – or, for that matter, to reach the right customers with specific time-based or location-based offers.
Hotels and airlines were a special case: their business is dependent on shared use of capital assets.
Of course, some businesses do use blunt versions of time-of-day or seasonal pricing.
We take it for granted that health clubs charge more for memberships that include peak hours.
But, in general, an asset is an asset, and you still hear complaints from people who don’t understand why the guy next to them in an airplane paid a lower price.
As real-time information about customers’ needs and vendors’ offers combines with a new concern for efficiency and optimization, there is a widespread shift to make use of the opportunities to personalize offers around location and time.
The cost of complexity and targeting has dropped, even as the demand for return on assets has increased.
You can see this in housing rentals, hotels and hospitality, and rental and leasing in general.
Zipcar, for example, lets people share cars. (Let’s hope the Chinese discover this before everyone in China buys their own car!)
And Worktopia is an online marketplace for business meeting rooms.
Overall, I see a broad shift from understanding assets as something you have, to looking for a stream of utility.
To illustrate, here are three start-ups that take the concept to individuals or small businesses; call it peer-to-peer timesharing.
(Yes, I am betting on this trend: I am an investor in one, LendAround, and considering an investment in the other two.) 
LendAround, in the United States, enables individuals to lend their DVDs to strangers, with the company charging a transaction fee for managing the process.
A DVD is about the smallest, cheapest item for which the logistical costs do not outweigh the value.
This market probably won’t last forever, but I suspect that LendAround ultimately may move on to other items.
For now, DVDs are a convenient, commodity-like object to start with: once you specify which title, there’s no variation in quality (unlike with houses or other goods) or terms and conditions.
Next is Xtify, founded by long-time entrepreneur Andrew Weinreich, which is focused on time-of-day pricing targeted at people who are nearby and reachable on their mobile phones.
To some extent, Xtify is an echo of Weinreich’s other venture, MeetMoi, a real-time dating site that uses mobile-phone location technology and interest profiles to help users find like-minded strangers.
Xtify lets its users – mostly small retailers and service providers – offer real-time pricing or discounts with the added precision of targeting by real-time geo-location.
With Xtify, service vendors can appeal to customers who are conveniently placed in both space and time – so they can come in now for, say, a discount latte.
The latte’s ingredients will remain available, but the space in the shop and the work of the people who will prepare the latte are vanishing assets.
Xtify’s challenge will be to get distribution; users will need to add the app to their cell phone in order to be targeted by anyone from a manicurist to an airport massage booth.
Finally, there is Rezz.it, focused on larger, planned transactions – but, again, transactions that might not have happened because willing sellers would never have found eager buyers.
The basic idea is that people can post items they have to rent, with a broad variety of descriptions and conditions.
You can limit the visibility to people you know.
The function may be to make money, or simply to remind your brother-in-law that you need the lawnmower back.
If he forgets, Rezz.it will remind him so that you don’t have to.
And if you want him to pay, Rezz.it will help you to collect without feeling like a cheapskate.
Or you may have a set of under-used dining room chairs.
You don’t particularly want to lend them out every day, but if someone is willing to pay, say, $200 to rent them for a dinner party, the trouble might be worth it.
So you can set a high price to offset the inconvenience and make money on the side.
And you can post different prices for different times: $20,000 to rent my house in London during the Olympics, $10,000 over Christmas, or $1,000 any other time.
At the other end of the spectrum, you could rent baby clothes for three months at a time.
In the end, Rezz.it is unlikely to replace current real-estate rental sites, but its software may provide enabling technology for some of them.
And it will enable other markets – for everything from lawnmowers to clothing, handbags, and cooking equipment – to become more efficient.
The first impact of monetizing vanishing assets could be to lower demand for such goods, since one lawnmower, for example, can serve many people.
But it will also lower the cost of using them. Just imagine if there were no way to use an airplane other than by owning it.
By sharing capital equipment, we make it more accessible to more people – and ultimately increase demand.
The Indian Tortoise and the Chinese Hare
“India everywhere” was the theme at this year’s World Economic Forum.
In the West, there is so much focus on China that India’s achievements are often acknowledged only as an afterthought.
As if to underscore the point that political stability must triumph in the long run, the Indians plastered Swiss buses with the banner: “India: The World’s Fastest Growing Democracy.”
The India media blitz was a huge success.
In Davos, speaker after speaker touted the idea that even if China is ahead now, over the longer run, the race between Asia’s two giants is a toss-up.
For a few days at least, India’s emergence as a superpower on par with China was taken as a fait accompli.
But what is the reality in the race between economies with more than a billion people each?
On the surface, China has opened up quite a lead on India.
Twenty-five years ago, at the start of the contemporary wave of globalization, national output in India and China was about the same.
Now, by any measure, China is more than twice as rich.
But the real difference is not so much that successful Chinese are doing better than successful Indians.
After all, the Indian elite are world-beaters, as Lakshmi Mittal’s bold $22 billion bid for French steelmaker Arcelor shows.
No, the real difference – whether we like to admit it or not – is that China’s communist government has succeeded in globalizing a much larger share of its population than India’s democratic government has managed to do.
Not that China is exactly egalitarian.
It is only along the coast, home to roughly one in three Chinese citizens, that most people can be said to have really joined the twenty-first century.
Much of rural China is still miserable, with 150 million people effectively unemployed and health and education standards often befitting an earlier century.
But caste-bound India’s record of exclusion is worse.
Perhaps only one in five persons are integrated into the global economy.
For every call center employee, there are many more people still eking out a subsistence living on the land.
Whereas China probably has about 450 million people in its globalized economy, India has at most 200-250 million.
It is this difference, more than anything else, that sets the two economies apart.
What can India do to close the gap?
Its biggest shortcoming is its lack of roads, bridges, ports, and other infrastructure, where the contrast with China is just stunning.
If your products can’t get to the global economy, you cannot conquer it.
Over the past five years, China has multiplied its highway system five-fold.
Its 50,000 kilometers of new roads are built to handle even large aircraft, which is more than one can say about some of the runways at India’s shambolic airports.
It is not just a matter of money – India’s central bank is rolling in cash, which it has mainly invested in low-yield foreign treasury bills.
The real problem is that China’s authoritarian system faces little opposition when it decides to bulldoze a shantytown that stands in the way of a new airport.
India’s government, by contrast, has neither the power nor the inclination to trample over poor people to make rich people richer.
Unfortunately, without infrastructure, the 800 million-plus Indians who have not yet “made it” don’t have a chance.
India will never be able to create enough jobs in services alone; it must be able to compete in low-end manufacturing areas as well.
Without better infrastructure, the majority of India’s citizens will remain frozen out of globalization.
So, is the idea that India’s economy could overtake China’s hopeless romanticism?
Not necessarily, if only because the areas where India excels, notably services, have far higher potential margins than manufacturing.
Here, the Chinese, hampered by a vastly inferior legal system, will not be able to compete easily.
Western companies are far more inclined to trust Indian firms with sensitive financial information or patents than they are in the case of China.
Foreign companies know that if they outsource any high-tech process to China, they might as well publish their blueprints on the Internet.
India also has a much better developed financial system than China, an advantage that will be increasingly important as the two countries develop.
Command and control financing (“directed lending,” as economists call it) works well when it comes to building bridges; it is a lot less effective when it comes to choosing what companies deserve to survive.
The challenge for the Indians, and, indeed, for other emerging markets like Brazil, Russia, and Mexico, is that they need to find ways to broaden the successful sectors of their economies without strangling them.
If India is to ever catch up with China, it must globalize more of its citizens, through better provision of health, education and infrastructure.
Only then will we truly start seeing “India everywhere.”
The India Option
French President Jacques Chirac’s visit to India this month to complete the sale of 6 attack submarines to India will confirm once more India’s emergence as an economic and diplomatic powerhouse.
The “strategic partnership” that both America and the European Union have at times sought with China looks both more plausible and more desirable with democratic India.
With a Muslim President, a Sikh Prime Minister, a Hindu Foreign Minister, and a foreign-born Christian President of its ruling Congress party, India is as remarkable a success story as the twenty-year boom that China’s Communist Party has delivered.
Indeed, since 1991, when a balance-of-payments crisis loomed, India has been shedding its socialist legacies and posting 7.5% average annual GDP growth – only marginally slower than China.
India has opened up its economy to world trade and started to privatize many of its state-owned industries (albeit often too slowly).
High-tech businesses have helped enormously in this effort by showing that India has more to gain than lose from competing in the global marketplace.
Perhaps for the first time since inventing the zero, India has a hot product to sell – and, this time, it can keep the profits for itself.
Moreover, a global bidding war has broken out for Indian brains.
The EU is keen to link into India’s boom.
The first EU Galileo satellite – intended as an alternative to America’s GPS system – was launched in late December with India as a full partner.
Also in December, India became the latest nation to join the EU in the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) team, which aims to produce electricity using nuclear fusion, as happens in the sun.
For obvious historical reasons, the United Kingdom has led the way in building EU links with India.
Indian businesses naturally chose Britain over other locations in Europe for reasons of language and cultural ties, but even that is changing, as Indian investments spread across the Continent.
In a sense, India’s democracy sometimes hinders immediate growth.
Unlike in China, India’s government cannot simply ride roughshod over local interests by, say, leveling a village to build a roadway or a dam.
But this is a sacrifice that India seems more than willing to make to safeguard its freedoms.
That sacrifice is particularly visible in today’s Congress-led Indian government, which relies on support from the Left Front Communist Party.
India’s communists (unlike China’s) remain ideologically driven, and the Left Front is resisting privatization of state assets, lifting caps on foreign direct investment, and creating a more flexible labor market.
Yet the essential reforms, which date back to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s time as finance minister in 1991 and include liberalization of external trade and dismantling the “license raj,” remain on track.
It is clearly in India’s interests to join forces with the EU in negotiations within the World Trade Organization to lower protectionist barriers, particularly in services such as accounting, law, and finance, as this will free up trade and generate greater investment flows.
India already is being treated with growing respect in global economic councils.
When “new economy” issues such as e-commerce come up at the WTO, India, the EU and the United States often find themselves on the same side.
On “old economy” issues, ideological clashes have given way to tough-minded bargaining, as has happened in the Doha round of trade talks.
India supports a Millennium Round of trade talks, but rejects any linkage of trade to labor standards.
The Indians want faster liberalization of the textile and clothing trades; the EU wants better enforcement of intellectual- property protection.
Indeed, India is keen to share intelligence with the EU in the fight against international terrorism.
The main problem in pushing this strategic partnership ahead lies mostly within the EU, where there is a split between protectionists and advocates of free trade.
In particular the EU must resist calls for higher tariffs from southern European textile manufacturers, as these businesses have failed to restructure, despite ample warnings over the last decade to do so.
Indeed, the EU should regard growth in India not as a competitive threat but as a golden opportunity that will benefit everyone.
The global economy is not a zero-sum game, and the challenge for European politicians will be to explain this to EU members, particularly countries like France that are resistant to globalization and keen on building a “Fortress Europe.”
Chirac’s visit provides a perfect moment for India to make it clear that strategic partnerships and protectionism (as seems to be occurring in the French effort to block Mittal’s bid for the Belgian-French steel group Arcelor.) don’t mix.
The second point of convergence between Indian and Western interests is one that will probably get no public mention during Chirac’s visit: India can perhaps serve as a counterweight to China.
The world is beginning to notice that India has nearly the same number of people as China, plus a more benign system of government and no designs on its neighbors.
China hawks in both India and the West dream that “strategic partnership” will link the world’s great democracies.
That will not happen soon.
To be sure, India is as wary of China as some in Europe and America are.
After all, China supplied much of Pakistan’s nuclear-weapons technology and beat India in a 1962 war; their borders remain disputed in places.
Yet neither India nor the EU wants their friendship to be part of an anti-China axis.
Indeed, India has mostly succeeded in ending the chill that set in after 1998, when it declared China to be the main target of its nuclear weapons.
Nonetheless, Europe, India, and America are all aware that today’s friendship could become tomorrow's alliance if China turns hostile.
The Indispensable UN
Success requires diplomacy and patience, and the UN’s latest summit continued the march forward in the creation of a community of nations responsible for the well being of all.
To be sure, the attempt by America’s new UN ambassador, John Bolton, to introduce hundreds of last-minute changes to the summit’s concluding declaration doomed the agreement – perhaps deliberately – to being less comprehensive and forceful than had been hoped.
Indeed, Bolton even wanted to eliminate any reference to the MDG.
Nevertheless, even the United States had to give way in the end to this moral imperative.
The summit’s declaration also enunciated, in refined diplomatic language, new rights and obligations concerning international intervention in a country’s internal matters, as in Darfur.
We are, it seems, at last becoming a world in which each of us is our brother’s keeper.
Some have suggested that the Iraq war proved the UN’s irrelevance.
On the contrary, I believe that the Iraq debacle underscores the value of the UN, and the need to strengthen it further.
Let’s not forget that, within the limits of its powers, the UN worked.
It was asked to judge whether there was an imminent threat to world peace requiring pre-emptive military action.
After reviewing the evidence, it concluded that the case for going to war had not been made, while the risk of turmoil – about which most experts in the region warned – almost certainly weighed on the deliberations.
Since then, evidence has mounted not only that there were no weapons of mass destruction, but that the American and British governments provided deceptive, distorted, and misleading information.
Similarly, the evidence is overwhelming that there was little if any link between Iraq and Al-Qaeda – at least before the war. 
In other words, deliberative democracy ­­– perhaps our most important safeguard against headstrong and reckless action – worked at the UN, but not in the US.
Unfortunately, the UN could not prevent the US and other countries from taking actions that almost surely contravene international law.
The story since then is well known.
When weapons of mass destruction were not found, the US and its small (and dwindling) “coalition of the willing” conjured up a new rationale – the struggle for democracy.
But if that were the objective, clearly a long list of countries should have been drawn up, and it is hardly certain that Iraq would have come out on top.
Inevitably, its major source of strength is moral suasion.
Even most Americans were reluctant to enter Iraq without the UN’s blessing.
The democratic deliberative process worked, and it yielded the right answer.
This should enhance confidence in the UN.
But the UN needs to be strengthened, by, for example, funding a permanent peacekeeping force.
Too often, UN peacekeeping missions require passing the hat among the advanced industrial countries, giving them virtual veto power over when, where, and how the UN acts.
At the same time, a strengthened economic and social security council would enable the UN to shape more effectively debates about reforming the global economic and financial system.
Today, by contrast, such debates are too often centered at the IMF, where the financial interests of the advanced industrial countries predominate.  
These reforms will eventually come.
Globalization has meant closer international integration, and that in turn has meant a greater need for collective action.
The UN is the international institution created for that purpose, and as the world changes, the UN must change with it.
But meaningful reform will almost surely have to await an American administration that is committed to global democracy in deed as well as rhetoric.
The Inequality Trap
WASHINGTON, DC – As evidence mounts that income inequality is increasing in many parts of the world, the problem has received growing attention from academics and policymakers.
In the United States, for example, the income share of the top 1% of the population has more than doubled since the late 1970’s, from about 8% of annual GDP to more than 20% recently, a level not reached since the 1920’s.
While there are ethical and social reasons to worry about inequality, they do not have much to do with macroeconomic policy per se.
But such a link was seen in the early part of the twentieth century: capitalism, some argued, tends to generate chronic weakness in effective demand due to growing concentration of income, leading to a “savings glut,” because the very rich save a lot.
This would spur “trade wars” as countries tried to find more demand abroad.
From the late 1930’s onward, however, this argument faded as the market economies of the West grew rapidly in the post-World War II period and income distributions became more equal.
While there was a business cycle, no perceptible tendency toward chronic demand weakness appeared.
Short-term interest rates, most macroeconomists would say, could always be set low enough to generate reasonable rates of employment and demand.
Now, however, with inequality on the rise once more, arguments linking income concentration to macroeconomic problems have returned.
The University of Chicago’s Raghuram Rajan, a former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, tells a plausible story in his recent award-winning book Fault Lines about the connection between income inequality and the financial crisis of 2008.
Rajan argues that huge income concentration at the top in the US led to policies aimed at encouraging unsustainable borrowing by lower- and middle-income groups, through subsidies and loan guarantees in the housing sector and loose monetary policy.
There was also an explosion of credit-card debt.
These groups protected the growth in consumption to which they had become accustomed by going more deeply into debt.
Indirectly, the very rich, some of them outside the US, lent to the other income groups, with the financial sector intermediating in aggressive ways.
This unsustainable process came to a crashing halt in 2008.
Joseph Stiglitz in his book Freefall, and Robert Reich in his Aftershock, have told similar stories, while the economists Michael Kumhof and Romain Ranciere have devised a formal mathematical version of the possible link between income concentration and financial crisis.
While the underlying models differ, the Keynesian versions emphasize that if the super-rich save a lot, ever-increasing income concentration can be expected to lead to a chronic excess of planned savings over investment.
Macroeconomic policy can try to compensate through deficit spending and very low interest rates.
Or an undervalued exchange rate can help to export the lack of domestic demand.