The West needs Russia as much as Russia needs the West, the thinking goes, whereas no one (to say the least) needs a sanctuary for Islamist fanatics in the heart of the Middle East.
That is why Russia must be persuaded to change course through a combination of economic sanctions, strategic unity, and diplomatic engagement; by contrast, the Islamic State’s ambitions cannot be contained, so they must be suppressed.
But the West needs to rethink its strategy, because the two challenges are not entirely distinct.
Had Obama not failed to enforce his chemical-weapons “red line” in Syria a year ago, following an attack on a suburb of Damascus, Russian President Vladimir Putin probably would not have been as daring as he was in Ukraine.
Likewise, helping the Kurds to confront the Islamic State could send the right message to the Kremlin.
Confronting this dual challenge presupposes a combination of long-term, coordinated strategic thinking and pedagogical skill.
Leaders must explain and clarify.
To say, “I don’t do stupid things,” as Obama did recently in an interview with the New York Times, is not enough, given the complexity, urgency, and scale of the threats America and the West are facing.
The simplicity of the Cold War left little need for explanation.
The West had only one opponent, and both sides understood the rules of the game (that is, the logic of the balance of terror).
Above all, the “Soviet mind” was relatively easy to decipher.
The complexity of today’s challenges consists not only in there being more than one, but also in the difficulty of understanding the “jihadi mind.”
Of course, one can say that the Islamic State’s dream of restoring a Sunni caliphate is as anachronistic as Putin’s neo-imperial ambition.
One can also say that both Putin and the Islamic State have drawn much of their strength from the West’s weakness, particularly its failure to have enforced clear and credible limits to their actions.
But, if Putin and the Islamic State have benefited from the West’s confusion, hesitation, and division in dealing with them, they are not paper tigers.
If they were, the West would need only to wait for its adversaries to collapse under the weight of their own contradictions: Russia’s overestimation of its means, and, in the case of the Islamic State, the consequences of its appallingly cruel behavior.
That scenario seems optimistic at best.
Though the Islamic State is resistible, it represents a much bigger challenge than Al Qaeda ever did.
It has set for itself a concrete territorial goal, and has ample financing, sophisticated weapons, and a highly competent military command.
At the same time, it would be as dangerous to overestimate the Islamic State’s capabilities today as it was to underestimate them yesterday.
The same logic applies to Putin’s Russia.
The seizure of Crimea was a swift, well-executed move, but the same tactics have not worked in the more complex and divided context of eastern Ukraine.
By winning Crimea the way that it did, Russia may well have lost Ukraine.
In his classic treatise Strategy: The Indirect Approach, B.H. Liddell Hart, reflecting on his World War I experiences, insisted on the foolhardiness of direct attacks on an entrenched enemy.
“In strategy,” he argued, “the longest way round is often the shortest way there.”
Today, Liddell Hart would probably encourage the West to concentrate its efforts on helping the Kurdish fighters in the Middle East and aiding Ukraine’s government in Eastern Europe.
That dual effort should be pursued without idealizing these partners.
They are not “good” simply because the West is backing them; but they are, in any case, infinitely better than the forces they are resisting.
Be it containment or rollback, the rules of the game should be clear.
By setting limits to “them,” the West will define – with newfound clarity – who and what it is.
France’s Little Big Man
PARIS – National stereotypes do not fade easily, especially if those with the greatest influence seem to be doing their best to justify them.
Consider the case of France.
To outsiders, the land of Molière is a country where political leaders’ extramarital relationships are tolerated, while badly needed economic reforms are not.
But the world could be in for a surprise – or at least half a surprise.
When it comes to politicians’ liaisons, continuity may prevail in France; but on the issue of reform, change may be around the corner.
President François Hollande has announced measures that, if implemented, would amount to a peaceful revolution: a major reconciliation with the industrial and business world that even his more energetic predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, dared not attempt, despite – or precisely because of – his more conservative inclinations.
The reality of change, however, has been hampered by the stereotype of continuity.
Hollande’s daring pledge of €30 billion ($40.6 billion) in tax cuts to boost the economy has been hijacked, at least in part, by revelations about his private life.
Public-opinion polls following the publication of photographs of a helmeted Hollande riding on a scooter behind one of his bodyguards to an assignation with a movie actress suggest that the French are mildly interested.
But the reality is more nuanced.
The French are not morally shocked by such revelations.
Though former President François Mitterrand’s second family was virtually a state secret, known only to a select elite and hidden from the public by a reverential press, his mistress and their daughter attended his funeral.
And Sarkozy’s tumultuous private life at the beginning of his presidency was on open display.
Unlike the British and the Americans, the French are much less obsessed with sex than they are with financial scandal.
Public-opinion surveys reveal an interesting dualism: the French want maximum freedom in the private sphere and maximum protection in the public sphere.
Thus, the French do not criticize Hollande on the ground of ethics, but on the ground of politics.
The president of “la Grande Nation,” political heir of the Sun King and General de Gaulle, has made a fool of himself: he looked simply ridiculous on his scooter.
Victor Hugo coined the formula “Napoleon le petit” to describe Napoleon III.
Will Hollande, who seems to take so much inspiration for both his public and private life from his mentor and model, France’s first-ever Socialist president, one day be described as “Mitterrand le petit”?
Vaudeville may be a French specialty, like bread, cheese, and wine, but it does not strengthen the dignity and credibility of an already spectacularly unpopular presidency.
Hollande wanted to be a “normal president.”
In the stolen images of him en route to a tryst, he seems to be outdoing himself.
And French humorists – and even politicians – have been quick to play on his vulnerability.
Hollande may be in love with another woman; it does happen.
But, if he is, it could not have been revealed at a worse moment, precisely when he was intent on steering the country onto a new, courageous, and badly needed course.
One may regret the disappearance of boundaries between private and public life in our global Internet age, but one must adjust to it – and Hollande clearly has not.
Of course, the key question is why Hollande waited 18 months before doing the right thing and helping the French economy by alleviating the tax burden that had been reducing French enterprises’ competitiveness.
The official answer is that deteriorating global economic conditions left no other choice.
For some, including me, Hollande was from the start a true social democrat.
But, having campaigned as a socialist, and with his own camp’s deep divisions leaving him no real majority in parliament, he could not afford to reveal his pro-industry orientation (he continues to denounce the financial sector) without a significant delay.
Whether one calls that realism or lack of political courage, a year and a half has been lost, seriously hampering France and its economy.
Now, however, the country may at long last be headed in the right direction.
But it is likely to have a weaker president at the helm.
Hollande now has three years to prove that, animated by the right ideas, he can transform his image – and that of France – with economic results, if not by his personal behavior.
The Congress of Vienna Revisited
PARIS – Two hundred years ago, on September 25, 1814, Russia’s Czar Alexander I and Friedrich Wilhelm III, the King of Prussia, were greeted at the gates of Vienna by Austria’s Emperor Franz I. The start of the Congress of Vienna ushered in the longest period of peace Europe had known for centuries.
So why has its anniversary all but been ignored?
True, the Congress of Vienna is mostly viewed as marking the victory of Europe’s reactionary forces after the defeat of Napoleon.
Yet, given today’s growing global confusion, if not chaos, something like “Proustian” nostalgia for the Congress may not be out of order.
Here, after all, was a meeting that, through tough but successful negotiations, reestablished international order after the upheavals caused by the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars.
Can we apply any of its lessons today?
To answer that question, we should consider not just the 1815 Treaty of Vienna, but also the 1648 Peace of Westphalia and the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, each of which in its own way brought to an end a bloody chapter in European history.
The treaties signed in 1648 concluded nearly a century of religious warfare by enshrining the principle of cuius regio,&nbsp;eius religio (“whose realm, his religion”).
The Congress of Vienna reinstated the principle of the balance of power, based on the belief that all parties shared a common interest transcending their respective ambitions, and re-established the Concert of Nations, which for two generations stopped territorial and ideological revisionism of the type seen from 1789 to 1815.
By contrast, the Treaty of Versailles, too harsh to be honored and too weak to be enforced, paved the way for World War II.
Of the three treaties, the one produced by the Congress of Vienna offers a sort of mirror image to help us understand the specificity of our current conditions.
In Vienna, the European powers were among themselves.
Their feeling of belonging to a great and unified family was reinforced by the common aristocratic origins of their diplomats.
The cultural “other” was not an issue.
Of course, the ambition today cannot be to recreate that world (or to reestablish an anachronistic Westphalian order of religious separation), but rather to devise a new order predicated on different assumptions.
Indeed, one of the keys to our current global disorder is that, in contrast to the Congress of Vienna – or, for that matter, the parties of 1648 – the international system’s main actors are not united by a common will to defend the status quo.
The main actors fall into three categories: open revisionists, like Russia and the Islamic State; those ready to fight to protect a minimum of order, such as the United States, France, and Great Britain; and ambivalent states – including key regional players in the Middle East, such as Turkey and Iran – whose actions fail to match their rhetoric.
In such a divided context, the alliance of “moderates” created by US President Barack Obama to defeat the Islamic State – a group that includes Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates – is weak at best.
A multicultural coalition is probably a requirement of legitimate military action in the Middle East; the dilemma is that unless Obama’s regional coalition broadens considerably, his current allies’ enthusiasm for US military intervention is likely to diminish quickly.
Or perhaps something like the “bipolar hegemony” of Great Britain and Russia after 1815 (though other players like Austria, Prussia, and France mattered) could be reconstituted, with the US and China substituting for Great Britain and Russia.
This seems to be Henry Kissinger’s ultimate dream – a dream that one can glimpse in his latest book, Germanically entitled World Order: Reflections on the Character of Nations and the Course of History.
But can we depend on that dream’s realization?
At a time when we are confronted by Russian expansionism and the extremism of messianic thugs, the lessons from the Congress of Vienna may seem distant and irrelevant.
Yet one is obvious: States possess common interests that should trump national priorities.
China, India, and Brazil are stakeholders in the world system, which means that they, too, need a minimum of order.
But that implies that they also contribute to maintaining it.
China’s interests, for example, would be best served not by playing Russia against the US, but by choosing the party of order over the party of disorder.
A gathering of the modern equivalents of Metternich, Castlereagh, Alexander I, and Talleyrand is also a dream: there are none.
But, in confronting today’s growing disorder and escalating violence, the leaders we have would do well to draw some inspiration from their forebears, who 200 years ago this week opened the way to nearly a century of peace.
Donald Rumsfeld and Smart Power
Donald Rumsfeld, America’s Secretary of Defense, recently spoke about the Bush administration’s global war on terror. “In this war, some of the most critical battles may not be in the mountains of Afghanistan or the streets of Iraq, but in newsrooms in New York, London, Cairo, and elsewhere.
Our enemies have skillfully adapted to fighting wars in the media age, but for the most part we have not.”
The good news is that Rumsfeld is beginning to realize that the struggle against terrorism cannot be won by hard military power alone.
The bad news is that he still does not understand soft power – the ability to get what you want through attraction rather than coercion.
As The Economist commented about Rumsfeld’s speech, “until recently he plainly regarded such a focus on ‘soft power’ as, well, soft – part of ‘Old Europe’s’ appeasement of terrorism.”
Now Rumsfeld finally realizes the importance of winning hearts and minds, but, as The Economist put it, “a good part of his speech was focused on how with slicker PR America could win the propaganda war.”
In other words, in blaming the media for America’s problems, Rumsfeld forgot the first rule of marketing: if you have a poor product, not even the best advertising will sell it.
Rumsfeld’s mistrust of the European approach contains a grain of truth.
Europe has used the attractiveness of its Union to obtain outcomes it wants, just as the US has acted as though its military pre-eminence could solve all problems.
But it is a mistake to count too much on hard or soft power alone.
The ability to combine them effectively is “smart power.”
During the Cold War, the West used hard power to deter Soviet aggression, while it used soft power to erode faith in Communism behind the iron curtain.
That was smart power.
To be smart today, Europe should invest more in its hard-power resources, and America should pay more attention to its soft power.
During President George W. Bush’s first term, Secretary of State Colin Powell understood and referred to soft power, whereas Rumsfeld, when asked about soft power in 2003, replied “I don’t know what it means.”
A high price was paid for that ignorance.
Fortunately, in his second term, with Condoleezza Rice and Karen Hughes at the State Department and Rumsfeld’s reputation dented by failures that in the private sector would have led to his firing or resignation, Bush has shown an increased concern about America’s soft power.
Of course, soft power is no panacea.
For example, soft power got nowhere in attracting the Taliban government away from its support for Al Qaeda in the 1990’s.
It took hard military power to sever that tie.
Similarly, North Korean dictator Kim Jong Il likes to watch Hollywood movies, but that is unlikely to affect his decision about whether to give up his nuclear weapons program.
Such a choice will be determined by hard power, particularly if China agrees to economic sanctions.
Nor will soft power be sufficient to stop Iran’s nuclear program, though the legitimacy of the Bush administration’s current multilateral approach may help to recruit other countries to a coalition that isolates Iran.
But other goals, such as promoting democracy and human rights, are better achieved by soft power.
Coercive democratization has its limits, as the US has learned in Iraq.
This does not mean that Rumsfeld’s Pentagon is irrelevant to American soft power.
Military force is sometimes treated as synonymous with hard power, but the same resource can sometimes contribute to soft power.
A well-run military can be a source of attraction, and military cooperation and training programs can establish transnational networks that enhance a country’s soft power.
The US military’s impressive work in providing humanitarian relief after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004 helped restore America’s attractiveness, and enhanced its soft power.
But the misuse of military resources can also undercut soft power.
The Soviet Union possessed a great deal of soft power in the years after World War II.
But the Soviets’ attractiveness as liberators was destroyed by the way they later used their hard power against Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
Brutality and indifference to “just war” principles of discrimination and proportionality can also destroy legitimacy.
The efficiency of the initial American military invasion of Iraq in 2003 created admiration in the eyes of some foreigners.
But this soft power was undercut by the inefficiency of the occupation, the mistreatment of prisoners at Abu Ghraib, and the policy – initiated by Rumsfeld – of detainment without hearings at Guantánamo.
To be sure, no one expects that we can ever attract people like Mohammed Attta or Osama bin Laden.
We need hard power to deal with such cases.
But today’s terrorist threat is not Samuel Huntington’s clash of civilizations.
It is a civil war within Islam between a majority of normal people and a small minority who want to coerce others into a accepting a highly ideological and politicized version of their religion.
We cannot win unless the moderates win.
We cannot win unless the number of people the extremists recruit is lower than the number we kill and deter.
Rumsfeld may understand this calculus in principle, but his words and actions show that he does not know how to balance the equation in practice.
Doing so – and thus being in a position to win the war – is impossible without soft power.
The Trumping of American Politics
WASHINGTON, DC – As Republicans and Democrats go through the long process of selecting a nominee for next year’s presidential election, both parties face the same question.
Will the anti-establishment – even anti-political – mood now dominating the contest last?
For once, Labor Day (the first Monday in September) was not the presidential race’s demarcation point: the overall themes had already been set.
Revulsion at government and traditional politicians hit the presidential contest like a tornado in the summer, flattening the campaigns of some who were once seen as serious contenders.
Among Republicans this sentiment is, of course, no surprise, given their party’s steady rightward drift and consistent antipathy toward President Barack Obama.
But it suited a wealthy, noisy braggart who barreled into the race attacking conventional politicians as “stupid” and insisting that he alone could get things done.
Those who wrote off Donald Trump as a “buffoon” failed to see that he has shrewdly read the Republican zeitgeist, and that he knows precisely where to stick the knife into competitors.
His depiction of former Florida governor Jeb Bush as a man of “low energy” has done real damage to a candidate whom many had assumed – even before he formally entered the race – would be the favorite.
“The Donald” (no one has better name recognition than the former TV personality) has pitched his appeal both to American patriotism and the country’s dark side.
Around mid-August, as Trump’s poll numbers rose even after public statements that would have brought down mere mortal candidates, it dawned on the pundits that he was no summer infatuation.
It became evident that he might win the first nominating contest, the Iowa caucuses, and that he was leading in the second, New Hampshire, and other states.
It was no longer laughable to say that he could be the Republican nominee.
But the “anti-system” mood of this election campaign is not confined to the Republicans.
Bernie Sanders the socialist and Donald Trump the plutocrat are addressing much the same impulse.
Speaking in clear, declarative sentences, Sanders sets forth an idealistic conception of government policy that appeals to a great many people on the growing left of the Democratic Party.
By contrast, Jeb Bush and the Democrats’ presumed nominee, Hillary Clinton, embody traditional politics.
Both come across as focus-grouped, packaged, and cautious, whereas Trump and Sanders are seen by their followers as “telling it like it is.”
Sanders appeals to the popular frustration with the compromises made by America’s leaders, including the centrist Bill Clinton.
Hillary Clinton, trying to straddle the divide between the two wings of the Democratic Party, is increasingly leaning to the left as Sanders draws enormous crowds, something she has yet to accomplish.
Moreover, her campaign is struggling to escape the quagmire produced by revelations that she conducted official business on a private email server during her tenure as Obama’s Secretary of State.
Meanwhile, Trump’s appeal among Republicans is across the board: moderates and conservatives, college-educated, Evangelicals, men and women.
It also includes white supremacists: in June Trump was endorsed by The Daily Stormer, America’s largest neo-Nazi “news” website.
When two far-right activists in Boston beat a homeless Latino man, with one saying that they had acted in Trump’s name, the candidate commented that some of his followers are “passionate.” A poll of Trump supporters found that 66% believe that Obama is a Muslim, and 61% that he was not born in the US (a claim that Trump continued to trumpet long after it had been disproved).
Trump’s closest Republican rival, Ben Carson, a renowned neurosurgeon, also has no political experience and says outlandish things.
But Carson says them quietly, which may be why his favorability rating in Iowa is higher than that of his Republican competitors (pulling even with Trump in one poll).
Carson has said, for example, that people enter prison as heterosexuals and come out gay; that America is like Nazi Germany in suppressing ideas and opponents; and that the president need not enforce the Supreme Court’s recent landmark decision legalizing gay marriage.
Trump and Carson, along with two other candidates running as political outsiders – Ted Cruz, a senator from Texas, and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina – currently account for around 60% of support among Iowa Republicans.
Bush and the rest of the field, including Rand Paul, Scott Walker, and Marco Rubio – all one-time darlings of the political press – are floundering.
To recover ground, some, especially Walker, have fallen into the trap of trying to out-Trump Trump.
But there’s only one Trump, and his candidacy is causing conniptions on the part of Republican Party officials, particularly given his campaign’s open hostility toward Latinos.
Following Obama’s re-election, in 2012, Republican leaders commissioned a study that showed that the party’s nominee will have to win more Latino votes than ever to win the White House.
There is scant chance of that if Trump is the party’s standard-bearer.
So far, Trump has defied the laws of political gravity.
But it remains possible that his candidacy will crash as some of his rivals drop out and leave their supporters (and wealthy backers) to crystallize around someone they see as a more viable alternative.
That would be a relief to Republican Party leaders, who recently obtained Trump’s vow (easily undone) not to mount an independent presidential campaign should he fail to win the party’s nomination.
In the meantime, both party establishments have reason to be nervous.
With Sanders now polling well ahead of Clinton in New Hampshire, serious commentators have begun speculating that Americans will ultimately be asked to choose between Sanders and Trump.
Which Way for US-China Relations Under Trump?
BEIJING – Donald Trump’s shocking victory in the US presidential election has upended all of the certainties that have shaped not only American politics, but also how the world thinks about the United States.
Trump must now confront the nitty-gritty of managing America’s international relationships, and arguably none is more important for the world than that between the US and China.
But it is also the relationship that was put in the most doubt by the tenor of Trump’s campaign.
The president-elect could complicate bilateral relations, particularly given that his first year in office will coincide with the Chinese Communist Party’s 19th National Congress next fall.
In an ideal world, both Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping should want to keep US-China relations stable.
But this will prove difficult, given not only Trump’s Sinophobic rhetoric, but also ongoing disagreements about Chinese territorial claims in the South China Sea and North Korea’s nuclear ambitions.
Moreover, US-China relations could fall victim to US domestic disputes about global trade, the value of the dollar, and protectionism.
Many Chinese observers accept that Trump will have to grapple with unprecedented divisions at home.
He will be challenged not only by the now shell-shocked Democrats, but also by Republicans who opposed his candidacy, whether openly or covertly.
Under these circumstances, he will have to emphasize putting America’s own house in order.
If, however, he confuses such an effort with his campaign’s “America first” thrust, even more tension is likely.
Beyond domestic politics, the international order has experienced several shocks in recent years, profoundly changing the global context for US-China relations.
Protracted conflicts in Ukraine and Syria hint at a new Cold War between the US and Russia, and the turmoil in those countries, as well as elsewhere, is increasingly disrupting national economies and security regimes.
As the world’s two leading powers, the US and China must figure out how to work together in such unstable conditions.
Today, their unsteady relationship features cooperation alongside intensifying competition.
Not unsurprisingly, the latter has gained more of the world’s attention than the former.
President Barack Obama has been reinforcing the US military presence in and around China’s neighbors, beefing up security alliances in Asia, and very publicly intervening in the territorial disputes in the South China Sea.
The Chinese leadership views these moves, as well as the proposed 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, as an effort to “contain” China.
At the same time that the US is rebalancing its geopolitical strategy toward Asia, China is asserting its global presence with new security and international-development initiatives, including the “one belt, one road” project, which will link the Chinese economy with much of Eurasia.
Likewise, the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank – which the US views as a Chinese tool for challenging the existing international order – continues to attract such faraway prospective members as Canada, which applied to join in August.
Zero-sum competition between the US and China will make a conflict between the two countries more likely.
One potential flashpoint will be North Korea’s nuclear-weapons program.
The US is already taking measures to prevent North Korea from attacking it, or South Korea, through enhanced ballistic missile defense systems.
The new Trump administration could supplement those efforts with military action to increase the pressure on China.
But any effort to bring nuclear-weapons technology to Japan or the Korean Peninsula, something that Trump declared acceptable during the campaign, would create a crisis in Northeast Asia the likes of which the world has not seen since the Korean War.
The US could also clash with China over Taiwan.
Relations between Taiwan and mainland China have been fairly peaceful since the 1995-1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis, when then-US President Bill Clinton sent an American aircraft-carrier battle group into the strait.
But Taiwan remains a highly sensitive – and emotive – issue for China.
If relations with the island sour, so, too, could the US-China relationship.
The world benefits when US-China relations stay on track, so both countries should be more transparent about their national interests.
With clearly defined positions, each country could pursue a policy of strategic restraint, avoiding the swaggering displays of force that have sometimes tempted them in the past.
If a conflict between the US and China were to erupt, China’s modernization could be derailed, and the Chinese people would miss out on the “Chinese Dream” that Xi has declared as their goal. For the US, a diplomatic breakdown would indicate that China had been “lost,” as it previously was thought to have been lost when Mao Zedong defeated Chiang Kai-shek’s US-supported Nationalist regime in 1949.
More broadly, US-China hostility would be felt worldwide, and would disrupt international efforts to confront global challenges such as climate change.
To avoid that scenario in the short term, the US and China should consider forming a joint team that includes experienced, high-ranking officials and prominent experts from both sides.
This group could chart a course for US-China relations in 2017, identify potential conflicts, and recommend solutions before tensions can reach a boiling point.
With a new diplomatic framework for bilateral relations, the US and China could ward off strategic confrontations.
In the long term, the US and China need deeper dialogue and a shared vision for the international order, so that individual countries will not be tempted to form rival blocs among themselves.
The US and China should also work together toward “globalization 2.0,” by reforming international rules and institutions to accommodate both established and emerging countries.
While there is much potential for conflict between the US and China in the coming years, there is also space for improved cooperation.
Indeed, amid the vast uncertainty created by Trump’s victory, a new relationship now makes more strategic sense than ever, given changing global circumstances, regional geopolitics, and domestic challenges in both the US and China.
Trump must now choose between cooperation and confrontation as the framework for US policy toward China.
His choice should be obvious: a collaborative effort to reform the international order would benefit both sides.
Clowns on the Campaign Trail
NEW YORK – Donald Trump, the real-estate tycoon and reality-show host, also known as “The Donald,” is unlikely to be the next president of the United States.
He is loud, crude, ignorant about most things, and looks absurd in his puffed up blond comb-over hairdo.
Even ardent Republicans have dismissed him as a “rodeo clown,” and his campaign as a “circus.”
The Huffington Post covers Trump’s campaign strictly as entertainment news.
Yet, for the moment, Trump is leaving all his rivals for the Republican presidential nomination in the dust.
Even in US politics, which can be very strange, this is extraordinary.
What explains Trump’s popularity?
Are all his supporters “crazies,” as Senator John McCain, perhaps unwisely, called them?
Trump’s critics argue that he is playing to the basest instincts of disaffected voters, who hate foreigners (especially Mexicans), distrust bankers (or anyone with a higher education, for that matter), and still can’t get over the election of a president whose father was black.
Trump, in the comedian Jon Stewart’s words, is “America’s id,” or at least the id of a large number of mostly white, mostly older, mostly small-town Americans.
Now, all this may be so.
But Trump is part of a wider phenomenon throughout the democratic world.
Disaffected voters can be found everywhere, whether in the US, Europe, or India.
But they are not only turning away from mainstream political parties and following populists who promise to clean out the corrupt elites from the centers of power; they also share a taste for political entertainers, or clowns if you like.
Beppe Grillo, a real professional comedian, now leads the second largest political party in Italy.
His aim is to overturn the country’s political establishment and upset the European Union by taking Italy out of the euro.
In a sense, of course, Italians already voted three times for a clownish figure as prime minister.
Silvio Berlusconi, another real-estate billionaire, who began his career as a crooner on a cruise ship, was even more outrageous than Trump, as well as a master of the mass media – literally so, as he owned most of it in his country.
As is true of The Donald, many people, especially men, liked him not despite his outrageous statements and behavior, but because of them.
A television comic named Victor Trujillo, but better known as Brozo the Creepy Clown, became the most influential political commentator in Mexico.
In the Netherlands, not normally a country known for clownish politicians, the surge of populism was first led by Pim Fortuyn, a flamboyantly gay man who staged provocative, and always richly entertaining, public appearances.
Again, his talent for shocking statements was an asset, not a hindrance.
After his violent death in 2002, Geert Wilders, a former punk rocker with a pile of dyed platinum blond hair, shone brightest in the Dutch populist firmament.
Apart from peculiar hairstyles (the balding Berlusconi has his head painted), the new populists have several things in common.
Whether billionaires or not, they share a prickly hostility to so-called elites, from whom they feel socially excluded.
Wilders and Trump, among others of their ilk, also play on popular anti-immigrant sentiment.
Trump called Mexicans in the US “rapists.”
Wilders wants to ban the Koran and stop Muslims from moving to his country.
But this, too, is part of the same resentment against elites, who are blamed for allowing foreigners to arrive in the first place.
In Europe, antipathy to immigrants, or Islam, can quickly switch to hostility toward the European Union, which is seen as yet another bastion of entrenched elites.
This is what Wilders and Grillo have in common.
But I think there is a more basic reason why political clowns are doing so well.
Many people are fed up with the professional political class.
In the past, politicians of the left often came from the trade unions, while conservatives were rich businessmen or landowners.
Social classes had their own interests, which were represented by parties divided by clear ideological differences.
Increasingly, however, people see no difference between politicians from one party or another.
They are lumped together under such rubrics as “Washington,” “Brussels,” or “Wall Street.”
This perception is exaggerated, especially in the US.
The country really would be a different place under a Republican president, especially with a Republican majority in both houses of Congress.
But it is certainly true in many places that ideological differences have largely collapsed.
Social democrats govern in coalition governments with laissez-faire conservatives.
Neoliberalism reigns.
More and more, politics looks like a rigged system whereby members of the same political class compete for jobs, rather than for the victory of ideas, or on behalf of larger collective interests.
Trumpism, then, or Grilloism, is a revolt against the professional politicians.
Trump is not just trying to run against a Democrat for the presidency; he is running against his own party’s establishment as well.
His supporters are disgusted with the compromises made in Washington between leading Republicans and Democrats.
To them, bipartisan cooperation is not necessary to the governance of a large and diverse country; it is a form of corruption.
That is why they voted five years ago for Tea Party politicians, who preferred a government shutdown to a negotiated deal with Democrats.
And that is why they are cheering for a showy loudmouth like Trump.
But, without compromise, a democracy becomes ungovernable.
The US is in grave danger of this now.
Even though Trump will not become the next president, the populist damage has already been done.
Tantangan-Tantangan Kebijakan Luar Negeri Donald Trump
CAMBRIDGE – Selama kampanyenya, Presiden terpilih AS Donald Trump mempertanyakan aliansi-aliansi dan lembaga-lembaga yang mendasari tatanan dunia liberal, namun ia menguraikan sejumlah kebijakan yang spesifik.
Mungkin pertanyaan paling penting yang ramai dibicarakan akibat kemenangannya adalah apakah fase panjang globalisasi yang dimulai pada akhir Perang Dunia II pada dasarnya telah berakhir.
Tidak demikian.
Bahkan jika perjanjian-perjanjian perdagangan seperti Trans-Pacific Partnership dan TTIP gagal dan globalisasi ekonomi melambat, teknologi meningkatkan globalisasi ekologi, politik, dan sosial dalam bentuk perubahan iklim, terorisme lintas negara, dan migrasi – baik Trump menyukainya atau tidak.
Tatanan dunia bukan sekedar ekonomi, dan Amerika Serikat masih menjadi pusatnya.
Warga Amerika sering salah memahami posisinya di dunia.
Kita terombang-ambing antara kemenangan dan penurunan.
Setelah Soviet meluncurkan Sputnik pada tahun 1957, kita percaya bahwa kita sedang mengalami penurunan.
Pada tahun 1980-an, kita berpikir bahwa Jepang lah yang berkuasa.
Setelah Resesi Besar (Great Recession) 2008, banyak orang Amerika salah percaya bahwa Tiongkok lebih kuat dari Amerika Serikat.
Mempertahankan keseimbangan militer di Eropa dan Asia Timur adalah sumber penting pengaruh Amerika, namun Trump benar bahwa mencoba untuk mengendalikan politik dalam negeri dari masyarakat nasionalis di Timur Tengah adalah jalan menuju kegagalan.
Timur Tengah sedang mengalami beberapa revolusi yang berakar dari batas-batas buatan setelah kolonialisme; perselisihan sektarian agama, dan modernisasi yang tertunda yang dijabarkan di dalam Laporan Pembangunan Manusia Arab (Arab Human Development Reports) yang dikeluarkan PBB.
Gejolak yang dihasilkan mungkin berlangsung untuk beberapa dekade, dan ini akan terus memancing terorisme radikal.
Eropa masih tidak stabil selama 25 tahun setelah Revolusi Perancis, dan intervensi militer oleh kekuatan dari luar membuat permasalahan makin buruk.
Namun, bahkan dengan menurunnya impor energi dari Timur Tengah, AS tidak dapat membalikkan punggungnya dari kawasan tersebut, melihat kepentingannya di Israel, non-proliferasi, dan Hak Asasi Manusia, di antaranya.
Perang sipil di Siria bukan hanya sekedar bencana kemanusiaan; namun juga mengganggu kestabilan kawasan tersebut dan Eropa juga.
AS tidak dapat mengesampingkan peristiwa seperti itu, namun kebijakannya juga harus menjadi bagian dari pengamanan, mempengaruhi dampak dengan mendorong dan memperkuat aliansi kita, daripada mencoba untuk memasukan kendali militer secara langsung, yang mana mahal dan kontra produktif.  
Sebaliknya, keseimbangan kekuatan kawasan di Asia membuat AS diterima di sana.
Kebangkitan Tiongkok telah menuai kekhawatiran di India, Jepang, Vietnam, dan negara-negara lain.
Mengelola kebangkitan global Tiongkok adalah salah satu tantangan kebijakan luar negeri terbesar saat ini, dan strategi dua jalur dua pihak AS dengan “integrasi namun memastikan” – yang mana AS mengundang Tiongkok untuk bergabung dengan tatanan dunia liberal, dan pada saat bersamaan memperkuat perjanjian perdamaian mereka dengan Jepang – masih merupakan pendekatan yang tepat.
Tidak seperti satu abad yang lalu, saat Jerman yang sedang bangkit (yang telah melebihi Inggris pada tahun 1900) menuai ketakutan yang membantu memicu bencana pada tahun 1914, Tiongkok tidak akan melibihi kita dalam hal kekuatan keseluruhan.
Bahkan jika ekonomi Tiongkok melebihi jumlah total ekonomi Amerika pada tahun 2030 atau 2040, pendapatan per kapita mereka (pengukuran yang lebih baik untuk melihat kemapanan ekonomi) akan masih ketinggalan.
Terlebih lagi, Tiongkok tidak akan sejajar dengan militer AS dalam hal daya tarik “kekuatan keras” dan “kekuatan lunak”.
Seperti yang pernah dikatakan oleh Lee Kuan Yew, selama AS masih terbuka dan menarik talenta-talenta dunia, Tiongkok akan menjawab tantangan itu dengan baik, namun tidak akan menggantikan AS.
Untuk alasan-alasan tersebut, AS tidak memerlukan kebijakan untuk menahan Tiongkok.
Satu-satunya negara yang dapat menahan Tiongkok adalah Tiongkok itu sendiri.
Selama Tiongkok menekan konflik teritorinya dengan tetangga-tetangganya, Tiongkok menahan dirinya sendiri.
AS perlu untuk meluncurkan inisiatif ekonomi di Asia Tenggara, memastikan kembali aliansi dengan Jepang dan Korea, dan terus meningkatkan hubungan dengan India.
Pada akhirnya, ada Rusia, negara yang sedang mengalami penurunan, namun dengan senjata nuklir yang cukup untuk menghancurkan AS – dan maka dari itu masih merupakan potensi ancaman bagi Amerika dan yang lainnya.
Rusia hampir sepenuhnya menggantungkan pendapatannya dari sumber-sumber energinya, mengadopsi sistem “ekonomi dengan satu tanaman pangan” atau “one crop economy” dengan lembaga-lembaga yang korup, dan diwarnai masalah kesehatan dan kependudukan yang besar.
Intervensi-intervensi Vladimir Putin di negara-negara tetangga dan di Timur Tengah. Dan dengan serangan cyber-nya ke AS dan negara lain, walaupun dimaksudkan untuk membuat Rusia terlihat hebat lagi, hanya memperburuk prospek jangka panjang negara tersebut.
Namun demikian, dalam jangka waktu yang singkat, negara-negara yang mengalami penurunan sering mengambil resiko yang lebih besar dan maka dari itu berbahaya – lihat Kekaisaran Austro-Hungaria pada tahun 1914.
Ini telah menghasilkan dilema kebijakan.
Di satu sisi, penting untuk tidak menerima tantangan Putin yang ingin mengubah permainan terhadap larangan tatanan dunia liberal setelah 1945 yaitu mengenai penggunaan kekuatan oleh negara-negara untuk mencaplok wilayah dari tetangga-tetangganya.
Pada saat yang sama, Trump benar untuk mencegah isolasi penuh sebuah negara yang mana memiliki kepentingan yang sama dengan kita mengenai keamanan nuklir, non-proliferasi, anti-terorisme, kutub utara, dan masalah kawasan seperti Iran dan Afghanistan.
Sanksi keuangan dan energi penting untuk memeberikan efek pencegahan; namun kita juga memiliki kepentingan tulus yang paling baik diteruskan dengan berhubungan dengan Rusia.
Tidak ada yang akan mendapatkan keuntungan dengan Perang Dingin yang baru.
Amerika Serikat sedang tidak mengalami penurunan.
Tugas kebijakan luar negeri yang mendesak bagi Trump adalah menyesuaikan retorikanya dan memastikan para sekutu dan yang lainnya menjaga peran AS dalam tatanan dunia liberal untuk terus berlanjut.
The Age of Incompetence
BERKELEY – On January 20, 2017, US President-elect Donald Trump will take office having received almost three million fewer votes than his opponent; and he will work with a Republican Senate majority whose members won 13 million fewer votes than their Democratic opponents.
Only the Republican majority in the House of Representatives, led by Speaker Paul Ryan, has any claim to represent a numerical majority of the 55% of Americans who voted on Election Day 2016.
Trump will also begin his presidency with an approval rating below 50%.
This is unprecedented – or “unpresidented,” as one of his semi-literate tweets put it (before he deleted it) – in the history of such ratings.
The government of the world’s oldest democracy is, in fact, not democratic.
Also unprecedented is the fact that so few members of the president-elect’s own party, and none of the Democratic opposition, consider him to be qualified for the duties of the presidency, apart from serving as Cheerleader-in-Chief.
Of course, the Trump phenomenon has been gestating for a long period.
With the honorable exception of George H.W. Bush, who had the requisite knowledge, intelligence, temperament, and values to serve, the last time a fully qualified Republican was inaugurated was in 1957.
No one denies that Richard Nixon had the knowledge and intelligence to be president; but most people will admit that his temperament and values left something to be desired.
Similarly, most people thought that Ronald Reagan lacked the requisite knowledge and intelligence for the office.
According to the journalist Peter Jenkins, former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher once said of Reagan, “Poor dear, there’s nothing between his ears.”
And the qualifications that Reagan did have on Inauguration Day eroded over time, after he was wounded in a failed assassination attempt 69 days into his presidency, and, later, when he began to suffer from Alzheimer’s disease.
Still, Reagan’s temperament and values (generally speaking) were well suited to the presidency.
He fully understood that being the star did not mean that he was the boss.
Both as a Hollywood actor and as a US president, Reagan had smart, dedicated, and trained professionals writing his lines and directing his moves.
He knew that his job was to be on screen, and not to interfere with the people behind the camera and in the post-production editing room, who were responsible for the finished product.
This is what most observers expected to see when George W. Bush took office in 2001: a folksy cheerleader who would follow the lead of the wise advisers he had inherited from his father.
But the younger Bush came to think of himself not just as the star, but as “the decider,” too.
And while Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld had been savvy policymakers back in the 1970s, they had become rather erratic by the early 2000s.
For whatever reason, Bush bonded with the two, which sealed his fate.
He has not attended any Republican National Conventions since leaving office, and he may wish that he had he never sent James Baker to Florida in November 2000 to secure his victory over Al Gore.
Trump clearly has not taken any lessons from the second Bush presidency.
He knows that he is the star, but he also wrongly believes that he has the knowledge and intelligence to be the boss.
He seems unaware that his campaign is over, that he could fail catastrophically and permanently in his new role, and that it is in his own interest to ensure that his proposals are sound, not just as slogans, but as actual policies that will keep the US safe and create prosperity.
So, what should the millions of Americans who now fear for the future do?
First, we can work at the state level to try to neutralize any Trump policy initiatives that are flawed or infeasible.
Democrats and principled Republicans in state legislatures need to work together to keep tax revenues flowing and to fund the many spending programs that are in the American interest, regardless of what is happening in Washington, DC.
And they should promise each other that, regardless of who comes to power in 2021, they will not hold each other liable for acting as disruptors today.
At the national level, we should constantly remind Senate Republicans that they speak for 13 million fewer voters than the Democrats do.
And we should remind Paul Ryan that he made a mistake by going along with the Bush administration’s discredited economic and foreign-policy initiatives between 2001 and 2008, and that it is a disservice to the country to show unconditional partisan support for an administration that is so obviously unfit.
And, if all else fails, we should remember that standing up to an unpopular president who received almost three million fewer votes than his opponent is not just the right thing to do; it will also make for great reality TV.
Donald Trump’s Choices in the Middle East
TEL AVIV – US President-elect Donald Trump has said a lot about foreign affairs, without really saying anything at all.
His muddled statements offer little insight into what kind of foreign policy he will actually pursue, and there is not much reason to believe that, when his approach does become clear, it will be what the United States – or the world – needs.
Trump is a businessman, not a statesman.
He thinks in terms of immediate profits and losses – a worldview that is exemplified in his declarations that US allies need to contribute more to security alliances.
At a time of evolving challenges and growing threats, adhering to this narrow-minded, isolationist approach is unlikely to do anyone much good.
One region that Trump will not be able to ignore is the Middle East.
The crisis in Syria, in particular, will draw the US in, though Trump’s choices there are limited.
After all, America’s “moderate” jihadist allies are no more palatable than President Bashar al-Assad, and the so-called Islamic State is far from defeated.
Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, a close Trump adviser and possible member of Trump’s cabinet, has identified defeating ISIS as the administration’s first foreign-policy priority.
Trump has claimed that he knows “more about ISIS than the generals do.”
But that is unlikely.
After all, the only way fully to defeat a movement that thrives amid chaos is to build strong and competent states, a task for which Trump lacks both the inclination and the patience.
If Trump opts for a purely military approach, he will find that every “victory” merely creates space for more violence and terror.
While the conquest of Raqqa and Mosul by a US-led military campaign would improve America’s standing among its Sunni allies, it would also relieve pressure on the Russia-Iran-Hezbollah axis.
Iran-backed Shia militias would unleash a killing spree against Sunni communities in Mosul after ISIS withdrew.
The ensuing turmoil and pressure on Sunni populations would fuel more terrorism, whether associated with ISIS or with entirely new groups.
Whatever tack Trump takes in Syria, it will surely be influenced by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Trump must cut America’s dependence on Russia in the Syria war, in order to resist Putin’s efforts to use his influence in Syria to gain leverage with regard to Ukraine.
Of course, Trump’s willingness to challenge Putin, for whom the president-elect has voiced admiration, is uncertain.
But America’s security and military establishment, together with Republican senators like John McCain, are unlikely to allow Trump to “Make Russia Great Again” by surrendering both Syria and Ukraine.
The surrender of Ukraine alone would embolden Russia to reassert itself in its supposed “sphere of influence,” potentially causing NATO to come apart.
Judging by his campaign statements, Trump might not be worried about the unraveling of NATO – or of any US security alliance, at least not yet.
But the results could be disastrous, not least because a lack of US security guarantees and structures could spur nuclear proliferation.
Trump’s promise to suspend the Iran nuclear deal is particularly worrying.
Iran has prepared Hezbollah to be a powerful proxy for precisely those occasions when it needs to strike back at Iran’s enemies.
Moreover, suspending the nuclear deal would cause Iran to become a nuclear power in no time.
In a region with no collective security architecture, terrorist groups could easily acquire their own primitive nuclear devices.
Given this, America’s estranged allies in the Middle East – Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Israel – would be well advised to drop their opposition to the Iran deal, and instead encourage Trump to keep it in place.
Likewise, Trump’s promise to reduce funding to foreign allies, as part of a broader “America first” strategy, should be tempering their joy at his victory.
Another estranged ally that could shape Trump’s choices in the Middle East is Turkey, which has pursued something of a détente with Russia in recent months.
To salvage the bilateral relationship, Trump would have to sacrifice America’s partnership with the Kurds, whose militias in Syria and Iraq have been America’s most reliable allies in the battles for Mosul and Raqqa.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan may want ISIS defeated, but he wants to quell the Kurds’ ambitions of self-rule even more.
Rewarding the Kurds for their help by backing their bid for statehood would be so unacceptable that, to prevent it, Erdoğan might even try to thwart the defeat of ISIS.
Add to that opposition from Iraq, Syria, and Iran, and it is clear that Kurdish independence is not in the cards.
Palestinian statehood, however, should be.
In his own erratic way, Trump has said as much, fueling hopes among some Palestinians that his election could end up working in their favor.
But Israel’s fanatic settler movement has the opposite impression, viewing Trump’s victory as a license for the unrestrained expansion of settlements in Palestinian lands.
In the end, how Trump uses US leverage in the Israel-Palestine conflict – the only issue in the Middle East where the US enjoys such indisputable influence – might depend on events on the ground.
Specifically, a settlement-building spree might end up triggering a particularly fierce third Palestinian intifada.
But Trump should not wait for a crisis to impose an agenda on him.
Instead, he should recognize that now, more than at any time since 1948, America’s estranged Sunni allies have a strong incentive to make peace with Israel and collaborate with it on regional security, and that such an arrangement could be legitimate only with the creation of a Palestinian state.
Given that this would also support US reconciliation with the Arab peoples, thereby serving America’s national security interests, Trump should not hesitate to seize the initiative.
Ancient Rome’s Donald Trump
DECORAH, IOWA – Populism has a long and colorful history in American politics, from Huey Long on the left and George Wallace on the right, to – more recently – Ross Perot in 1992 and Donald Trump today.
But the roots of populism stretch much further back in time – more than two millennia, to the beginning of the end of the Roman Republic.
For most of its history, the Roman Republic was governed by old political families and reliable power brokers who knew how to keep the masses in line.
Elections were held, but they were deliberately designed to give the ruling classes the lion’s share of the popular vote.
If the Roman aristocracy, which voted first, chose a man for office, officials often would not even bother to count the ballots cast by the lower classes.
On occasion, disgruntled farmers, tavern owners, and donkey drivers would rise up and press their rulers for debt relief and a real voice in government, but these revolts were put down quickly with promises of better times ahead and by hiring a few off-duty gladiators to rough up the chief troublemakers.
In the late second century BC, the aristocratic Gracchi brothers tried to bring about a political revolution from within, only to be killed by the conservative nobility.
The man who ultimately brought down the system was a wealthy and ambitious nobleman named Publius Clodius Pulcher, a populist demagogue who refused to play by the rules.
Clodius had always been eccentric and unpredictable in ways that both shocked and amused the Roman populace.
As a young man, he had incited a mutiny among his brother-in-law’s troops.
Then, when pirates captured him, he took deep offense at the small ransom they accepted for his release.
Nothing was sacred to Clodius.
The more audacious his behavior, the more the public loved him for it.
In Rome, for example, Clodius, a noted ladies’ man, committed sacrilege by dressing up as a woman and infiltrating the female-only religious festival of the goddess Bona Dea, with the aim of seducing Pompeia, Julius Caesar’s wife.
The scandal led Caesar to divorce Pompeia, and gave rise to the famous quip that Caesar’s wife needed to be beyond suspicion.
After escaping punishment by employing a large legal team and doling out generous bribes, Clodius entered politics in an effort to secure the respect of the ruling class, which was quick to dismiss him as a buffoon.
What Clodius’s critics failed to realize was that he was smart, determined, and very much in touch with the frustrations of the common people.
After the elite rebuffed him, Clodius began breaking every rule in his quest for power.
He gave up his standing as a nobleman and officially joined the plebs, positioning himself as the leader of the angry Roman working classes.
Using his natural charm, fiery rhetoric, and keen sense of how to play establishment politicians against each other, he rammed through legislation establishing the first regular handout of free grain in Western history.
This provided him with a huge following among the common people, especially those who had lost their jobs in recent economic upheavals.
He became the king of the Roman streets and unleashed a populist uprising unlike anything the Republic had ever seen.
Rome’s ruling classes had no idea how to control Clodius, whom they continued to despise.
If the Republic were going to be destroyed, the famous orator and establishment politician Cicero lamented, at least let it fall by the hand of a real man.
Exacting revenge, Clodius engineered Cicero’s exile and laid his plans to rise to the top of the political pyramid.
During his campaign for the praetorship, an elected magistrate that ranked just below Rome’s ruling consuls, the elections had to be postponed twice because of fighting in the streets between his followers and the faction of his enemy, Annius Milo.
When Clodius happened to meet Milo along the Appian Way, a fight broke out between their guards, and Clodius was gravely wounded.
Reckoning that a dead rival was less of a threat than a live and angry one, Milo ordered his men to finish him off.
But though Clodius had been killed, the populist forces he unleashed remained very much alive, and they quickly found new champions, most notably Caesar.
The ruling classes stood by dazed and helpless as control of the state they had run for centuries slipped from their hands.
In 49 BC, Caesar crossed the Rubicon, engulfing Rome in civil war.
Caesar’s murder on the Ides of March was followed by a revolt that destroyed, once and for all, the power of the ruling classes.
An autocratic Empire arose, and the Roman Republic vanished forever.
The Donald Trump of North Korea
DENVER – By all accounts, the much-anticipated Seventh Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea was a non-event.
If the first such meeting of North Korea’s highest organ in more than 35 years had any impact at all, it was to dash any hopes that the country’s irascible leader, Kim Jong-un, would turn his attention to economic reform.
In the time Kim spent avoiding discussing North Korea’s shambolic economy, he made it abundantly clear that the country’s real pride is its nuclear program.
Despite past pledges to abandon nuclear-weapons development, the government has lately been pursuing new research, evidently in the hope of proclaiming the achievement of some new technological milestone.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, most of the world has jumped on the free-market bandwagon.
But North Korea has held fast to its isolation.
Its cult-like regime has encouraged a hyper-nationalist worldview, according to which any systematic cooperation with another country – much less the international community at large – is considered a threat to North Korea’s sovereignty.
And, as the latest party congress made clear, this will not change anytime soon.
Nowadays, however, North Korea is beginning to look less like an outlier than a forerunner in a broader trend toward nationalism, autarky, and authoritarianism.
Global trends, as measured by Freedom House and other nongovernmental authorities, include a surge in despotic regimes not seen since the first half of the twentieth century.
The embrace of nationalism can be seen virtually everywhere, from conflict-prone regions to the world’s most robust democracies.
While the emergence of another North Korea is not in the cards, the growing momentum of nationalism and illiberalism is troubling, to say the least.
No country is free of structural problems, especially given the ease with which central governments can become overburdened, exhausted, and corrupt.
And it is never easy to balance the power of the center with the preferences of minorities, the rights of regions, and the authority of local entities.
But, over the years, solutions have emerged to ease these internal imbalances and clashes.
One such solution is integration into broader structures, such as the European Union.
Strife in the Balkans, for example, was supposed to be resolved with progress toward EU membership.
Other kinds of supra-national structures and alliances that help countries to recognize and advance common interests have a similar impact.
Unfortunately, that model is not what it used to be.
And, nowadays, public opinion polls indicate that supra-national entities are losing their appeal.
Perhaps the most salient example is the United Kingdom’s referendum on continued EU membership next month.
And Euroskeptic parties are on the rise across Europe, and have even joined government coalitions in some places.
Meanwhile, countries left out of European integration – such as Turkey – now seem pleased to have missed the boat, as they attempt to chart their own way forward (or, it often seems, backward) without external interests or responsibilities constraining their behavior.
But, as Turkey moves to shape Middle Eastern affairs, it looks less like a robust nation-state than like a bumptious regional power that has learned little and forgotten less.
Of course, the Middle East’s ongoing turmoil is one of the main challenges facing the entire world, not just Turkey.
Those who believed that the Arab Spring would give rise to a new era of democracy and participatory governance in the Arab world never anticipated the power of retrograde forces – such as the self-described “Islamic State” – to push the region toward more primeval forms of tribal and sectarian loyalty.
Even countries that have fought hard to maintain secular government have fallen into a familiar trap, with the military emerging as the only cohesive body capable of imposing its will.
Egypt, which seemed to be establishing democracy in the wake of the Arab Spring revolutions, is the poster child for this trap.
The weakening of democracy is accompanied by another disturbing trend: the reemergence of hostility among counties that would benefit far more from cooperation than competition.
Vladimir Putin’s Russia has become a major revisionist power, seeking to change by force the terms of the Soviet Union’s breakup, and even decisions taken at the height of Soviet power (namely, the incorporation of Crimea into Ukraine).
China, too, has engaged in unilateral efforts to assert its territorial claims, especially in the South China Sea.
That has not only complicated its relations with its Southeast Asian neighbors, which have watched China’s rise with growing trepidation, but also with the United States, which maintains treaty ties with several of those states.
But the US has its own problems.
The presidential primaries – specifically, Donald Trump’s rise to become the US Republican Party’s presumptive nominee – are raising doubts about America’s capacity to help lead the world through troubled times.
Trump’s campaign has been marked by bellicose nationalism and anti-immigrant proposals – from the construction of a massive wall to keep out immigrants to a ban on all Muslims from entering the US – as well as reckless criticisms of America’s relations with friends and foes alike.
Yet he remains electorally viable; indeed, he commands a large and often virulently loyal following.
The internal political strain that this reflects and reinforces highlights just how vulnerable the world order is today.
With his blustery and reckless style, Trump seems to lack the knowledge, wisdom, and temperament needed to execute the steady stewardship that today’s world requires.
In that sense, he has quite a lot in common with the callow Kim – except that, if Trump gains power, he will have control of a far more influential country.
Donald Trump’s Message
CAMBRIDGE – Donald Trump’s lead in the race for the Republican Party’s nomination as its presidential candidate in November has caused consternation.
The Republican establishment fears he will not be able to defeat Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee.
But some observers worry more about the prospect of a Trump presidency.
Some even see Trump as a potential American Mussolini.
Whatever its problems, the United States today is not like Italy in 1922.
The Constitution’s institutional checks and balances, together with an impartial legal system, are likely to constrain even a reality-TV showman.
The real danger is not that Trump will do what he says if he reaches the White House, but the damage caused by what he says as he tries to get there.
Leaders are judged not only on the effectiveness of their decisions, but also by the meaning that they create and teach to their followers.
Most leaders gain support by appealing to the existing identity and solidarity of their groups.
But great leaders educate their followers about the world beyond their immediate group.
After World War II, during which Germany had invaded France for the third time in 70 years, the French leader Jean Monnet decided that revenge upon a defeated Germany would produce yet another tragedy.
Instead, he invented a plan for the gradual development of the institutions that evolved into the European Union, which has helped make such a war unthinkable.
Or, to take another example of great leadership, Nelson Mandela could easily have chosen to define his group as black South Africans and sought revenge for the injustice of decades of apartheid and his own imprisonment.
Instead, he worked tirelessly to expand the identity of his followers both by words and deeds.
In one famous symbolic gesture, he appeared at a rugby game wearing the jersey of the South African Springboks, a team that had previously signified South African white supremacy.
Contrast Mandela’s efforts to teach his followers about a broader identity with the narrow approach taken by Robert Mugabe next door in Zimbabwe.
Unlike Mandela, Mugabe used colonial-era grievances to build support, and now is relying on force to remain in power.
In the US today, while the economy is growing and the unemployment rate is at a low 4.9%, many feel excluded from the country’s prosperity.
Many blame rising inequality over the past few decades on foreigners, rather than technology, and it is easy to rally opposition both to immigration and globalization.
In addition to economic populism, a significant minority of the population also feels threatened by cultural changes related to race, culture, and ethnicity, even though much of this is not new.
The next president will have to educate Americans about how to deal with a globalization process that many find threatening.
National identities are imagined communities in the sense that few people have direct experience of the other members.
For the past century or two, the nation-state has been the imagined community that people are willing to die for, and most leaders have regarded their primary obligations to be national.
This is inescapable, but it is not enough in a globalizing world.
In a world of globalization, many people belong to a number of imagined communities – local, regional, national, cosmopolitan – that are overlapping circles sustained by the Internet and inexpensive travel.
Diasporas are now connected across national borders.
Professional groups like lawyers have transnational standards.
Activist groups ranging from environmentalists to terrorists also connect across borders.
Sovereignty is no longer as absolute as it once seemed.
Former President Bill Clinton has said that he regrets his failure to respond adequately to the genocide in Rwanda in 1994, although he was not alone.
Had Clinton tried to send US troops, he would have encountered stiff resistance in Congress.
Good leaders today are often caught between their cosmopolitan inclinations and their more traditional obligations to the people who elect them – as German Chancellor Angela Merkel has discovered in the wake of her brave leadership on the refugee crisis last summer.
In a world in which people are organized primarily in national communities, a purely cosmopolitan ideal is unrealistic.
We see this in widespread resistance to acceptance of immigration.
For a leader to say there is an obligation to equalize incomes globally is not a credible obligation, but to say that more should be done to reduce poverty and disease and help those in need can help to educate followers.
Words matter.
As the philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah puts it, “Thou shalt not kill is a test you take pass-fail.