But we should be devoting as much attention to the microeconomic problems – such as poor incentives, market failures, and regulatory shortcomings – that led us into the crisis in the first place.
Indeed, just as microeconomic problems in the financial sector triggered a credit crunch and fueled a global recession, so microeconomic factors hold the key to recovery.
Many economies need to fix the financial sector and restore credit, while many more need to raise productivity in order to boost growth and create jobs.
Some industries suffer from counterproductive and ill-conceived regulation; others are ailing as a result of monopolistic behavior by dominant firms, or because they face a lack of effective competition and transparency in utilities and financial services.
Fixing these problems would help us to return to a path of growth and prosperity for all.
To achieve this, we first must follow the Hippocratic oath and avoid doing more harm.
Governments around the world should ignore the temptation to relax competition in order to provide relief to particular industries or economic groups.
The renowned American economist Mancur Olson argued that stagnation in developed economies results from cartels and lobbies becoming more numerous and powerful over time, until they eventually drain a country’s economic dynamism.
Preserving a competitive environment in which markets remain open and contestable is the best tonic, because firms must constantly innovate and perform better under such conditions.
This, in turn, makes our societies more creative and, ultimately, more prosperous.
Efforts to relax competition have many faces.
But all of them make an economy less productive and redistribute wealth to small, coordinated groups with vested interests and a strong inclination to lobby the government.
The most common approach is protectionism, which has been part of the political discourse in various countries in recent years.
But official measures to help national producers at the expense of domestic business customers and consumers are always short-sighted, for they fail to help producers to address the challenges that they will have to face sooner or later anyway.
Similarly, old-fashioned dirigisme – such as attempts to “pick winners,” foster national “champions,” or keep failed business models alive through state subsidies – is both harmful and doomed to fail.
And misplaced regulation – for example, in the service sector – remains a barrier to healthy competition in many countries.
Once we have stopped doing harm, we must start doing the right things.
Economic policy is like gardening: pulling on plants will not make them grow faster, but a successful gardener can provide them with the right environment in which to flourish.
Relying on competition can help societies to unleash well-functioning markets’ power to provide goods and services.
To achieve this, policymakers must have a sound enforcement framework at their disposal, take an economy-wide approach, and attract the participation of all stakeholders.
Sound enforcement implies legal tools and resources to pursue and implement an economic policy, along with an institutional design that reduces meddling by vested interests.
Consider, for example, the importance of impartial and effective antitrust authorities, or subsidy schemes that are sufficiently well designed to ensure that they truly serve the public interest.
An economy-wide approach is needed because markets are interconnected.
Misguided regulation or market failures that harm competition anywhere can burden the entire economy.
The global crisis erupted because major problems in the functioning of the banking sector had been left unaddressed.
The poor functioning of input markets, such as markets for energy or intermediary products, can also do a lot of economic harm, not least because it hampers external competitiveness.
Finally, strengthening competition throughout the economy requires broad support.
This cannot be achieved without bridging ideological divisions and overcoming political pressures from particular economic groups.
Advocacy can play a key role, by educating not only policymakers, but also citizens and businessmen, about the benefits of competition.
There should be a wide consensus that a pro-competitive environment is one of the keys to economic prosperity.
Australia provides a good example of how pro-competitive policies deliver results.
Its economy was one of the OECD’s worst in terms of productivity growth in the 1980’s; a decade later, Australia was in third place.
In the interim, all of the country’s economic regulation was examined from the standpoint of maximizing competition, and a national pro-reform consensus was forged.
Currently, significant efforts are underway in several countries, including Mexico.
Structural reforms to boost productivity will also be crucial to ensure Europe’s economic recovery and the survival of its social model.
The “Single Market Acts I &amp; II” provide a comprehensive agenda to tap fully the potential of an integrated and competitive market of 500 million consumers to catalyze growth and prosperity in the European Union.
We know from experience that competition works.
By basing economic policy on this experience, we could not only avert Olson’s grim prophecy. We could also accelerate economic recovery, increase the pace of innovation, and raise livelihoods for millions of people worldwide.
Financial Inclusion Now
KUALA LUMPUR – Making the financial system accessible to the world’s poorest people can unlock their economic potential, improve their lives, and benefit the wider economy.&nbsp;So it is no surprise that financial inclusion of the poor has become an important component of public policymaking.
Central banks and regulators worldwide are taking the lead in making financial inclusion a priority, in addition to their traditional mandates of maintaining monetary and financial stability.
Financial inclusion is about providing an opportunity for the world’s 2.5 billion unbanked and financially underserved to participate in the formal financial system, thereby helping to lift them out of poverty and enter the economic mainstream.
Greater financial inclusiveness promises a more cohesive society and more balanced growth and development.
Moreover, financial systems themselves stand to benefit from becoming more comprehensive and progressive.
The additional consumers participating in the formal financial system will strengthen national economies and, in turn, enrich the global economy.
Indeed, as developing countries move toward middle-income status, financial inclusion is a key component of continued progress.
In countries with high levels of financial exclusion, consumers are left to rely on unregulated informal services.
These inferior substitutes often imply exorbitant costs for borrowers – and financing that is usually too short term for productive investment activity.
Moreover, the lack of consumer protection and regulatory and supervisory frameworks exposes informal activities to vulnerabilities that can harm borrowers and jeopardize financial stability.
Increasing the availability of formal financial services to those who have long been denied them requires establishing a balanced regulatory framework.
Oppressive, blanket regulation, which may be necessary in complex and unpredictable financial markets, may not be relevant in a rural community –&nbsp;or, worse, it may stifle efforts to promote financial inclusion.
Indeed, proportionality is an important aspect of regulation, enabling prudential measures that, rather than exceed or underestimate, are commensurate with the risks that need to be addressed.
Little wonder, then, that high levels of exclusion in developing and emerging countries have prompted policymakers to embrace proportionate regulation, thereby gaining the flexibility to encourage innovation in the provision of financial services while preserving financial stability.
Bangladesh, for example, has adapted its financial regulations for microfinance institutions.
This has helped to catalyze the growth of sustainable microfinancing to local women-owned enterprises.
Kenya’s “test and learn” approach to regulation has unleashed the potential of mobile-phone-based financial-service delivery through M-PESA, which offers consumers a safe and convenient alternative to cash.
There are many other examples of successful implementation of proportionate regulation that have resulted in greater financial inclusion without compromising financial stability.
In Malaysia, agent-banking regulation (which safeguards consumers’ interests while supporting financial institutions’ business models) has led to the expansion of branchless banking to reach previously unserved rural areas.
Similarly, Mexico’s “tiered” approach to financial access – according to which requirements for opening bank accounts are proportionate to risk, with low-value accounts subject to higher transaction restrictions – has expanded access to basic accounts, while mitigating the risk of money laundering.
And Pakistan and Indonesia, by basing capital requirements for microfinance institutions on the size of the population that they expect to serve, are enabling these institutions to serve distinct market niches sustainably.
Policymakers in many countries have recently been considering the role of financial standard-setting bodies (SSBs) in advancing financial inclusion.
In particular, they are focusing on the specific challenges that arise when applying supervisory standards in a developing country that is pursuing financial stability and inclusion.
Although global standards supposedly reflect the principles of proportionality, they provide insufficient guidance for the national regulators, banking institutions, and financial-sector assessors who are trying to apply them effectively in diverse environments.
This lack of contextual clarity has led to excessively conservative interpretations of the regulations – and thus to the creation of unintended barriers to financial inclusion.
Addressing this will require input from policymakers with practical experience applying international standards, particularly in emerging economies.
At the same time, in order to ensure continued progress toward financial inclusion, representatives from developing and emerging economies must play a greater role in shaping future standards.
The Alliance for Financial Inclusion, a network of central bankers and financial policymakers from more than 80 developing countries, is already contributing to more effective and proportionate global regulation by facilitating increased engagement with SSBs. This September, Malaysia’s central bank will advance the process by hosting AFI’s Global Policy Forum.
Such collaborative efforts among developing countries ultimately foster closer cooperation between them and their developed counterparts.
This will lead to better outcomes for the global financial system, the global real economy, and, most important, the people who have been excluded from both for far too long.
Occupy QE
NEW HAVEN – The Federal Reserve continues to cling to a destabilizing and ineffective strategy.
By maintaining its policy of quantitative easing (QE) – which entails monthly purchases of long-term assets worth $85 billion – the Fed is courting an increasingly treacherous endgame at home and abroad.
By now, the global repercussions are clear, falling most acutely on developing economies with large current-account deficits – namely, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Turkey, and South Africa.
These countries benefited the most from QE-induced capital inflows, and they were the first to come under pressure when it looked like the spigot was about to be turned off.
When the Fed flinched at its mid-September policy meeting, they enjoyed a sigh-of-relief rally in their currencies and equity markets.
But there is an even more insidious problem brewing on the home front.
With its benchmark lending rate at the zero-bound, the Fed has embraced a fundamentally different approach in attempting to guide the US economy.
It has shifted its focus from the price of credit to influencing the credit cycle’s quantity dimension through the liquidity injections that quantitative easing requires.
In doing so, the Fed is relying on the “wealth effect” – brought about largely by increasing equity and home prices – as its principal transmission mechanism for stabilization policy.
There are serious problems with this approach.
First, wealth effects are statistically small; most studies show that only about 3-5 cents of every dollar of asset appreciation eventually feeds through to higher personal consumption.
As a result, outsize gains in asset markets – and the related risks of new bubbles – are needed to make a meaningful difference for the real economy.
Second, wealth effects are maximized when debt service is minimized – that is, when interest expenses do not swallow the capital gains of asset appreciation.
That provides the rationale for the Fed’s zero-interest-rate policy – but at the obvious cost of discriminating against savers, who lose any semblance of interest income.
Third, and most important, wealth effects are for the wealthy.
The Fed should know that better than anyone.
At the same time, the top 10% also owned nonfinancial assets (including primary residences) with a median value of $756,400 – nearly six times the value held by the other 90%.
All of this means that the wealthiest 10% of the US income distribution benefit the most from the Fed’s liquidity injections into risky asset markets.
And yet, despite the significant increases in asset values traceable to QE over the past several years – residential property as well as financial assets – there has been little to show for it in terms of a wealth-generated recovery in the US economy.
The problem continues to be the crisis-battered American consumer.
In the 22 quarters since early 2008, real personal-consumption expenditure, which accounts for about 70% of US GDP, has grown at an average annual rate of just 1.1%, easily the weakest period of consumer demand in the post-World War II era.
That is the main reason why the post-2008 recovery in GDP and employment has been the most anemic on record.
Trapped in the aftermath of a wrenching balance-sheet recession, US families remain fixated on deleveraging – paying down debt and rebuilding their income-based saving balances.
Progress has been slow and limited on both counts.
Notwithstanding sharp reductions in debt service traceable to the Fed’s zero-interest rate subsidy, the stock of debt is still about 116% of disposable personal income, well above the 43% average in the final three decades of the twentieth century.
Similarly, the personal saving rate, at 4.25% in the first half of 2013, is less than half the 9.3% norm over the 1970-1999 period.
This underscores yet another of QE’s inherent contradictions: its transmission effects are narrow, while the problems it is supposed to address are broad.
Wealth effects that benefit a small but extremely affluent slice of the US population have done little to provide meaningful relief for most American families, who remain squeezed by lingering balance-sheet problems, weak labor markets, and anemic income growth.
Nor is there any reason to believe that the benefits at the top will trickle down.
With real consumption stuck on a 1% growth trajectory, the bulk of the US population understandably views economic recovery and job security very differently from those enamored of wealth effects.
The Fed’s goal of pushing the unemployment rate down to 6.5% is a noble one.
But relying on wealth effects targeted at the rich to achieve that goal remains one of the great disconnects in the art and practice of economic policy.
The Occupy Wall Street movement began two years ago this month.
While it can be criticized for its failure to develop a specific agenda for action, it galvanized attention to income and wealth inequality in the US and around the world.
Unfortunately, the problem has only worsened.
Lost in the angst over inequality is the critical role that central banks have played in exacerbating the problem.
Yes, asset markets were initially ecstatic over the Fed’s decision this month not to scale back QE.
The thrill, however, was lost on Main Street.
That is precisely the point.
The Fed’s own survey data, which underscore the concentration of wealth at the upper end of the US income distribution, fit the script of the Occupy movement to a tee.
QE benefits the few who need it the least. That is not exactly a recipe for a broad-based and socially optimal economic recovery.
Russia’s European Game in Syria
PARIS – This much is clear in Syria: There is no good solution.
There has not been a good solution since that black Wednesday in August 2013, when Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s war machine, by using chemical weapons, crossed the “red line” that US President Barack Obama had warned would trigger an American military response.
The moderate opposition still stood, and the Islamic State had not yet emerged from the shadows.
Yet, in a shocking last-minute about-face, Obama declined to intervene.
That lapse cannot be undone.
But in the hell of bad solutions on offer for Syria, some are worse than others.
And the one devised by Russian President Vladimir Putin is probably the most infernal of all.
Russian airstrikes have been concentrated on targets around the cities of Idlib, Homs, and Hama – areas where, according to independent observers, jihad watchers, and other groups that scrutinize the videos placed online by the Russian authorities themselves, the Islamic State is not established.
This means that the primary objective of the Russian attacks is to weaken the entire opposition, including the democratic opposition, fighting the Assad regime.
The goal of Russia’s intervention is therefore not to contribute to the “struggle against terrorism,” as the Kremlin’s propagandists claim, but to restore political control, at any cost, to the regime that spawned the terrorism in the first place.
More precisely, Russia’s aim is to rescue (after a long period of arm’s-length support) a dictatorship that American and French authorities describe as being responsible for causing more than 250,000 deaths since 2011.
The regime’s behavior no doubt fueled the terrifying rise of the Islamic State as well, providing Assad with a trump card in his bid for international support – and Russia with a fig leaf.
One might argue that the past is past and that, in view of the general disaster in Syria, Russia’s intervention will at least have the benefit of halting the country’s free fall.
But the first consequence of Putin’s offensive – one employing methods tested in the two Chechen wars and not burdened, to put it mildly, by the precautions observed by Western armed forces – will be to increase, not reduce, the number of civilian casualties.
The world was rightly horrified by America’s recent blunder in bombing the Médecins Sans Frontières’ hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan.
But how many Syrian Kunduzes will result from Russian airstrikes if the Kremlin continues to favor unguided bombs over guided missiles?
(This is just one example of Russia’s tactics, but one that reveals much about how Putin intends to prosecute his latest foreign adventure.)
And can anyone believe, even fleetingly, that Russia’s intervention will lessen, rather than aggravate, Syria’s refugee crisis?
Putin’s methods are forcing tens of thousands of civilians to flee indiscriminate airstrikes, clearing the way for the death squads of a regime that in recent months had been showing signs of exhaustion, and dashing any remaining hope of creating effective safe zones in northern Jordan and southern Turkey.
Now even the last holdouts among the regime’s opponents will be appearing on the roads of Europe.
They will not appear on the roads of Russia, mind you: Unlike Germany or France, Putin will not hesitate, while terrorizing tomorrow’s refugees, to slam the door in their faces.
Nor is Putin shy about his intentions in Syria.
One piece of news reported by Russian media but curiously unheeded in the West is that the missile cruiser Moskva, with its dozens of anti-aircraft ordnance, has been deployed to Latakia.
But the Islamic State has not, unbeknownst to everyone but Putin, acquired an air force that needs to be neutralized.
Rather, the Kremlin evidently will view as a legitimate target any aircraft that might pass over territory that it comes to regard as being under its control.
And, because any such plane would necessarily be flying the flag of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Turkey, or another member of the coalition fighting the Islamic State, it is not hard to envisage how Russia’s involvement could lead to international escalation of Syria’s civil war.
Fortunately, we are not there yet.
But let us not pretend that Russia’s military operations, which, to date, have been aimed solely at providing Russia with mastery over Syrian airspace and protecting its interests on the ground, are bolstering efforts to defeat the Islamic State.
Putin is not just a fireman who sets fires; he is an old-school imperialist.
His operation in Syria is partly designed to divert attention from his dismemberment of Ukraine.
And his thinly veiled threats against the Baltic states, Poland, Finland, and now Turkey – whose airspace and relations with NATO have been probed by Russian aircraft – reveal a strategy of aggression that has as its chief goal the weakening of Europe.
Europeans must wake up to Putin’s design before it is too late.
In France, the siren song of appeasement is becoming a national rallying cry, from the far-right National Front to far-left elements – and among a growing number of mainstream politicians of all stripes.
Indeed, the Kremlin has assiduously cultivated party secretariats across Europe.
A web of invisible links has brought into being what could be called “Putin’s Party” in Europe.
If Putin’s Party were enticing only the usual European populist demagogues, from Nigel Farage in the United Kingdom to Viktor Órban in Hungary, it would be bad enough.
But when even leaders who are normally considered to be responsible statesmen, such as Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, begin justifying Putin’s actions, Europe risks frittering away the very security on which its prosperity is built.
How Scary is Disruptive Technology?
CAMBRIDGE – The steady stream of improvements in driverless cars has convinced me that before too long the roads will be filled with cars and trucks operating without humans at the wheel.
Likewise, I am convinced that the revolution in artificial intelligence will allow computers and robots to do many of the tasks that white-collar workers now do.
It’s not surprising, therefore, that many people are worried about the fate of those whose jobs are vulnerable – or have already been lost – to the latest disruptive technology.
What will happen to the millions of men and women who now drive trucks and taxis when the trucks and taxis can drive themselves?
What will happen to the accountants and health workers when computers can do their jobs?
Some analysts have estimated that, with many fewer employees needed to produce the current volume of goods and services, a large share of current employment could be made redundant.
I hear these worries and realize that they cannot be easily dismissed.
But I am optimistic that the United States, at least, will adapt successfully to the new technology.
There may be some losers as well as winners, but the American public as a whole will be better off.
And those who lose their jobs to the new technology will soon find other employment.
I believe that there is little reason to worry that the new technology will create large-scale unemployment.
The changes in technology will increase the economy’s output and raise the potential standard of living of the population.
Those who want to work will continue to find jobs.
Why am I so optimistic?
Simply put: history.
Rapid technical change is not something new.
We have experienced technological change that substitutes machines and computers for individual workers for many years.
And yet, despite the ups and downs of the business cycle, the US economy continues to return to full employment.
This has been most dramatic in manufacturing.
Robots and automated machines have replaced production workers in manufacturing for many years, driving employment in the sector from 13 million in 1950 to only nine million now, even as the real value of manufacturing output rose by 75%.
And those who are no longer employed in manufacturing have found jobs elsewhere in the economy.
Computers have also replaced workers in a wide range of service industries.
We no longer see many elevator operators.
Switchboard operators are gone.
Most of us get our boarding passes at airports from automated check-in machines.
Law firms and accounting firms use computers to do what professional employees used to do.
And yet the US unemployment rate is now just 4.9%, even lower than its average in recent decades.
Among US college graduates – who constitute 40% of the US labor force – the unemployment rate is just 2.7%.
Because college graduates comprise a larger share of the younger age cohorts than of the older population, the overall unemployment rate will be held down as that group ages and its share of the labor force grows.
The rising output per worker made possible by the increased use of robots and computers also will allow employees to work fewer hours and enjoy more leisure.
Employees in the US currently work an average of 1,790 hours a year, 30% more than their German counterparts, who average just 1,371 hours per year.
A reduction in working hours per employee translates into quality-of-life improvements like longer vacations and longer weekends.
Fewer working hours will also provide more opportunities for travel, eating out, and other activities that create jobs for service workers.
The aging of the population will increase the need for service-sector employees in hospitals and nursing homes as well.
These trends will fuel higher demand for workers in the service sector, which now accounts for 81% of employment in the US.
The share of workers in the US service sector increases year after year; it is where those who lose jobs in manufacturing or construction find new ones.
And computers and robots simply cannot replace many of these jobs.
Although they can provide some of the services that older people will increasingly need, for example, they cannot provide the services that involve actually touching clients and patients.
People choosing careers will bear such considerations in mind as they select occupations.
That, too, will hold down the unemployment rate in the future.
The US unemployment rate currently is less than half the rate in the European Union.
There are many reasons for the disparity; but a critical one is the absence in the US of labor laws and union rules that prevent employees and firms from adapting to the new technologies.
If the US maintains a relatively free labor market, employees will adjust positively to the changing technology.
How Slow Will China Go?
SEOUL – China’s economic performance over the last few decades has been outstanding.
Despite possessing very different institutions than those seen in the advanced economies, no doubt a result of its communist system, China managed to achieve 8.7% average annual per capita GDP growth from 1980 to 2015.
The key has been its unique strategy of “crossing the river by feeling the stones,” whereby it has gradually tested, implemented, and adjusted reforms and growth-enhancing policies.
But, while China’s economic development has been exceptional in many ways, its growth performance is not unique.
Both Japan and South Korea also transformed their economies through rapid industrialization and export-oriented policies, backed by strong investment, before experiencing slowdowns.
If China is to manage its current challenges – in particular, sharply decelerating growth – it should look to these countries’ experience for guidance.
All three countries have followed a similar path, but at a different time.
Based on per capita GDP, China is more than 40 years behind Japan and about 20 years behind South Korea.
Specifically, Japan’s annual per capita GDP growth averaged 8.6% in the 1960s, before plummeting to 3-4% in the 1970s and 1980s.
South Korea’s GDP growth dropped from 7-8% in the 1970s and 1980s to 4% in the 2000s.
China’s three-decade-long run of double-digit growth came to an end in 2010, with the annual rate now below 7%.
In each case, the decline in growth came when per capita income reached about $8,000.
The growth trajectory experienced by these three Asian countries can be explained by the “convergence” phenomenon – the tendency of poor countries to grow faster than rich countries, once they address certain structural and policy factors.
The economic logic of this “catch-up” process is straightforward: for countries with lower levels of per capita output, there is a larger gap between current and potential capital stock and technology.
That gap can be closed rapidly through the adoption and imitation of existing technologies, which improve productivity, and through high rates of accumulation of physical capital, owing to higher returns on investment.
And, indeed, Japan, South Korea, and China all maintained high levels of investment throughout the catch-up process, peaking at nearly 40% of GDP in Japan in the 1970s.
South Korea reached similar levels in the 1990s; and China’s investment spending currently stands at more than 45% of GDP.
As countries move closer to their potential per capita output levels, the power of convergence diminishes, forcing its beneficiaries to adjust their growth models accordingly.
Reducing investment, due to its lower returns, is an important component of that adjustment.
Another is increasing technological innovation, to avoid a sharp slowdown in productivity growth.
A third is shifting output from low-value-added agricultural and manufacturing goods to higher-value-added domestic services.
China, like Japan and South Korea before it, is now pursuing this adjustment.
But it faces serious obstacles, beginning with limited institutional and human capabilities – a constraint that could hinder domestic innovation and efficient resource allocation.
Of course, China should not be working to restore past rates of GDP growth. That would be a waste of time.
As former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers and Harvard University professor Robert Barro have pointed out, a slowdown was inevitable for China, just as it was for Japan and South Korea.
My work suggests that China’s GDP growth rate will decline to 5-6% in the coming decade, and 3-4% in the long run.
With its catch-up glory days in the past, China should aim for higher incomes through steady growth and lower volatility.
To achieve this, it must focus specifically on crisis prevention and management. That is where Japan and South Korea went wrong.
In the 1980s, Japan allowed asset bubbles to grow.
That may have spurred growth for a while, but when the bubbles burst, the financial system’s huge debts helped push the economy into a bout of deflation and stagnation from which it has still not fully emerged.
Similarly, South Korea was thrown into financial crisis in 1997, when panicked foreign investors fled, hitting the over-leveraged corporate sector hard as the air was sucked out of the under-supervised financial system.
As it stands, China seems to be moving along a similar path.
According to the Bank for International Settlements, Chinese corporate debt has increased rapidly in recent years, from 99% of GDP in 2008 to 166% in 2015, with more than half of the debt owed by poorly performing state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
This does not bode well for the corporate sector or the financial system.
But it is not too late to change course.
To avert a crisis, China’s leaders must act now to address the weaknesses in the corporate and financial sectors and to improve macroeconomic- and financial-policy frameworks.
To keep productivity – and incomes – rising, they must continue to implement structural reforms that support labor-market flexibility and the development of human capital, while privatizing SOEs and liberalizing the financial sector.
Like its neighbors, China will have to confront slower growth, and its social consequences, head-on.
But the country’s future is anything but predetermined.
With the right approach, it can manage a smooth transition from middle- to high-income status – a transition that would not only improve the wellbeing of China’s 1.3 billion citizens, but also reduce risks and uncertainties in the global economy.
A Healthier Global Health Agenda
LONDON – On September 25, world leaders will meet in New York at a special session of the United Nations to chart a path to a new set of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Described as a “generational opportunity,” the potential is indeed great.
But indications so far suggest that optimal health goals could be derailed.
The SDGs will succeed the Millennium Development Goals, which were adopted in 2000 and expire in 2015.
The MDGs have proved instrumental in galvanizing political will and focusing financial resources on a limited set of basic needs in low- and middle-income countries.
The lives of millions of people, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, have been improved.
The SDG framework has been the subject of a year of widespread consultation, lobbying, and debate.
Consensus is emerging in a few areas: the new goals should address the unfinished MDGs; they should include not only poverty, but also planetary limits, including climate change; and they should be universal in scope, addressing challenges such as widening inequality in poor and rich countries alike.
A universal health goal also makes a lot of sense.
Some conditions, such as neglected tropical diseases, are unique to developing countries, while others, like AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and maternal mortality, affect poor countries disproportionately.
But, for the most part, a universal set of maladies has emerged over the past decade, accounting for the vast bulk of ill health and preventable death in all regions of the world.
Unfortunately, the proposed health agenda seems to ignore this trend.
The Global Burden of Disease Study, conducted by hundreds of scientists collaborating over many years, provides the best comparable estimates regarding causes of death and disability and their underlying risk factors.
The data are clear about what makes us sick and kills us prematurely.
Non-communicable diseases accounted for two out of every three deaths worldwide in 2010, and projections indicate that by 2030, NCDs will be the most common cause of death in Africa.
These deaths are largely driven by a few risky behaviors: tobacco smoking (second in the global ranking of risk factors), alcohol use (ranked third), obesity and poor nutrition (ranked sixth and seventh, respectively), and physical inactivity (ranked tenth).
In late July, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon published a short report to inform the upcoming General Assembly debate.
While clear about the need to address the existing MDGs, the report only briefly mentions the burden of NCDs.
While it calls for action to “promote healthy behaviors” it does not include any measures to curb smoking, reduce excessive alcohol consumption, or improve diets; instead, the report focuses solely on water, sanitation, and hygiene (all good things, to be sure).
Why do NCDs, the world’s biggest killers, have such a low profile, given the evidence concerning current and future health needs?
A look at the consultative processes that shaped the Secretary-General’s report provides some clues.
Of the 99 papers reviewed for the health consultation, 15 came from organizations promoting sexual and reproductive health and rights, while only five were from NCD-focused groups (six if a paper from a group supported by the alcohol industry is included).
Equally important, much evidence was simply ignored.
A review of the documents presented to the Secretary-General’s High Level Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, chaired by the Presidents of Indonesia and Liberia and the Prime Minister of Great Britain, reveals a broad range of recommendations, rooted in a deep understanding of current and future global health problems.
The experts recognized that the world’s health problems are shifting away from communicable diseases toward NCDs.
They gave a strong recommendation to include “interventions to reduce the consumption of alcohol and tobacco.”
But the High Level Panel nonetheless arrived at a position that The Lancet, a leading medical journal, characterized as embodying a “weak” commitment to addressing NCDs.
Relegating NCDs to a low position on the global health agenda is not new.
An independent committee of experts convened by the World Health Organization found that the tobacco industry used creative, secretive, and effective tactics to divert the WHO’s focus from NCDs for years.
Recent publications reveal that the food industry pursued similar strategies to influence global health policy.
How can we overcome the role that vested interests may be playing in setting a global health agenda that fails to address key drivers of disease?
Perhaps one answer lies in listening more to the communities directly affected by major health conditions.
For example, people living with and affected by HIV organized vibrant social movements that issued demands for change at national and global levels, dismantled legal and social barriers that exacerbated risk, and articulated norms and standards in human-rights terms.
As a result, huge progress has been made in preventing infections and keeping people living with HIV alive.
The UN General Assembly could do well to listen and learn from that experience.
Everyone, including the most marginalized and vulnerable, has a right to good health, which is essential to human dignity and economic development.
But upholding this right requires that policymakers focus on what makes people sick.
An agenda that powerful corporate interests would rather stifle might be a bitter pill for world leaders, but it is one that they should swallow sooner rather than later.
Starved for Science
AMSTERDAM – In the Mekong Delta, farmers obtain 6-7 tons of rice per hectare in dry seasons and 4-5 tons per hectare in wet seasons, using fast-maturing rice varieties that allow up to three consecutive yields annually.
By contrast, West African rice farmers harvest only 1.5 tons per hectare of traditional upland rice annually, while other cereals yield no more than one ton – a figure comparable to yields in medieval Europe.
Such disparities are unnecessary.
Indeed, the proliferation of agricultural technology – from more efficient machinery to higher-yielding or more robust crop varieties – has the potential to narrow the productivity gap considerably, even if differences between climates and producers remain.
For example, a new variety of African upland rice, Nerica, triples annual yields.
Likewise, over the last four decades, improved breeding methods, higher-quality feed, and better veterinary care have more than doubled average milk production worldwide.
Nevertheless, regional discrepancies remain massive: cows in the Netherlands can produce roughly 9,000 liters of milk annually, while Zebu cattle in the tropics produce only about 300 liters.
The need to increase agricultural output becomes more urgent every day.
The global population is set to reach nine billion by 2050, while people in the developing world – where nearly all of the population growth will occur – are seeking more varied diets.
By 2030, demand for animal products will double, with overall food demand rising by 40%.
Science has much to contribute to global food security.
While genetic modification is not essential to feed the world, it does provide significant advantages, enabling scientists to introduce or enhance traits – virus resistance in cassava, for example, or improved digestibility of feed – that cannot be realized with conventional breeding.
To be sure, raising yields is not the same as feeding the world.
If a vast swath of the population cannot afford the food that is produced, the size of the yield is irrelevant.
While nearly one billion people have been lifted out of poverty (defined by the World Bank as an income of less than $1.25 per day, in purchasing-power-parity terms) in the last 20 years, such progress will prove more difficult for the next billion.
Given this, policymakers should redouble their efforts to reduce poverty by supporting sustainable and inclusive economic growth.
They should commit to advancing sound agricultural management, maintaining well-functioning markets, and increasing investment in agriculture.
At the same time, these objectives, while pressing, should not obscure the need to focus on yields – increases in which have accounted for three-quarters of food-production growth in recent decades.
Fortunately, the most significant potential limitations – land, water, and nutrients – seem unlikely to constrain global output excessively in the foreseeable future.
But, while none is in short supply globally, local shortages may occur.
Although crop land per capita will continue to decline, more arable land is available worldwide than previously thought.
The example of the use of the Brazilian cerrado, once considered useless, augurs well for the African savannas.
Underused land reserves also exist elsewhere in South America, Central Asia, and Eastern Europe.
A more immediate challenge is ensuring that crops receive sufficient water, which requires building and maintaining efficient irrigation systems to stabilize yields and enable farmers to harvest an additional crop each year.
As it stands, only 4% of arable land in Sub-Saharan Africa is irrigated, compared to 38% in Asia.
While the Middle East will face serious water shortages, Africa, where most population growth is set to occur, contains numerous unexploited water sources.
Fertilizer use has become significantly more efficient in recent years, a trend that will continue.
Reserves of minerals like phosphate will remain plentiful in the next decades, and nitrogen is not limited.
Technology to extract nutrients from waste already exists, reducing dependency on mining.
Moreover, pigs and poultry are ideal food-waste processors, and their effluents can serve again as nutrient and energy sources, turning future food chains into interconnected production cycles.
Perhaps the most pressing constraint on agricultural production is the impending labor shortage, as rural young people, who traditionally comprise the agricultural labor force, flock to cities.
With small farmers unable to provide sufficient surpluses, agricultural production will become increasingly consolidated and mechanized, raising fossil-fuel consumption, which will have to be offset by the introduction of more efficient technologies.
Of course, future food production is subject to significant uncertainty.
Population growth may not slow down as rapidly as expected.
Protectionism threatens open markets and GDP growth.
And price volatility, whether triggered by drought or short-sighted national policies, could deter investments in agriculture and decrease the poor’s purchasing power.
Whether climate change will be a source of yield uncertainty in the coming decades remains unclear as well.
Although precipitation may be affected, higher temperatures would enable agricultural production in colder regions, and CO2 is known to bolster plant growth, even in dry areas.
In addition, while food hygiene, traceability, and labeling are improving, any amount of negligence when it comes to food safety could have far-reaching consequences in the complex and interconnected global food chain.
Rising demand for animal products highlights microbiological risks, with animal-welfare measures sometimes creating new hazards.
For example, open pens for poultry may increase the spread of communicable diseases like avian influenza.
Despite such risks, the outlook for future food security is promising.
Our food is safer and our diets are more diverse than ever before; production methods are becoming increasingly sustainable, clean, and efficient; and we are constantly becoming better at protecting biodiversity.
Yet many in Europe and the United States – which have benefited most from agricultural advances – are mistrustful of this progress, viewing scientific advancement and free trade as a dangerous combination.
To the extent that this perception impedes progress, it is the real threat to global food security.
How Terrorism\u0027s Victims Became Perpetrators
Why is America in trouble?
September 11 was a traumatic event that shook the nation to its core. But it would not have changed the course of history for the worse if President Bush had not responded as he did.
Declaring war on terrorism was understandable, perhaps even appropriate, as a figure of speech. The problem is that President Bush meant it literally.
I believe there is a direct connection between this and the abuse of detainees by US soldiers in Abu Ghraib prison.
What happened at Abu Ghraib was not a case of a few bad apples, but a pattern tolerated and even encouraged by American authorities.
For example, the Judge Advocate General Corps routinely observes military interrogations from behind a two-way mirror; that practice was discontinued in Afghanistan and Iraq.
The International Red Cross and others started complaining about abuses as early as December 2002.
It is easy to see how terrorism can lead to torture.
Last summer, I took an informal poll at a meeting of Wall Street investors to find out whether they would condone the use of torture to prevent a terrorist attack.
The consensus was that they hoped somebody would do it without their knowing about it.
Americans, sadly, are now victims who have turned into perpetrators.
Indeed, since September 2001, the war on terror has claimed more innocent victims than those terrorist attacks.
This fact is unrecognized at home because the victims of the war on terror are not Americans.
But the rest of the world does not draw the same distinction, and world opinion has turned against America.
The Bush administration knew what it was doing when it declared war on terror and used that pretext for invading Iraq.
Perhaps Bush did not personally recognize this, but Vice President Dick Cheney and a group of extremists concentrated in and around the Pentagon did.
These people are guided by the belief that international relations are relations of power, not law.
Because America is the most powerful nation on earth, it ought to use that power more assertively.
They advocated the overthrow of Saddam Hussein even before Bush was elected and won him to their cause after September 11.
The invasion of Afghanistan could be justified on the grounds that the Taliban provided Bin Laden and Al Qaeda with a secure training ground. Invading Iraq could not be similarly justified.
Nevertheless, the ideologues in the administration were determined to pursue it because, in the words of Paul Wolfowitz, "it was doable."
President Bush managed to convince the nation that Saddam Hussein had some connection with the suicide bombers of September 11, and that he possessed weapons of mass destruction.
When both claims proved false, he argued that America invaded Iraq to liberate the Iraqi people.
That claim was even more far-fetched.
If America had really cared for the Iraqi people, more troops would have been sent to provide protection not only for the Ministry of Oil, but for museums and hospitals, too.
Instead, Iraq was devastated by looting.
Now that America's position has become unsustainable, the Bush administration is handing over power to local militias in Falluja and elsewhere.
This prepares the ground for religious and ethnic divisions and possible civil war à la Bosnia, rather than democracy.
I would love to pin the blame for all this on Bush and his team. But that would ignore that Bush was playing to a receptive audience.
Indeed, after all that has happened, a majority of the US electorate continues to have confidence in Bush on national security matters.
If this continues and Bush is reelected, Americans must ask the question: "What is wrong with us?"
America needs profound soul-searching.
The terrorists seem to have hit upon a weak point in America's collective psyche. They have made Americans fearful and found a willing co-conspirator in the Bush administration.
For reasons of its own, the Bush administration has found it advantageous to nurture the fear that September 11 engendered.
By declaring war on terror, Bush united the country behind him.
But fear is a bad counselor.
By succumbing to fear Americans are doing the terrorists' bidding: unleashing a vicious cycle of violence that may result in a permanent state of war.
The war on terror need never end; because the terrorists are invisible, they will never disappear.
The war on terror polarizes the world.
In battles for survival, whether in Yugoslavia or Israel, everyone sticks with his own tribe or nation, whether its policies are right or wrong.
This is the state of mind that Bush sought to foster when he declared that those who are not "with us" are with the terrorists.
That attitude cannot be reconciled with an open society, a concept based on the recognition that nobody possesses ultimate truth.
Might is not necessarily right. It is not enough to reject the Bush administration's policies; Americans must reaffirm the values and principles of an open society.
The war on terror is an aberration. America must defend itself against terrorist attacks, but that cannot be allowed to become the overarching objective of its existence.
Today, no single country or combination of countries can stand up to American military might.
The main threat to America's dominant position comes not from outside, but from within.
If Americans fail to recognize that they may be wrong, they risk undermining the country's dominant position.
Being the most powerful nation gives America privileges, but it also imposes obligations.
If Americans want to preserve their privileged position, they must not use it to dictate to the rest of the world, but for the well being of others.
Indeed, many problems-maintaining peace, ensuring law and order, protecting the environment, reducing poverty, and fighting terrorism-require collective action.
Americans cannot do anything they want, but little can be done without US leadership or active participation.
Instead of undermining and demeaning international institutions because they do not necessarily follow America's will, the US should strengthen and improve them.
Instead of engaging in preemptive military actions, the US should pursue preventive actions of a constructive nature, creating a better balance between carrots and sticks in the prevailing world order.
Emerging Markets’ Euro Nemesis
BRUSSELS – Emerging markets’ currencies are crashing, and their central banks are busy tightening policy, trying to stabilize their countries’ financial markets.
Who is to blame for this state of affairs?
A few years ago, when the US Federal Reserve embarked on yet another round of “quantitative easing,” some emerging-market leaders complained loudly.
They viewed the Fed’s open-ended purchases of long-term securities as an attempt to engineer a competitive devaluation of the dollar and worried that ultra-easy monetary conditions in the United States would unleash a flood of “hot money” inflows, driving up their exchange rates.
This, they feared, would not only diminish their export competitiveness and push their external accounts into deficit; it would also expose them to the harsh consequences of a sudden stop in capital inflows when US policymakers reversed course.
At first sight, these fears appear to have been well founded.
As the title of a recent paper published by the International Monetary Fund succinctly puts it, “Capital Flows are Fickle: Anytime, Anywhere.”
The mere announcement that the Fed might scale down its unconventional monetary-policy operations has led to today’s capital flight from emerging markets.
But this view misses the real reason why capital flowed into emerging markets over the last few years, and why the external accounts of so many of them have swung into deficit.
The real culprit is the euro.
Quantitative easing in the US cannot have been behind these large swings in global current-account balances, because America’s external deficit has not changed significantly in recent years.
This is also what one would expect from economic theory: in conditions approaching a liquidity trap, the impact of unconventional monetary policies on financial conditions and demand is likely to be modest.
Indeed, the available models tell us that, to the extent that an expansionary monetary policy actually does have an impact on the economy, its effect on the current account should not be large, because any positive effect on exports from a weaker exchange rate should be offset by larger imports due to the increase in domestic demand.
This is what has happened in the US, and its recent economic revival has been accompanied by an expansion of both exports and imports.
The impact of the various rounds of quantitative easing on emerging markets (and on the rest of the world) has thus been approximately neutral.
But austerity in Europe has had a profound impact on the eurozone’s current account, which has swung from a deficit of almost $100 billion in 2008 to a surplus of almost $300 billion this year.
This was a consequence of the sudden stop of capital flows to the eurozone’s southern members, which forced these countries to turn their current accounts from a combined deficit of $300 billion five years ago to a small surplus today.
Because the external-surplus countries of the eurozone’s north, Germany and Netherlands, did not expand their demand, the eurozone overall is now running the world’s largest current-account surplus – exceeding even that of China, which has long been accused of engaging in competitive currency manipulation.
This extraordinary swing of almost $400 billion in the eurozone’s current-account balance did not result from a “competitive devaluation”; the euro has remained strong.
So the real reason for the eurozone’s large external surplus today is that internal demand has been so weak that imports have been practically stagnant over the last five years (the average annual growth rate was a paltry 0.25%).
The cause of this state of affairs, in one word, is austerity.
Weak demand in Europe is the real reason why emerging markets’ current accounts deteriorated (and, with the exception of China, swung into deficit).
Thus, if anything, emerging-market leaders should have complained about European austerity, not about US quantitative easing.
Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s talk of “tapering” quantitative easing might have triggered the current bout of instability; but emerging markets’ underlying vulnerability was made in Europe.
The fickleness of capital markets poses once again the paradox of thrift.
As capital withdraws from emerging markets, these countries soon will be forced to adopt their own austerity measures and run current-account surpluses, much like the eurozone periphery today.
But who will then be able – and willing – to run deficits?
Two of the world’s three largest economies come to mind: China, given the strength of its balance sheet, and the eurozone, given the euro’s status as a reserve currency.
But both appear committed to running large surpluses (indeed, the two largest in the world).
This implies that, unless the US resumes its role as consumer of last resort, the latest bout of financial-market jitters will weaken the global economy again.
And any global recovery promises to be unbalanced – that is, if it materializes at all.
A Time for Action in the Middle East
LONDON – The announcement, following the use of chemical weapons in Syria, of an emergency summit in Jordan this week of military leaders from the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Canada, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar is a welcome development.
Western policy is at a crossroads: commentary or action; shaping events or reacting to them.
After the long and painful campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan, I understand every impulse to stay clear of the turmoil, to watch but not to intervene, to ratchet up language but not to engage in the hard, even harsh business of changing reality on the ground.
But we have to understand the consequences of wringing our hands instead of putting them to work.
People wince at the thought of intervention.
But contemplate the future consequences of inaction and shudder: Syria, mired in the carnage between the brutality of Bashar al-Assad and various affiliates of Al Qaeda, a breeding ground of extremism infinitely more dangerous than Afghanistan in the 1990’s; Egypt in chaos, with the West, however unfairly, looking as if it is giving succor to those who would turn it into a Sunni version of Iran; and Iran itself, despite its new president, still a theocratic dictatorship, with a nuclear bomb.
The West would appear confused, its allies would be dismayed, and its enemies would be emboldened.
This is a nightmare scenario, but it is not far-fetched.
Start with Egypt.
To many in the West, it is clear that the Egyptian military has removed a democratically elected government and is now repressing a legitimate political party, killing its supporters and imprisoning its leaders.
So we are on a steady track toward ostracizing the new government.
In doing so, we think that we are upholding our values.
I completely understand this view.
But to embrace it would be a grave strategic error.
The fallacy of this approach lies in the Muslim Brotherhood’s nature.
We think of it as a normal political party.
It is not. If you want to join the UK Conservative Party or the German Christian Democrats or America’s Democratic Party, you can do so easily, and they will welcome you with open arms.
In all of these countries, all parties respect basic democratic freedoms.
The Muslim Brotherhood is not such a party.
Becoming a member is a seven-year process of induction and indoctrination.
The Brotherhood is a movement run by a hierarchy that is more akin to the Bolsheviks.
Read their speeches – those put out not for Western ears, but for their own.
What they were doing in Egypt was not “governing badly.”
If you elect a bad government, then tough – you live with it.
The Muslim Brotherhood, by contrast, was systematically changing the constitution and taking control of the commanding heights of the state in order to make it impossible for its rule to be challenged.
And it was doing so in pursuit of values that contradict everything for which democracy stands.
So you can rightly criticize the actions or overreactions of Egypt’s new military government; but it is difficult to criticize the intervention that brought it into being.
Now all of the choices that Egypt faces are ugly.
There are large numbers of soldiers and police among the casualties, as well as civilians; and, partly as a byproduct of the fall of Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, Egypt is awash with weapons.
But simply condemning the military will not bring a return to democracy any nearer.
Egypt is not a creation of nineteenth- or twentieth-century global power games.
It is an ancient civilization stretching back thousands of years, imbued with fierce national pride.
The army has a special place in its society.
The people do want democracy, but they will be disdainful of Western critics whom they will see as utterly naive in the face of the threat to democracy that the Muslim Brotherhood posed.
We should support the new government in stabilizing the country; urge everyone, including the Muslim Brotherhood, to get off the streets; and let a proper and short process to an election with independent observers be put in place.
A new constitution that protects minority rights and the basic ethos of the country should be drafted, and all political parties should operate according to rules that ensure transparency and commitment to the democratic process.
This is the only realistic way to help those – probably a majority – who want genuine democracy, not an election used as a route to domination.
In Syria, we know what is happening – and that it is wrong to let it happen.
But leave aside any moral argument and just think of the world’s interests for a moment.
Doing nothing would mean Syria’s disintegration, divided in blood, with the countries around it destabilized and waves of terrorism rolling over the region.
Assad would remain in power in the richest part of the country, with bitter sectarian fury reigning in the country’s eastern hinterland.
Iran, with Russia’s support, would be ascendant – and the West apparently impotent.
I hear people talk as if nothing can be done: the Syrian defense systems are too powerful, the issues too complex, and in any event, why take sides when one is as bad as the next?
But others are taking sides.
They are not terrified of the prospect of intervention.
They are intervening in support of a regime that is assaulting civilians in ways not seen since the dark days of Saddam Hussein.
It is time we took a side: the side of the people who want what we want; who see our societies, for all their faults, as something to admire; who know that they should not be faced with a choice between tyranny and theocracy.
I detest the implicit notion behind so much of our commentary that the Arabs or, even worse, the people of Islam, are unable to understand what a free society looks like, that they cannot be trusted with something so modern as a polity where religion is in its proper place.
It is not true.
What is true is that there is a life-and-death struggle going on over the future of Islam, with extremists aiming to subvert both its open-minded tradition and the modern world.
In this struggle, we should not be neutral.
Wherever this extremism is destroying the lives of innocent people – from Iran to Syria, Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia, as well as elsewhere in Africa, Central Asia, and the Far East – we should be at their side.
As one of the architects of policy after the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, I know the controversy, anguish, and cost of the decisions taken.
I understand why the pendulum has swung so heavily the other way.
But it is not necessary to revert to that policy to make a difference.
And the forces that made intervention in Afghanistan and Iraq so difficult are of course the very forces at the heart of the storm today.
They have to be defeated.
We should defeat them, however long it takes, because otherwise they will not disappear.
They will grow stronger, until we will reach another crossroads; at that point, there will be no choice.
How the West Was Re-Won
PARIS – In 2005, at the Royal Academy of Arts in London, a prestigious exhibit sponsored by the Chinese Government, “The Three Emperors,” celebrated the greatness of Chinese art.
The show’s central piece was a giant painting in the European (Jesuit) style depicting the envoys of the Western world lining up to pay respect to the Chinese emperor.
The message could not have been more explicit: “China is back.”
The West would have to pay tribute to China in the future the way it had kowtowed to it in the past.
In 2012, China is on the verge of becoming the world’s largest economy and is by far the leading emerging power.
Yet two simultaneous phenomena suggest that the West may have been buried prematurely by its own Cassandras and by Asian pundits who sometimes behave like “arrogant Westerners.”
First, the West, particularly Europe, is slowly taking the measure of the Asian challenge.
Second, it is doing so at the very moment that the emerging countries are starting to feel the consequences of a world economic crisis that has Europe as its epicenter.
In other words, a new balance of strengths and weaknesses is emerging beneath the surface of events – and runs contrary to current mantras.
Europe has awakened to the Asian challenge just as its own crisis exposes and intensifies the emerging countries’ economic, political, and social weaknesses.
A few years ago, in my book The Geopolitics of Emotion, I stressed the differences that existed between a Western world dominated by fear and an Asia animated by hope.
While the West accumulated debts, Asia had startled the world with its long economic boom.
This continues to be the case, but nuances are appearing.
There is more fear today in the West, but also a little less hope in Asia.
Indeed, global investors are starting to hedge their bets, as if preparing themselves for a more genuinely balanced world spanning different continents and cultures.
Asia may have caught up with the West; Latin America may be on track to do so; and Africa may be slowly positioning itself to grow.
The Arab world, too, with its ongoing revolution, may also be joining the game, overcoming the humiliation that had been its peoples’ animating emotional force.
The West, meanwhile, may be slowly adapting to the new realities of a world that it no longer dominates, but in which it still occupies an essential role, owing to values whose universalism is now formulated in a more restrained and coherent way.
Indeed, to fear, hope, and humiliation, I would now add a fourth and decisive cultural mood: modesty.
Today’s West is very different from the historical West.
It is a reduced entity, increasingly aware that it can no longer be the center of the world, if only because of its shrinking demographic weight.
Europe accounted for 20% of the world’s population at the beginning of the eighteenth century; the population of the West as a whole will constitute slightly more than 10% in 2050.
The West is also fragmented: the American West is growing increasingly apart from the European West.
The question is no longer one of shared interests or common security goals, but of culture, as the United States, in particular, increasingly looks to Asia and Latin America and attracts immigrants from those regions.
As for the Asian West, Japan will continue to remain alone and unique.
Given this, it might seem premature, to say the least, to announce the “return of the West,” especially at a time when the US economy remains fragile, Europe’s financial crisis is fueling an existential funk, and Japan’s deep structural malaise continues.
Still, across Europe, particularly in the south, one is witnessing a willingness to learn from others.
There is a growing awareness, even in France – not known for its humility – that benchmarking is necessary, and that tough sacrifices will have to be made.
In other words, Europeans are beginning to understand that they have lived well beyond their means materially, and well below their means intellectually, spiritually, and ethically – a process that might be described as the beginning of Europe’s “Montization,” to pay tribute to Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti’s embodiment of responsibility and courage.
Just imagine: a more virtuous Europe encountering a more “decadent” China, whose venal elites are starting to turn on each other?
What we may be witnessing is the consolidation of a truly multipolar world, in which the West no longer dominates, but is not about to be replaced by Asia or the emerging world in general.
The West is not “striking back.”
But a more modest West may stabilize its position with respect to China, particularly at a time when China has become both more arrogant and less confident in its own political and social system.
America’s Rehearsals for Retirement