In the fourteenth century, the powerful Mali Empire included parts of modern-day Senegal, Guinea, and Niger.
Defeated and divided, it became a French colony in the nineteenth century, regaining independence in 1960.
Mali’s population is diverse: desert nomads, notably Tuaregs, in the north, and a majority of sedentary black populations in the south.
Many languages are spoken, but Islam, to which almost 95% of the population adheres, is a unifying factor.
Agriculture is the main economic activity, notably in the vast internal delta of the Niger River, home to many tribes, including the Dogon, a people remarkable for their sculpture and architecture.
Long a military dictatorship, Mali became an African democratic success story from 1991 to 2012, before a coup crippled its rudimentary public institutions.
In the north, Tuaregs traveling to Mauritania, Algeria and Niger, were particularly weakened by persistent drought and the collapse of the caravan economy.
Many have turned to weapons, slave, or gold trafficking; some are demanding independence.
In the wake of the ferocious religious war that tore Algeria apart in the 1990’s, a great number of Muslim fundamentalist Arabs fled south to the vast Sahara that covers part of Mali.
Then, in 2011, Western-backed regime change in Libya toppled Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi and drove more fundamentalists to flee into the desert –&#160;but not before they had gotten their hands on a significant part of Qaddafi’s heavy weaponry, as well as many vehicles.
These fundamentalists, becoming bandits of sorts, came to terms with the nomadic traffickers.
All, including the traffickers, ended up embracing the fundamentalist rhetoric of revenge against infidels.
In January 2013, these groups formed a convoy of several hundred pick-ups and ATVs, armed with heavy machineguns.
The desert cities of Gao, Kidal, and Timbuktu quickly fell to them.
Islamic monuments, including some of Timbuktu’s glories, were destroyed.
Sharia law was applied; women who were never forced to do so before had to wear the veil.
The convoys even threatened Bamako, the capital, composed mostly of black Africans.
In a panic, acting President Dioncounda Traoré, a colonel from the south, called upon the French authorities to enforce a bilateral defense agreement, though he had contributed to the coup that drove the legally elected former president, Amadou Toumani Touré, into exile, causing the state to collapse and straining relations with France.
France has no interest in Mali other than the protection of its citizens and the stability of the Sahel region.
Indeed, France withdrew all of its permanently based military forces from Mali years ago.
And, with fewer than a thousand French citizens still living in Mali, even its pragmatic interest is relatively slight.
Although isolated, French President François Hollande courageously decided to respond firmly to Traoré’s call for help.
In France, everyone understood and approved.
Few suggest that French military intervention was a means to recapture its colonial empire.
And the United States – indifferent to the integrity of the Malian state and the welfare of its citizens in normal circumstances – was aware of the possibility that Mali’s vast territory could fall under fundamentalist/terrorist control.
So it decided to take part in the transport, communications, logistical, and intelligence components of the French-led operation.
For similar reasons, Great Britain, though allergic to any common European defense policy, offered two planes.
As for Europe, it did nothing – which was foreseeable.
France performed marvelously.
In just a few days, it managed to send in nearly 3,000 men, heavily armed and efficiently motorized.
Gao, Kidal, and Timbuktu were recaptured; Bamako was saved.
The fundamentalists, having lost most of their vehicles and arms to French aerial bombing, fled headlong into the desert.
French troops are now set to return home.
But, with thousands of fundamentalist killers in the desert, now poorly motorized but still armed, should they do so?
Mali, of course, is not the only country facing a fundamentalist insurrection.
Such violence is typical of Islam’s contemporary crisis.
The learned, cultured, and radiant traditions of earlier centuries seem to have vanished.
Having missed their economic takeoff, many Muslim-majority countries appear open to the call of Islamist fundamentalism.
These countries now require painful, far-reaching reforms to attain economic prosperity, a goal that presupposes cultural change as well.
In Christianity, the Reformation was essential to forging democracy and capitalism.
But, in contemporary Islam, the powerful have always managed to eliminate would-be reformers.
As a result, the Islamic world is mostly weak, partly colonized, humiliated, and economically powerless.
Oil benefits a handful of princes.
Despite their travails, only a few thousand of the world’s 1.5 billion Muslims have embraced the extremist project of killing infidels and moderates.
But, amid the resulting political and religious confusion – and, because religious authorities remain silent in the face of Islamist rhetoric – no Muslim state can solve its problems domestically.
External help is needed.
Mali was the first to ask for it, with local religious authorities supporting the government’s request for military assistance from France.
Now Mali’s army must be reconstituted, its police trained, and its government restructured.
This, too, will be possible only if religious authorities back the necessary reforms.
But, as in Mali, the task of assisting reform in Muslim states is not for France alone.
It is the responsibility of the West as a whole.
Berbagai Wajah Malnutrisi
ABUJA – Jika Anda kebetulan sedang duduk dengan dua orang, ada kemungkinan salah satu dari Anda mengalami malnutrisi.
Dan mungkin Anda tidak menyadarinya.
Ya, betul sekali: satu dari tiga orang di dunia menderita malnutrisi, dan hal ini tidak selalu terlihat seperti yang Anda bayangkan.
Mulai dari dua milyar orang dewasa yang kelebihan berat badan sampai ke 159 juta anak-anak dengan pertumbuhan terhambat, terdapat berbagai bentuk malnutrisi.
Sebagai dokter, Saya pernah melihat wanita yang terlihat sehat, tapi menderita anemia, karena rendahnya asupan zat besi.
Dan Saya pernah melihat lelaki berbadan sehat dengan perut besar, sehingga meningkatkan resiko mereka menderita penyakit jantung. 
Afrika Barat adalah salah satu tempat dengan tingkat malnutrisi paling tinggi di dunia.
Ini termasuk “wajah” kondisi malnutrisi yang paling diketahui orang: sekitar 9% dari anak-anak di bawah lima tahun di Afrika Barat menderita wasting atau mereka terlalu kurus jika dibandingkan dengan tinggi badan mereka.
Pada kondisi terburuk, wasting bisa berakibat fatal. 
Tapi Afrika Barat juga menderita malnutrisi dalam bentuk lain.
Sepertiga anak-anak dibawah usia lima tahun di wilayah tersebut mengalami pertumbuhan terhambat (terlalu pendek untuk usia mereka), kondisi ini memiliki dampak yang tidak bisa diubah pada pertumbuhan kognitif.
Menurut penelitian Dampak Kelaparan di Afrika, anak-anak dengan pertumbuhan terhambat di benua ini mendapat hingga 3.6 tahun lebih sedikit pendidikan dibandingkan anak-anak dengan nutrisi cukup.
Masalah ini tidak hanya berdampak pada anak-anak.
Setengah dari perempuan usia produktif di Afrika Barat menderita anemia.
Anemia tidak hanya menyumbang hampir seperlima dari tingkat kematian ibu; bayi yang lahir dari perempuan penderita anemia lebih mungkin menderita kurang berat badan.
Hal ini menimbulkan lingkaran setan yang buruk.
Mungkin wajah malnutrisi yang paling tidak terlihat bukanlah kekurangan nutrisi, tapi kelebihan berat badan dan obesitas.
Saat ini, 31% orang dewasa di Afrika Barat menderita kelebihan berat badan atau obesitas.
Di Nigeria, negara asal Saya, 33% orang dewasa menderita kelebihan berat badan dan obesitas.
Selain dari penyakit jantung, kelebihan berat badan juga meningkatkan resiko diabetes, darah tinggi, stroke dan lainnya.   
Malnutrisi juga mempunyai dampak serius terhadap ekonomi.
Laporan Nutrisi Global tahun 2016 memperkirakan, di Afrika malnutrisi berdampak pada berkurangnya 11% PDB – lebih dari kerugian pertahun akibat krisis finansial global pada tahun 2008-2010.
Pada level individu, orang dewasa yang mengalami pertumbuhan terhambat di masa kecil mereka – kondisi yang diderita oleh hampir 70% dari populasi pekerja di beberapa wilayah – sering mengalami penurunan kapasitas bekerja dan mencari nafkah, karena tantangan pertumbuhan yang mereka hadapi.
Hal ini tidak hanya berdampak buruk pada perkembangan manusia, tapi juga terhadap kemajuan ekonomi.
Oleh karena itu, sangat penting untuk mengatasi malnutrisi.
Namun, terdapat kemajuan yang tidak merata, khususnya di Afrika Barat.
Tentunya, ada beberapa negara yang mencapai kesuksesan, karena pemerintah yang cepat tanggap.
Dalam satu dekade, Ghana mengurangi hampir setengah tingkat pertumbuhan terhambat, sebagian karena investasi di hal-hal yang mempengaruhi nutrisi, seperti pertanian dan perlindungan sosial.
Pemerintahan Niger mengurangi setengah angka kematian anak dibawah usia lima tahun dalam jangka waktu yang hampir sama, dengan membuat anggaran khusus dan mengambil keputusan operasional untuk mengatasi wasting.
Namun negara-negara lain hampir tidak mengalami kemajuan dalam mengatasi masalah malnutrisi.
Di Togo, tingkat pertumbuhan terhambat hampir sama dalam satu dekade terakhir.
Di Mali dan Guinea, tingkat wasting meningkat.
Dan ada banyak negara lain yang mengalami hal yang sama.
Banyak negara-negara Afrika lain yang siap untuk mulai menulis kisah sukses mereka.
Pantai Gading berhasil menurunkan tingkat pertumbuhan terhambat, sementara Senegal berada di jalur yang benar untuk mengatasi wasting.
Di kedua negara tersebut, investasi ekstra – baik secara politik dan finansial – bisa mempunyai dampak besar.
Namun donor dan pemerintah masih enggan untuk memberikan pendanaan yang dibutuhkan.
Menurut Laporan Nutrisi Global tahun 2016, dana dari donor untuk intervensi yang fokus pada nutrisi stagnan pada angka $1 milyar.
Sembilan pemerintah di Afrika Barat, rata-rata, mengalokasikan lebih dari 1% anggaran mereka untuk nutrisi.
Namun, nutrisi adalah salah satu bentuk investasi terbaik yang dapat kita lakukan, setiap $1 investasi di nutrisi akan menghasilkan keuntungan $ 16.
Di banyak negara, misalnya India, penyakit yang diakibatkan oleh obesitas seperti penyakit jantung menghabiskan hampir 30% pendapatan rumah tangga per tahun.
Kecuali pemerintah di Afrika mulai membuat pilihan dan investasi cerdas, benua ini mungkin akan mengalami nasib yang sama.    
Banyak pemerintah di Afrika mempunyai target keamanan, stabilitas dan kemakmuran ekonomi jangka panjang yang ambisius.
Gizi adalah elemen penting untuk mencapai semua target tersebut.
Nutrisi sangat penting untuk perkembangan benua kita, sehingga harus menjadi prioritas utama dalam pembuatan keputusan.
Jutaan jiwa bergantung pada hal ini.        
Managing China’s Crisis Management
BEIJING – China’s “Central Economic Work Meeting,” comprising top government decision makers, recently chose to continue the expansionary fiscal and monetary policy launched in the last quarter of 2008.
But it also called for greater emphasis on transforming China’s development pattern and rebalancing its economic structure.
The move thus signaled the start – well ahead of other countries – of China’s “exit” from crisis-driven economic policies.
Indeed, China should accelerate its change of course. While expansionary policies have succeeded in ensuring a V-shape recession, their medium and long-term effects are worrisome.
First, China’s crisis management has made its growth pattern, marked by massive investment demand, even more problematic.
China’s investment rate is extremely high in comparison with other major economies, and has been increasing steadily since 2001, creating first overheating and then overcapacity.
Until the global financial/economic crisis that began in 2008, however, strong export performance concealed China’s overcapacity problem, which, thanks to the stimulus package, is now set to become more serious.
Indeed, China’s investment rate may have surpassed 50% in 2009.
Second, China’s external imbalance may also worsen.
Trade and exports accounted for 67% and 37% of the country’s GDP, respectively, before the global crisis, but have since fallen significantly.
And yet reliance on external demand remains fundamentally unchanged, even as the contribution of net exports to GDP growth has turned negative.
In fact, worsening overcapacity, together with all the many types of price distortions still in place, may push Chinese enterprises to boost production for export markets, like the United States, where protectionist tendencies are likely to intensify in 2010 and onwards.
Third, China’s financial stability and fiscal position may deteriorate in the medium term.
The government, well aware of the overcapacity problem, focused the country’s stimulus package on investment in infrastructure, rather than new factories.
But infrastructure is a long-term investment, revenues from which will be lower without accompanying investment in manufacturing capacity.
An eight-lane highway must carry traffic to generate tolls.
Moreover, due to hasty and poorly supervised implementation, waste in infrastructure construction can be serious.
With an investment rate of 50% and a GDP growth rate of 8%, the incremental capital-output ratio could be higher than six, compared to 4.1 in 1991-2003, implying not only low efficiency, but also the possibility of a significant increase in nonperforming loans.
Finally, monetary policy has been far too loose.
Unlike the US, China did not suffer from a liquidity shortage and a credit crunch during the global financial crisis.
Thus, low interest rates and non-market interference, rather than demand from enterprises, fueled explosive credit growth in the first half of 2009, surpassing the full-year target.
If commercial banks had been allowed to base lending decisions solely on economic considerations, credit and money supply would have grown more slowly, limiting the risk of rising bad-loan ratios, stalled enterprise reform, inflationary pressure, and a resurgence of asset bubbles as excess liquidity enters equity and real-estate markets.
Indeed, China’s housing prices have been skyrocketing in recent months.
The government was too generous in helping revive real-estate demand, and, overwhelmed by fear of the negative impact of falling asset prices on economic growth, has been too cautious in dealing with bubbles when they have reappeared.
With the housing sector accounting for 10% of GDP and investment in real-estate development accounting for 25% of total fixed investment, any decision to rein in runaway housing prices will be difficult.
All in all, the negative impact of the Chinese government’s crisis-management measures on China’s long-term growth may be serious if the authorities fail to tackle the economy’s structural problems head on.
But it is also worth noting that the government is well aware of the problems, and has begun to take measures to put structural adjustment back at the top of the policy agenda.
In 2010, for example, the government may seek to stimulate domestic consumption by making income distribution more favorable to the household sector relative to the enterprise sector, and by providing more public goods to reduce households’ precautionary savings.
Certainly, without a more equitable income distribution, official talk of creating a “harmonious society” will sound empty.
Furthermore, the government should continue to eliminate price distortions by creating more flexible mechanisms, including for the exchange rate.
The government’s goal should be to succeed not only in reviving the economy, but also in reversing the deterioration of China’s structural problems, thereby laying a solid foundation for economic growth in the future.
In this respect, the Chinese have good reason to be optimistic, for their country has defied predictions of economic demise repeatedly over the past three decades.
Transatlantic Trade-Offs
LONDON – Almost two decades after the idea was first mooted, the United States and the European Union agreed last week to begin negotiating a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
The partnership’s launch – which should occur at the beginning of 2015 – has been presented as a much-needed “deficit-free stimulus” that would boost US and EU GDP by 0.5% annually, while helping to increase employment on both sides of the Atlantic.
While both parties aim to eliminate remaining tariffs on bilateral trade, they are particularly eager to reduce the thicket of non-tariff barriers – mainly competing technical and sanitary standards and regulations �� that have stifled development of the bilateral economic relationship.
Closer regulatory cooperation may also help the US and the EU to confront what business leaders view as increasingly unfair competition from China both at home and abroad.
But can the TTIP live up to the hype?
Tellingly, the High-Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth, which was tasked with identifying the policies and measures that should define the negotiations, has recommended a more conservative approach.
Indeed, the Group’s final report, released earlier this month, states that the agreement “should be designed to evolve over time,” moving “progressively toward a more integrated transatlantic marketplace.”
Specifically, the group recommends establishing “an on-going mechanism for improved dialogue and cooperation” on regulatory issues and non-tariff barriers, as well as a “framework for identifying opportunities for…future regulatory cooperation.”
Such caution is warranted, given that some of the main principles that drive the two parties’ regulatory approaches are vastly different – and sometimes at odds with one another.
For example, the EU has long been committed to the “precautionary principle,” which prevents products that may harm human health from entering the EU market – even if the scientific evidence is not yet conclusive.
This principle underpins the EU’s refusal to import genetically modified (GM) foods from the US, where they are widely consumed.
But senior members of the US Congress have stressed that a successful agreement must include opening the EU market to all US agricultural products.&#160;
Another potential area of contention – conflicting notions of personal privacy – could inhibit the two sides’ ability to accomplish their shared goal of opening up the digital market.
In recent weeks, major US technology companies, including Google and Facebook, have been accused of aggressively lobbying the European Parliament to suspend plans to intensify privacy rules in the EU.
A third challenge is rooted in Europe’s deeply held skepticism of financial markets.
The day after US President Barack Obama announced the launch of the TTIP negotiations, the European Commission released its blueprint for a Eurozone Financial Transaction Tax that would impose new costs on US banks operating in EU markets.
Other cases in which barriers to transatlantic trade and investment conceal conflicting objectives and deep-rooted attitudes include France’s protection of its cherished audiovisual sector and America’s desire to continue to block European penetration of its iconic airline industry.
Negotiators will also have to overcome significant structural obstacles.
As the European Commission struggles to secure a clear negotiating mandate from all 27 member states, the US will face its own internal coordination problems.
European countries succeeded in creating the Single Market in 1992 not by harmonizing all of their standards and regulations, but by agreeing to recognize one another’s.
If a product is approved for sale in one EU member state, it is considered safe enough to be sold in another.
A similar policy of “mutual recognition” could be the key to successful US-EU trade negotiations, but only if both parties can overcome the biases that are built into their regulatory and political systems.
Such barriers are particularly pronounced in the US, where Congress oversees the legal framework within which federal regulatory agencies – such as the Environmental Protection Agency and the Food and Drug Administration – operate.
Not only do the US administration and its federal agencies have to accept that a safety standard established and tested in Frankfurt or Athens is equivalent to its US counterpart; congressional committees must agree.
For its part, the EU would have to reconsider, for example, its policy on GM foods.
The EU overcame national biases to establish the Single Market by instituting a process of legally binding qualified majority voting, whereby individual member states could be outvoted on specific regulations.
But such an approach cannot be replicated to break the inevitable logjams of transatlantic regulatory negotiations.
Faced with such significant obstacles, it is not surprising that the High-Level Working Group has settled on a more modest measure of success for TTIP negotiations.
But this does not negate the partnership’s value.
Although transatlantic tariffs average only 3-5% (with higher peaks for some sensitive products), tariff elimination would have a significant impact, given that bilateral trade totals $650 billion annually.
Simplifying customs procedures and opening up markets for public procurement could bring further benefits.
And establishing a formal mechanism for transatlantic regulatory consultation will eventually pay off, one sector at a time.
The TTIP that is signed in 2015 may not be the revolutionary and comprehensive agreement for which many observers are hoping. But it remains a crucial step toward a more integrated transatlantic marketplace.
Managing Iraq\u0027s Oil
In recent months, Iraq's oil production has grown to more than two million barrels per day.
At this rate, current oil output and oil exports now exceed post-invasion predictions.
Experts had argued that funding shortages, lack of security, the problems of stabilizing a legitimate government, and technology shortfalls would severely limit Iraq's output.
Despite the odds, Iraq's daily output reached a post-invasion record of 2.5 million barrels in March.
A number of factors enabled Iraq to increase its output.
Most significantly, the Bush administration gave Iraq $2.3 billion to restore its oil production.
After the invasion, no one expected Iraq to get loans, let alone outright grants.
Instead, $2.3 billion was invested directly into the Iraqi oil sector.
To protect the oil fields and other facilities, the Americans dedicated a massive, overwhelming force of soldiers and private contractors.
The level of protection was unprecedented even compared to Saddam's regime.
On the technical side, the Bush administration hired the world's best oil service companies to revamp Iraq's technologically challenged oil fields.
They still have a long way to go, but significant improvements are already evident.
Moreover, the war didn't change the quality of Iraqi fields, which are still among the richest in the world and can produce oil with relatively little effort and investment.
Finally, high oil prices in the past 12 months provided an unexpectedly large windfall to the Iraqi budget, allowing for the financing of other sectors without slighting the oil industry.
High prices also enabled the Coalition Provisional Authority to add even more private security personnel to protect refineries and pipelines.
Granting Iraq the money to restore its oil industry was one of the best post-war decisions that the Bush administration has made.
The money allowed Iraq to begin to address security, production, and technology issues throughout its oil system.
But the question remains: will output growth continue following the transfer of sovereignty to an Iraqi government at the end of June?
Despite massive injections of funds and unprecedented security, insurgents have still managed to halt or reduce oil production and exports several times since the invasion.
The bombing of a pipeline or other oil facility somewhere in Iraq remains almost a daily occurrence, and the transfer of power has not reduced these attacks so far.
Like the Bush administration and Saddam himself, the insurgents understand that whoever controls Iraqi oil controls Iraq's destiny.
The new Iraqi government, even supported by US military might, will simply not be able to guarantee a predictable flow of oil, and output will remain quite volatile.
At the same time, maintaining the flow of funds into the Iraqi oil sector is essential, not only for its growth, but for its very survival.
Money brings technological regeneration as well as security.
Under even the best circumstances for Iraq, with oil prices remaining high, the funds available to maintain and modernize the oil industry are limited.
If oil prices decline in the future, the oil industry will suffer severely.
This makes for an interesting relationship between Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
Only Saudi Arabia can manage the global output of oil in such a way that will make room for Iraqi oil and keep prices high.
In contrast, only Saudi Arabia can flood the market and reduce prices far below their current level.
A decline in oil revenues could be devastating to the fledgling Iraqi government.
Current oil revenues are barely enough to cover state expenses, let alone pay for reconstruction, debt, and war reparations.
Even if President Bush wins reelection, it is highly unlikely that the US will make another outright grant to a sovereign Iraq.
Theoretically, international loans could be an alternative, but who would lend to an unstable government, let alone a government whose legitimacy has not been fully established?
Likewise, privatization is out of the picture for now.
The new government will have to make do and chart a slow path for its oil recovery, just as Saddam's regime did.
At the same time, the logic of renewed American support for the Iraqi oil industry remains powerful.
Normal financing is not forthcoming. Only grants from the US will reduce output volatility.
Saddam's regime caused most of the volatility in the oil market in the last 30 years.
In fact, every peak in oil prices since 1973 was caused by an event related to Iraq.
One would hope that his removal would reduce market volatility and stabilize oil prices.
Unfortunately, Iraq appears set to continue to be a major source of high oil prices, owing to highly erratic output.
For the foreseeable future, one of the principal outcomes of the invasion of Iraq will be greater volatility and thus higher prices.
Managing Risk to Save the Poor
The G-8 finance ministers have agreed to cancel $40 billion of debt owed by eighteen of the world’s poorest countries.
This is a triumph for common sense.
But, at only $238 per person in the eighteen countries, debt relief alone is hardly enough to help the poor.
Fortunately, other efforts will complement the developed countries’ increased generosity.
The most notable is a significant movement towards providing finely focused risk-management services to the poor, which could ultimately prove to be worth far more than $40 billion.
We tend to think that new risk-management products, such as novel types of insurance or financial derivatives, will primarily interest the rich, or at least relatively wealthy people.
In fact, new risk-management products are being developed for some of the poorest people in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
It is important to recognize that the world’s poorest people are not the same people from year to year.
Good fortune and bad fortune alternate randomly, and the poorest people are particularly vulnerable when misfortune – like a hurricane in a fishing village – strikes.
So risk management, by smoothing out bumps in income, can be extremely important in alleviating the effects of poverty.
Moreover, if unmanaged, risk destroys the prospect of economic growth.
Without risk management, poor people will not experiment with new crops or more productive methods, because any mistake could be disastrous.
For example, in subsistence rural areas, a bad harvest may lead to starvation before the next year’s crop is in.
More typically, it leads “merely” to a sudden collapse in the economic base, leading to years of hardship in the future.
If a poor family in subsistence farming receives no help during the year after a bad harvest, its members may eat their beasts of burden, cut down the trees that provide nutrients to the soil, sell whatever farming equipment they have, and even eat the seeds that were set aside for planting the following season.
Providing money when it is needed is essential.
Unfortunately, according to Joanna Syroka of the World Bank’s Commodity Risk Management Group, official foreign aid and private charity tends to arrive too late, often after starvation has actually begun, and long after the families have taken extreme measures, consuming their capital to survive.
While the aid may keep them alive, they are left economically paralyzed for years to come.
Syroka and her colleagues are striving to promote the use of modern financial technology to make sure that aid arrives in time – and in sufficient volume – to avert such outcomes.
The old tool for managing farmers’ risks is crop insurance, which responds directly to the failure of a crop.
But crop insurance suffers from what economists call a “moral hazard,” because it reduces farmers’ incentives to ensure the crop’s success.
The farmer may neglect the crop or refuse to invest in saving a failing crop if he knows that a payout is forthcoming.
The farmer may even plant a crop that he knows will fail.
This is why private crop insurers are in short supply, and why crop insurance often requires expensive government subsidies.
But insurance technology is improving, aided by improved information technology.
The moral hazard implicit in crop insurance can be addressed by making payouts depend not on the actual crop failure but on the bad weather that caused it.
Since the farmer cannot influence the weather, there is no moral hazard.
In the past, weather insurance could not manage a farmer’s risk effectively because we could not measure well enough the effects of weather on crops.
For insurance to be effective as a risk-management device, weather must be measured at a finely-detailed local level, and the correct measurements must be taken at the correct time.
Crops are especially vulnerable at certain times, for example, when seeds begin germinating or when bad weather the previous year puts perennials at risk.
Today, weather insurance uses an expanded number of sophisticated weather stations and deep knowledge of the science of agriculture to measure weather’s effects on local agriculture.
Different crops are affected differently, and weather insurance must take account of a farm’s various crops and when they were planted – complexities that modern information technology can solve.
Many companies are already involved in offering improved weather insurance to poor farmers, with notable successes from ICICI Lombard and BASIX in India, and from the International Finance Corporation and the insurance company Credo Classic in Ukraine.
Similar work is underway in Africa, led by the World Bank and in Central America various countries’ governments are collaborating with the Inter-American Development Bank and the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
The number of agencies and governments involved in the movement towards sophisticated risks management for the poor is inspiring.
At the same time, the application of risk-management technology, insurance, and finance requires little of stretched foreign-aid budgets: a relatively small number of office workers, cell phones, and computers.
With the ongoing revolution in information and communications technology, the phones and computers will cost less and less, even as the costs of many commodities needed for development grow.
Jeffrey Sachs’s new book The End of Poverty argues that with proper help from advanced countries the world could see the end of poverty as we know it in coming decades, prompting some to describe him as a starry-eyed idealist.
But if we take account of both the increased generosity of rich nations and the application of improved financial and insurance technology, he just might be right.
Managing the Earth
Sometime in the next twenty years, the relationship between human beings and the natural world is going to change, profoundly and forever.
It won't happen suddenly, but current scientific developments will make change inevitable.
Like it or not, ready or not, these scientific developments are putting us on the road to becoming the managers of the global ecosystem, rather than just a participant in it.
I like to think about this coming revolution in historical terms.
For most of the three and a half million years that beings we might call "human" have walked the Earth, they were unambiguously part of the natural system.
The iron laws of evolution governed their survival, and those who couldn't compete died early and were soon forgotten.
Our only defenses against a hostile world were primitive stone tools and fire - a minimal kind of protection at best. 
Then, about 10,000 years ago, something extraordinary happened.
Somewhere in the Taurus mountains in what is now Turkey, a group of people, probably women, began to develop a new set of technologies that would change the way that human beings interacted with their environment.
We call these technologies "agriculture," and, for the first time, they gave human beings the power to move outside the laws of natural selection.
No longer would our ancestors have to content themselves with the food that nature offered - they could start to grow their own, far surpassing nature's meager supply.
Since the birth of agriculture, human history has been a steady progression of further liberation from the restraints of nature.
Instead of generating power using human and animal muscles, we developed machines that could liberate sunlight stored in coal and oil.
Instead of relying on natural defenses against diseases, we developed antibiotics and the other tools of modern medicine. 
The result is that human beings are no longer really a part of nature - the survival of our species no longer depends on our ability to compete in the Darwinian jungle.
We depend on our social structure and technology, rather than on our genes.
Today, we are poised to take another giant step, one that will bring us back into the natural system of our planet rather than remove us farther from it.
For the first time in history, we are starting to understand how the living things around us work, how all the pieces fit together. 
Some of these advances are theoretical, allowing us to build computer models of complex systems like continent-wide forests or entire oceans.
This is not a responsibility we can shirk.
The analogy I like to use involves the homely example of caring for a suburban lawn.
You can decide to mow the grass, in which case you produce one kind of ecosystem, one kind of future.
Or you can decide not to mow the grass, in which case you produce another kind of ecosystem, another kind of future.
Either way, your actions determine what happens to the lawn.
The one thing you cannot do is fail to decide.
No matter what you do, even if you decide to do nothing, the future of the lawn depends on you.
In fact, our relation to the planet will be like that of a gardener to a garden.
The gardener doesn't destroy his plants indiscriminately, but he does regularly pull up weeds.
The gardener doesn't "conquer" his or her plants, but studies them to produce the garden that is desired.
Most importantly, the gardener does not manage the garden for the sake of the plants, but for some other goal - to raise food, produce flowers, or just to look pretty. 
In the same way, human beings are on the brink of being able to manage the planet, and the decisions we make will determine what the future of the planet will be.
Given the phenomenal rate at which science advances these days, it is not too early to start thinking about how we are going to handle this awesome new responsibility.
Mengendalikan Politik Air
AMMAN – Hari Air Sedunia tahun ini, pada tanggal 22 Maret, menciptakan peluang untuk menyoroti satu hal yang merupakan kenyataan pahit di banyak negara: Ketersediaan air bersih semakin menjadi faktor penentu strategis dalam urusan regional dan global.
Jika sumber daya air tidak dikelola dengan penuh kehati-hatian, konsekuensinya akan sangat buruk.
Tahun lalu, United Nations World Water Development Report lagi-lagi menyoroti bagaimana tingginya kesenjangan antara permintaan dan pasokan bisa mengarah ke konflik.
World Economic Forummenempatkan krisis air sebagai ancaman global terbesar, bahkan lebih berbahaya dibandingkan serangan teroris atau krisis keuangan, dan kemungkinan terjadinya lebih besar dibandingkan penggunaan senjata pemusnahan massal.
Penelitian yang dilakukan Strategic Foresight Group menunjukkan pentingnya pengelolaan secara cerdas: negara-negara yang tergabung dalam kerja sama pengelolaan sumber daya air (joint stewardship) sedikit kemungkinannya terlibat dalam perang.
Timur Tengah sayangnya memperlihatkan contoh tragis akibat rendahnya kerja sama regional.
Irak, Suriah, dan Turki bersaing demi mendapatkan bagian di sungai Tigris dan Eufrat.
Namun semuanya gagal.
Pelaku bukan  negara (non-state actors) mengendalikan DAS di kedua sungai.
Kekurangan air memperburuk krisis pengungsi di kawasan (ini lah penjelmaan tata kelola yang buruk).
Bagian terburuk dari tragedi ini adalah seharusnya insiden ini bisa dihindari.
Pada tahun 2010, ketika West Asia-North Africa Forum diselenggarakan di Amman, kami mengusulkan pembentukan “circles of cooperation” yang akan melembagakan kerja sama antar Irak, Yordania, Lebanon, Suriah, dan Turki mengenai isu-isu air dan lingkungan hidup. pengaturan serupa akan membantu pengelolaan sumber daya lingkungan yang dimiliki bersama oleh Yordania, Israel, dan Palestina.
Jika lembaga supranasional dibentuk, strategi-strategi gabungan dapat ditetapkan untuk mengendalikan kekeringan, mengkoordinasikan pola tanam, merumuskan standar-standar umum pengawasan aliran sungai, dan mengimplementasikan rencana investasi untuk menciptakan pekerjaan dan teknologi pengolahan air.
Kawasan-kawasan lain sudah menerapkan tindakan yang sama.
Negara-negara yang berbagi wilayah sungai di Afrika, Asia Tenggara, dan Amerika Latin sadar bahwa kepentingan nasional dan stabilitas regional bisa saling menguatkan jika kebutuhan manusia lebih diutamakan di atas chauvinisme.
Musim gugur lalu, komunitas internasional mengadopsi Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals) yang berjanji “akan menjamin ketersediaan air dan sanitasi untuk semua orang serta pengelolaan keduanya secara berkelanjutan.”
Janji ini juga mencakup komitmen “untuk memperluas kerja sama internasional.”
Pihak-pihak yang bertanggung jawab melaksanakan komitmen ini harus ingat bahwa kerja sama di bidang air tidak sekedar menandatangani perjanjian dan melakukan pertemuan.
Kerja sama ini mencakup perencanaan gabungan atas proyek-proyek infrastruktur, pengendalian banjir dan kekeringan, penetapan strategi terpadu untuk melawan perubahan iklim, pemeliharaan kualitas aliran air, dan pelaksanaan pertemuan puncak atau KTT secara berkala untuk menegosiasikan trade-off antara air dan barang publik lainnya.
Kerja Sama Hasil Pembagian Air (The Water Cooperation Quotient), kerja sama hasil bentukan Strategic Foresight Group, akan membantu negara yang berbagi DAS dan danau untuk memantau kekuatan kerja sama ini.
Dari total 263 DAS yang melalui beberapa negara, hanya seperempat yang mendapat manfaat dari kerja sama lembaga yang berfungsi sepenuhnya.
Penting sekali agar lembaga-lembaga ini diperluas cakupannya untuk meliputi seluruh DAS di dunia pada akhir 2030 sesuai dengan periode SDG.
Bagi penduduk miskin di negara-negara berkembang, kerja sama lintas batas menghasilkan manfaat besar.
Ketika negara-negara menyepakati pembangunan dan manajemen infrastruktur kritis, tidak akan terjadi keterlambatan.
Biaya dapat dihemat. Hasil akan dibagi secara optimal.
Jika seluruh negara-negara berkembang yang dilewati DAS yang sama dapat menguatkan kerja sama lintas batas ini, maka pertumbuhan PDB mereka dapat segera naik 1-2 persen.
Komunitas internasional harus mendorong negara-negara di kawasan ini untuk menguatkan kerja sama melalui pembentukan instrumen-instrumen keuangan yang akan menyediakan skema dana concessional dan preferential.
Marshall Plan global tentang DAS bersama pada awalnya mungkin terkesan seperti usulan program berbiaya tinggi; tapi kerugian akibat kurang/tidak adanya tindakan – lihatlah konsekuensi yang mengancam Eropa karena aliran masuknya pengungsi secara besar-besaran – bisa jadi puluhan kali lebih besar.
Selain itu, komunitas internasional harus bertindak cepat untuk menyelamatkan infrastruktur air bersih dari tindak kekerasan dan terorisme.
Beberapa sungai, termasuk Tigris dan Eufrat, sejak dahulu hingga sekarang masih dianggap “tempat lahirnya peradaban”.
PBB harus mempertimbangkan pengerahan pasukan penjaga perdamaian untuk melindunginya.
Terakhir, hukum internasional harus dirumuskan untuk mencegah, tidak hanya menyelesaikan konflik.
Terutama, perjanjian internasional yang kuat diperlukan untuk mengatur kadar emisi di badan air.
Kini, sebagian besar perselisihan umumnya terjadi karena isu pembagian jumlah air.
Di masa depan, konflik akan lebih diwarnai dengan perselisihan tentang kualitas air, seiring dengan bertambahnya polusi akibat praktik irigasi, industrialisasi, dan urbanisasi.
Hari Air Sedunia adalah waktu yang tepat untuk meluncurkan agenda baru tentang bijak menggunakan air.
Namun setiap hari harus menjadi hari kerja sama sedunia demi menjaga sumber daya terpenting di planet bumi.
Getting Cities Right
WASHINGTON, DC – The developing world is experiencing rapid urbanization, with the number of city dwellers set to reach four billion in 2030 – double its 2000 level.
But unplanned and uncoordinated urban development is risky, threatening to replace migrants’ hopes for a better life with unsanitary living conditions, joblessness, and high exposure to natural disasters.
In many respects, urbanization is rational.
After all, cities are the hubs of prosperity, where more than 80% of global economic activity is concentrated.
And their density facilitates the delivery of public services, including education, health care, and basic services.
Indeed, it costs $0.70-0.80 per cubic meter to provide piped water in urban areas, compared to $2 in sparsely populated areas.
But the high concentration of assets and people, especially in coastal areas, is an economic liability, with around $3 trillion in assets at risk from natural hazards.
Vulnerability will increase further over the next two decades, as cities triple their built-up land, to 600,000 square kilometers, often without basic infrastructure or policies to prevent construction and settlement on disaster-prone and vulnerable sites.
To get urbanization right, policymakers must take urgent action to build sustainable cities.
Through effective land-use management, they can provide reliable and affordable access to basic services, education, housing, transport, and health care to growing urban populations, while minimizing the carbon footprint.
This entails, first and foremost, abandoning the perception of a tradeoff between “building more cities” to accommodate rapid urban growth and “building cities right” to enhance social and environmental outcomes.
In fact, evidence shows that building cities right generates near-term benefits, while reducing the longer-term costs associated with sprawl, congestion, pollution, and climate change.
The alternative – building cities around a low-density, individual-vehicle transportation model – will leave urban planners struggling to increase density and develop public-transport systems later, a challenge that the United States is currently facing.
A new World Bank report provides a practical agenda for building sustainable cities.
The framework – which emerged from a three-year effort to develop a foundation of credible facts and analysis from countries with diverse urban experiences, such as Uganda, China, India, and South Korea – can help policymakers to understand the obstacles to urbanization and to identify politically, technically, and fiscally feasible policy options.
This framework reflects three main aspects of urban development: planning, connecting, and financing.
A major finding is that, regardless of the level or speed of urbanization, planning for land-use management should be the top priority.
By clearly defining property rights and implementing effective land-use systems that are coordinated with infrastructure, particularly transport, policymakers can help cities to attract private investment, connect people with jobs, reduce environmental and social risks, and decrease vulnerability to natural hazards.
With urban growth in developing countries likely to occur largely in secondary cities, the opportunity is still open (but closing fast) to shape urban design to ensure that, for example, residents do not spend half of each day commuting to and from work.
While no single model for managing rapid urbanization exists, positive examples offer some guidance.
For example, Seoul’s population more than tripled from 1960 to 2000.
South Korean policymakers, anticipating the challenges, strengthened institutions for valuing and pricing land, trained a cadre of appraisers to ensure transparency in the valuation process, and publicly disseminated land-value information.
At the same time, the government supported construction of high-rise residential buildings capable of housing the growing urban population and developed multiple transport modes, including highways, rail networks, and subway lines, which have helped to connect people with employment opportunities within and among cities.
Likewise, leaders in Singapore and Japan treated public transport as a crucial aspect of land-use plans.
As a result, they boast some of the world’s lowest energy consumption as a share of GDP.
In order to encourage citizens to use public transport, policymakers in Tokyo reduced subsidies for private cars, so that driving one became five times costlier than using public transport.
Complementary investment in high-speed inter-city transport has reduced travel times between Japan’s two largest agglomerations, Tokyo and Osaka, which are 314 miles apart, to less than two and a half hours, thus integrating labor and housing markets and enhancing productivity.
Of course, financing rapid urban development requires significant capital outlays to build efficient systems for transport, water provision, solid waste management, and sewage removal and treatment.
But, as these investments bolster economic growth, increased tax revenues would imply more sustainable financing, as would local governments’ ability to leverage land markets and approach local-currency debt markets.
In Mumbai, the auction of 13 hectares of land in the new financial center, the Bandra-Kurla Complex, generated $1.2 billion. This amounts to more than ten times the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority’s total expenditure in 2005, and six times the total value of municipal bonds issued by all local governments and utilities in India in more than a decade.
Similarly, in Istanbul, the auction of an old bus station and government building in 2007 generated $1.5 billion – more than the city’s total expenditures and infrastructure investments in 2005.
And Colombia’s finance ministry has developed Findeter, a bond bank that finances regional urban infrastructure projects by providing resources to financial intermediaries that allocate them to subnational authorities.
By building sustainable cities, policymakers can support social and economic development, while minimizing environmental damage.
Managing urbanization as it occurs, rather than struggling to fix cities later, is an opportunity that developing-country leaders should not miss.
We, the Corporations?
CHICAGO – You would think that 600,000 comments on a petition would be sufficient to bring an issue to the top of the US Securities and Exchange Commission’s agenda.
But public opinion does not seem to matter if the issue is mandatory disclosure of political spending by corporations.
Denying rumors that such a rule will be promulgated soon, SEC Chair Mary Jo White recently told lawmakers that this issue is not at the top of her list of priorities.
But it is at the forefront of the Republican Party’s concerns, reflecting its leaders’ determination to prevent any such requirement from taking effect.
In April, Ann Wagner, a Republican congresswoman, introduced a bill “to prohibit the Securities and Exchange Commission from issuing rules requiring the disclosure of an issuer’s expenditures for political activities.”
The reason why such an apparently minor issue is gaining so much attention is that it transcends corporate governance and goes to the very essence of America’s democratic system.
For this reason, it is important to understand what is at stake.
Freedom of expression is a core democratic principle.
Integral to this freedom is the right to spend money to disseminate speech.
Any limitation on spending is a limitation on freedom of speech itself.
But is this right limited to individuals or does it extend also to associations of individuals?
In a controversial decision issued in 2010 – Citizens United vs. Federal Election Commission – the US Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment of the US Constitution also protects the free-speech rights of associations of individuals.
Thus, corporations, as associations of individuals, have the right to spend as much as they want to disseminate their views, including in support of electoral campaigns.
Whether you like the political consequences of the Citizens United decision or not, it has its own logic.
And that logic applies outside of the United States as well, and can lead to similar consequences everywhere: an enormous increase in the largest corporations’ political power.
Will parliamentarians become mere spokesmen of corporate interests?
Is there any mechanism within the US Constitution, or other constitutions, to prevent this?
A logical implication of the view that corporations are “people” is that shareholders should learn about the political spending carried out by the companies in which they invest.
Disclosure may help democratize political donations, preventing them from having an undue influence in elections.
If I appoint an agent to manage my money, shouldn’t I want to know how much he spends on political donations in my (alleged) interest?
And wouldn’t it be preposterous for any rule or regulation to prevent me from finding out?
But this is exactly what is happening.
Not only do companies refuse to disclose to their shareholders how much they spend on political campaigns; they also are lobbying hard to prevent any rule that would require them to do so.
The US Chamber of Commerce opposes all such proposed rules as “politically motivated,” because the pressure to require disclosure of election-related corporate spending does not come from institutional investors, but from government pension funds controlled by elected officials.
But conservative groups are shortsighted in their opposition to mandatory disclosure of such information.
They believe that it would weaken Republicans and benefit Democrats, and they are right: there is no doubt that the left stands to gain more in the short term from such a requirement.
But the biggest winner would be democracy.
The current political game in the US is one in which both Republicans and Democrats compete for corporate money, which they then deploy in expensive campaigns to preserve or increase their power.
The winners are not the Republicans or the Democrats, or even the companies that fund them.
The winner is a corrupt form of capitalism that is undermining the US economy, making it less productive and undermining people’s sense of fairness.
I doubt that a mandatory disclosure rule alone could fix the problem.
But it would be an important step in the right direction.
More important, actively blocking that step forces the political system toward a precipice from which democracy cannot return.
The Unbearable Lightness of BMI
KIEL – Now is the time of year when many people most dread stepping onto the bathroom scale.
But, while all of that holiday feasting may have led to greater girth, how should we understand what higher or lower body weight means?
The body mass index (BMI) has long been used in epidemiology, medicine, and nutritional sciences.
But its value is increasingly being questioned, especially in obesity research, where body-composition measurements are proving to be far more relevant.
The BMI is calculated by dividing a person’s body weight in kilograms by the square of his height in meters (kg/m2).
First named after the Belgian astronomer, mathematician, and statistician Adolphe Quetelet, who demonstrated in 1835 how adult weight normally increases in proportion to height squared, the index provides a measure of body weight, independent of stature, allowing us to compare the weight of short and tall people.
In 1972, an American scientist, Ancel Keys, working in the area of human nutrition, public health, and epidemiology, renamed it the BMI after finding that its values also correlated with body fat mass as derived from skin-fold or body-density measurements.
However, recent findings have cast doubt on the BMI’s value.
For example, although the BMI is associated with fat mass in obese people, there is little or no association with that of normal or underweight individuals.
At any given BMI score, fat mass varies widely, and other variables, such as gender or age, further distort findings, with greater increases in fat mass per BMI unit seen in women and in the elderly.
Such usage, however, has serious limitations.
Because the index is calculated from two biological measures (weight and height), the resulting score has no biological meaning in itself.
Thus, studies of the genetics of obesity that are based on a relationship between certain genetic markers and the BMI are also meaningless.
In fact, the use of the BMI is likely to obscure our understanding of genetic effects on body weight.
This is because body weight is the sum of our organs and body tissues; and each organ or body part has its own regulatory (and thus partly genetic) basis.
We can understand more about organ and tissue masses, for example, or fatty infiltrations in individual organs like the liver and pancreas, by focusing on the nature of each body component, rather than by relying on an overall body score.
Indeed, the regulation of body weight overall is determined by the sum of the specific regulatory outcomes affecting individual body components.
Because individual body components are inter-related, control of body weight seems to occur in the relationships between tissues and organs, rather than within individual components.
Adjusting weight by height squared is also likely to yield a different outcome for different organs.
This power may vary by population; and short and tall subjects with equal BMI scores, from the same population, may have a different body composition.
Further evidence supporting the use of body-composition analysis, rather than the BMI, comes from the metabolic heterogeneity observed within each BMI category.
For example, a subgroup of normal-weight subjects may have low subcutaneous fat mass but high visceral fat mass (“thin on the outside and fat on the inside”).
Despite their normal BMI, metabolically obese individuals – who may comprise as much as 24% of a normal-weight population – may be insulin-resistant and suffer increased cardio-metabolic risks.
Likewise, around half of overweight subjects, and 15-45% of obese subjects, appear to have a favorable metabolic profile (that is, no metabolic complications, inflammation, dyslipidaemia, or hypertension).
At a BMI above 30, these subjects are deemed “metabolically healthy obese.”
Like obese patients suffering from cardio-metabolic risks (the “metabolically abnormal obese”), they have high visceral and subcutaneous fat mass, though metabolically healthy obese patients sometimes have excessive body fat but lower fat infiltration in the liver and in skeletal muscle.
But the differences between the metabolically healthy obese and the metabolically abnormal obese are inconsistent.
And, though age, sex, ethnicity, waist circumference, physical activity, smoking, and alcohol consumption all correlate with metabolic phenotypes, the BMI is unable to distinguish between the two groups.
It would be unfair to say that the BMI has no clinical value; it can be a useful indicator of nutritional health in patients, and help doctors make day-to-day decisions about whom they should treat.
But one must turn to body-composition measurements for any serious epidemiological and etiological studies on obesity.
Man, Machine, and in Between
TÜBINGEN, GERMANY ­– We are so surrounded by gadgetry nowadays that it is sometimes hard to tell where devices end and people begin.
From computers and scanners to mobile devices, an increasing number of humans spend much of their conscious lives interacting with the world through electronics, the only barrier between brain and machine being the senses — sight, sound, and touch — through which humans and devices interface.
But remove those senses from the equation, and electronic devices can become our eyes, ears and even arms and legs, taking in the world around us and interacting with it through software and hardware.
This is no mere prediction.
Brain-machine interfaces are already clinically well established – for example, in restoring hearing through cochlear implants.
And patients with end-stage Parkinson’s disease can be treated with deep brain stimulation (DBS).
Current experiments on neural prosthetics point to the enormous future potential of similar interventions, whether retinal or brain-stem implants for the blind or brain-recording devices for controlling prostheses.
Non-invasive brain-machine interfaces based on electroencephalogram recordings have restored the communication skills of paralyzed patients.
Animal research and some human studies suggest that full control of artificial limbs in real time could further offer the paralyzed an opportunity to grasp or even to stand and walk on brain-controlled, artificial legs, albeit likely through invasive means, with electrodes implanted directly in the brain.
Future advances in neurosciences, together with miniaturization of microelectronic devices, will enable more widespread application of brain-machine interfaces.
This could be seen to challenge our notions of personhood and moral agency.
And the question will certainly loom that if functions can be restored for those in need, is it right to use these technologies to enhance the abilities of healthy individuals?
But the ethical problems that these technologies pose are conceptually similar to those presented by existing therapies, such as antidepressants.
Although the technologies and situations that brain-machine interfacing devices present might seem new and unfamiliar, they pose few new ethical challenges.
In brain-controlled prosthetic devices, a computer that sits in the device decodes signals from the brain.
These signals are then used to predict what a user intends to do.
Invariably, predictions will sometimes fail, which could lead to dangerous, or at least embarrassing, situations.
Who is responsible for involuntary acts?
Is it the fault of the computer or the user?
Will a user need some kind of license and obligatory insurance to operate a prosthesis?
Fortunately, there are precedents for dealing with liability when biology and technology fail.
Increasing knowledge of human genetics, for example, led to attempts to reject criminal responsibility, based on the inappropriate belief that genes predetermine actions.
These attempts failed, and neuroscientific pursuits seem similarly unlikely to overturn our views on human free will and responsibility.
Moreover, humans often control dangerous and unpredictable tools, such as cars and guns.
Brain-machine interfaces represent a highly sophisticated case of tool use, but they are still just that.
Legal responsibility should not be much harder to disentangle.
But what if machines change the brain?
Evidence from early brain stimulation experiments a half-century ago suggests that sending a current into the brain may cause shifts in personality and alter behavior.
And, while many Parkinson’s patients report significant benefits from DBS, it has shown a greater incidence of serious adverse effects, such as nervous system and psychiatric disorders and a higher suicide rate.
Case studies revealed hypomania and personality changes of which patients were unaware, and which disrupted family relationships before the stimulation parameters were readjusted.
Such examples illustrate the possible dramatic side-effects of DBS, but subtler effects are also possible.
Even without stimulation, mere recording devices such as brain-controlled motor prostheses may alter the patient’s personality.
Patients will need to be trained in generating the appropriate neural signals to direct the prosthetic limb.
Doing so might have slight effects on mood or memory function or impair speech control.
Nevertheless, this does not raise a new ethical problem.
Side-effects are common in most medical interventions, including treatment with psychoactive drugs.
In 2004, for example, the United States Food and Drug Administration told drug manufacturers to print warnings on certain antidepressants about the increased short-term risk of suicide in adolescents using them, and required increased monitoring of young people as they started medication.
Similar safeguards will be needed for neuroprostheses, including in research.
The classic approach of biomedical ethics is to weigh the benefits for the patient against the risk of the intervention, and to respect the patient’s autonomous decisions.
None of the new technologies warrants changing that approach.
Nevertheless, the availability of such technologies has already begun to cause friction.
For example, many in the deaf community have rejected cochlear implants, because they do not regard deafness as a disability that needs to be corrected, but as a part of their life and cultural identity.
To them, cochlear implants are an enhancement beyond normal functioning.
Distinguishing between enhancement and treatment requires defining normality and disease, which is notoriously difficult.
For example, Christopher Boorse, a philosopher at the University of Delaware, defines disease as a statistical deviation from “species-typical functioning.”
From this perspective, cochlear implants seem ethically unproblematic.
Nevertheless, Anita Silvers, a philosopher at San Francisco State University and a disability scholar and activist, has described such treatments as “tyranny of the normal,” aimed at adjusting the deaf to a world designed by the hearing, ultimately implying the inferiority of deafness.
We should take such concerns seriously, but they should not prevent further research on brain-machine interfaces.
Brain technologies should be presented as one option, but not the only solution, for, say, paralysis or deafness.
He is one of five former senior Khmer Rouge leaders who will be made to answer for their roles during Pol Pot’s genocide, in which an estimated 1.7 million Cambodians perished.
Until recently, Duch was the only one imprisoned, after being exposed in 1999.
The court – with its improbable blend of Cambodian and foreign judges and attorneys as well as laws – is meant to be a model for judicial reform and independent justice in a country where impunity has long been the rule.
The five red-robed judges who preside over the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (the tribunal’s official name) are the final arbiters of Duch’s detention, but the question they are now considering belongs as much to the people of Cambodia as it does to the court.
Should mass murderers be afforded the same rights as everyone else?
One of my aunts has a strong opinion on the matter.
Khmer Rouge soldiers beat her father to death, and she remembers being shot at for sport by communist cadres as she and dozens of other peasants scuttled up a mountainside.
She now lives one block from S-21.
“Human rights are for humans,” she said emphatically when I asked her about Duch's case.
“He is a monster.”
I once believed that, too.
When I first visited Duch’s house of horrors in 1990, I was 15 and full of wonder about the country where I was born but had never lived.
My family escaped the Khmer Rouge on April 17, 1975, the day they claimed victory.
When my mother and I journeyed home to reunite with relatives who had survived the genocide, S-21 (also known as Tuol Sleng) was among our first stops.
By then, the torture facility had been turned into a museum.
I remember feeling claustrophobic as I walked down its narrow halls and into classrooms turned into crude cellblocks.
The air was stale but heavy with the stench of death in interrogation chambers, barren save for a single bed frame, shackles, and a chair.
Flecks of dried blood peeled up from the floor.
This was a place where fingernails of countless victims were ripped out, where others were strung upside down and dunked in barrels of water, where many were brutalized with metal prongs and batons.
This was a place of utter brokenness.
This was Duch’s place.
Mostly, I remember the hundreds of black and white mug shots of prisoners and victims that covered every inch of the walls – a ghastly montage of human suffering that haunts me to this day.
I couldn’t help but think: this was somebody’s daughter, somebody’s son.
This was somebody’s mother or sister or brother.
Back then, I thought: What monster could do such things?
Now, that monster was sitting in a courtroom, looking scared and meek as prosecutors catalogued his alleged war crimes.
Sitting in the packed auditorium where snatches of Duch’s face flash by on a movie screen, I’m struck by what I see: a face that belongs to someone.
This alleged perpetrator of unspeakable misdeeds is, like his victims, someone’s son, someone’s brother, someone’s father.
This might have been only a fleeting thought had I not seen Duch’s family members, who attended the hearings.
Hang Seav Heang, 28, described the defendant as a gentle man, a good father.
One of his sisters said he was a caring, protective brother, and that she would always love him.