In late April, 40% of Republicans polled said that they wouldn’t support Trump in the general election.
Republicans also worry that Trump could be defeated badly enough to cost them control of the Senate and cut their majority in the House of Representatives.
For this reason, many are agonizing over what to do about Trump.
Some are stretching to say that they support Trump, but don’t endorse him.
Presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush have both said that they’ll stay out of this race.
For the first time in American history, both parties’ nominees are far more disliked than liked by the country at large, though Trump does lead Clinton in this department.
This is not a very good basis for starting the next presidency.
Overcoming India’s Official Homophobia
NEW DELHI – Sixty-six years after adopting one of the world’s most liberal constitutions, India is being convulsed by a searing debate over a colonial-era provision in its penal code, Section 377, which criminalizes “whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman, or animal.”
Though not widely used – there were 578 arrests under Section 377 last year – the law is a tool for the harassment, persecution, and blackmail of sexual minorities within India.
It must be changed.
As the Nobel laureate Amartya Sen has observed, “The criminalization of gay behavior goes not only against fundamental human rights, but it also works sharply against the enhancement of human freedoms in terms of which the progress of human civilization can be judged.”
In the period after a liberal Delhi High Court struck down Section 377 in 2009, the heavens did not fall; Indian society did not collapse.
Yet bigots petitioned to reverse that decision, ultimately succeeding in turning back the clock for gay rights in India in 2013, when the Supreme Court overturned the High Court’s decision.
Like many Indians, I found the Supreme Court’s 2013 ruling antithetical to India’s commitment to pluralism and democracy, which provides for the embrace of a multitude of identities, including those based on sexual orientation.
So, last December, I sought to introduce a bill that would have amended Section 377 and decriminalized all consensual sex between adults, irrespective of their gender and sexuality.
A vocal section of homophobes in the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) voted overwhelmingly against the bill’s introduction, so that no pragmatic debate on the bill’s merits could take place.
The same thing happened when I tried again in March.
Sneering comments were made about my alleged personal interest in the bill, to which I responded that one does not need to be a cow to defend the rights of animals.
The BJP’s vote is incongruous on several levels, but most glaringly in its rejection of millennia of Indian practice in favor of a British colonial law (which the British themselves have outgrown).
The Indian ethos toward sexual difference has historically been liberal, with neither mythology nor history revealing the persecution or prosecution of sexual heterodoxy.
In fact, the Hindu epics are dotted with characters like Shikhandi in the Mahabharata, who was born female and became male; many Hindus venerate the half-man, half-woman Ardhanarishvara; and temple sculptures across India depict homosexual acts.
Yet the BJP, the party of Hindu chauvinism, chooses to ignore this Hindu tradition.
In its 2013 judgment, the Supreme Court said that legislators, not judges, must decide the fate of Section 377.
Unfortunately, thanks to the prejudices of a few dozen vocal and motivated BJP members, parliament is not up to the task.
Indeed, legislative recourse for the injustice of Section 377 may not be available as long as the BJP is in power.
But there is still hope for relief through India’s judicial process.
The Supreme Court has now agreed to undertake a “curative review” of its 2013 decision.
Such a review could lead it to repeal Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code.
While I have been unsuccessful in my efforts to amend Section 377 through legislative channels, I remain committed to human rights, to keeping the government out of our bedrooms, and to defending Indian pluralism.
As we await the Supreme Court’s review, we can and must continue to seek justice for India’s minorities in the court of public opinion.
To this end, I have circulated a petition, with the goal of highlighting for Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his party that public sentiment has moved beyond the nineteenth century.
With 65,000 people having already signed, the message is clear.
But, in terms of real change in this area, my hopes rest with the judiciary, rather than the government.
After all, whereas change via legislation would require political courage – a quality sorely lacking in the current Indian government – the judiciary is not hampered by such considerations.
The good news is that India’s Supreme Court has an exemplary record of interpreting statutes in a way that expands human rights in the country.
The curative review raises hope that it will do so again, creating an India in which the law embodies constitutional values of privacy, equality, dignity, and non-discrimination for all citizens.
The alternative – allowing Indian law to continue to serve as an iron cage for some of our people – would directly undermine the freedom of identity and expression that constitutes the backbone of Indian democracy.
What is more, it would leave India out of step with much of the rest of the international community, a country embarrassed before the world’s other democracies.
We must demand that our Supreme Court – if not our lawmakers – affirm a pluralist India that accommodates all identities within our country.
The time for change was many years ago.
But it is never too late to do the right thing.
I hope that the Supreme Court is listening.
Fear of Fracking
CAMBRIDGE – Against all expectations, US emissions of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, since peaking in 2007, have fallen by 12% as of 2012, back to 1995 levels.
The primary reason, in a word, is “fracking.”
Or, in 11 words: horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing to recover deposits of shale gas.
	No other factor comes close to providing a plausible explanation.
Unlike the European Union, the US never ratified the Kyoto Protocol, in which participating countries committed to cut CO2 emissions by roughly 5%, relative to 1990 levels, by 2012.
Nor is America’s continued emissions reduction a side effect of lower economic activity: While the US economy peaked in late 2007, the same time as emissions, the recession ended in June 2009 and GDP growth since then, though inadequate, has been substantially higher than in Europe.
Yet US emissions have continued to fall, while EU emissions began to rise again after 2009.
One can virtually prove that shale gas has been the major influence driving the fall in US emissions.
Just ten years ago, the natural-gas industry was so sure that domestic production was reaching its limit that it made large investments in terminals to import liquefied natural gas (LNG).
Yet fracking has increased supply so rapidly that these facilities are now being converted to export LNG.
	Natural gas emits only half as much CO2 as coal, and occupies a rapidly increasing share of electricity generation – up 37% since 2007, while coal’s share has plummeted by 25%.
Indeed, natural gas has drawn close to coal as the number one source of US power.
Renewables still constitute only 5% of power generation in the US – less than hydroelectric and far less than nuclear, let alone coal or gas.
Meanwhile, the share of coal – the dirtiest fuel – has been rising, not falling, in the rest of the world’s energy mix.
Since 2010, coal dependence has risen even in Europe, where some countries are phasing out emission-free nuclear power and no natural-gas boom has materialized (though CO2 emissions remain far higher in the US than in Europe).
	The advent of shale gas has had a variety of implications – more good than bad – for the US economy, national security, and the environment.
The economic benefits include job creation in the short term, “re-shoring” of some manufacturing activities in the medium term, and, lower macroeconomic vulnerability to global oil shocks in the long term.
Moving beyond economics, America’s reduction in net energy imports – which have already fallen by one-half since 2007 – means that its foreign policy will be less constrained by events in the Middle East.
In Europe, the new technology could similarly break Russia’s politically troublesome stranglehold on natural-gas supplies.
	The net environmental effects of growing reliance on shale gas appear beneficial as well.
The substitution of natural gas for coal has put the US on track to meet the Obama administration’s international commitment to reduce CO2 emissions 17% below 2005 levels by 2020.
Gas is also better for local air quality, owing to the absence of the sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, mercury, and particulates emitted by burning coal.
Yet environmentalists are overwhelmingly opposed to fracking, evidently for three reasons.
None, however, is persuasive.
	First, fracking’s opponents worry that shale gas will displace renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power.
But the fact is that CO2 emissions cannot be reduced without cutting coal use, and shale gas is already displacing coal in the US.
This is not speculation; it is happening now.
Even if some cleaner source becomes viable later, we would still need natural gas as a bridge to get us from here to there.
Put differently, if the world continues to build coal-fired power plants at the current rate, those plants will still be around in 2050, regardless of what other technologies become viable in the meantime.
Solar power cannot stop those coal-fired plants from being built today.
Natural gas can.
Such concerns cannot be dismissed.
It is not enough to proclaim that fracking should be safe if operators are responsible and regulators do their job. One must consider the likelihood that in some under-regulated US state, someone will not act responsibly and some local water supply will become contaminated.
The industry should follow best practices, including making public the chemicals that it uses. High-quality environmental and safety regulation – and vigorous enforcement – are essential.
	But, in deciding whether to allow fracking (France has banned it, for example, and New York state has a moratorium), one must compare the risks to health, safety, and the environment with those of the alternatives. Even a serious fracking mishap would be unlikely to cause as much damage as the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, the Fukushima nuclear catastrophe in 2011, or coal-mining tragedies that play out dramatically in frequent explosions and collapses (and more insidiously in the form of lung disease, water pollution, and soil erosion).
The precautionary principle is hard to dislodge.
WASHINGTON, DC – Most economists nowadays are pessimistic about the world economy’s growth prospects.
The World Bank has, yet again, downgraded its medium-term projections, and economists the world over are warning that we are facing a “new normal” of slower growth.
Where there is less consensus – or so it seems – is in accounting for this weakness.
Almost three years ago, former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers revived Alvin Hansen’s “secular stagnation” hypothesis, emphasizing demand-side constraints.
By contrast, in Robert Gordon’s engaging and erudite book The Rise and Fall of American Growth, the focus is on long-term supply-side factors – in particular, the nature of innovation.
Thomas Piketty, in his best-selling tome Capital in the Twenty-First Century, describes the rise of inequality that is resulting from low GDP growth.
Joseph E. Stiglitz’s book Re-Writing the Rules of the American Economy: An Agenda for Growth and Shared Prosperity blames political choices for both slowing growth and rising inequality.
These accounts differ in emphasis, but they are not contradictory.
On the contrary, while Summers, Gordon, Piketty, and Stiglitz each examines the issue from a different perspective, their ideas are complementary – and even mutually reinforcing.
Summers’s Keynesian argument is that the problem is a chronic aggregate-demand shortfall: Desired investment lags behind desired savings, even at near-zero nominal interest rates, resulting in a chronic liquidity trap.
Today’s near-zero – even slightly negative – short-term policy interest rates do not mean that longer-term rates, which are more relevant to investment financing, have also hit zero.
But the yield curve in the major advanced economies is very flat, with both real and nominal longer-term rates at historic lows.
There may be many reasons for this, but Gordon describes one possibility: The underlying pace of innovation has slowed, leading to lower expected returns on investment and thus forcing down interest rates.
And it is the investment needed to translate new knowledge into actual innovation that links the supply and demand sides and generates growth.
Both of these theories can be connected with Piketty’s arguments about the dynamics of capital accumulation.
Implicit in Piketty’s thesis is that capital can be substituted for labor relatively easily.
When capital grows faster than labor and GDP, the rate of return will fall over time, but proportionately less than growth in the amount of capital.
The result is a redistribution of income from labor to those who own capital.
Summers actually proposed a new form of the production function, whereby the progress of intelligent machines makes capital a perfect substitute for segments of the labor force.
An increasing concentration of income at the top, combined with top earners’ high propensity to save, then leads to the chronic shortfall of aggregate demand that characterizes secular stagnation.
Stiglitz makes the case that policy bias also contributes to income concentration.
Gordon’s thesis is more about a kind of “satiation” in rapid technological progress, which depresses expected returns and thus helps to explain the chronic lack of sufficient investment.
But, at the end of his book, he makes median income the real indicator of economic performance.
With expectations about the future being undermined by such deep-rooted and multifaceted forces, perhaps it should not be surprising that voters in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are expressing anger toward the establishment.
Fortunately, there are reasons for hope.
First, I do not share Gordon’s assessment of prospects for longer-term technological progress.
I believe that, as the digital revolution and artificial intelligence restructure larger segments of economic activity, overall productivity growth may accelerate again, leading to higher expected returns and, therefore, more investment and faster growth.
That in itself will not lead to a more balanced distribution of wealth or income, and it may not generate enough employment.
But it could help create the political and fiscal space for inclusiveness-oriented policy reforms.
Second, developing and emerging economies still offer immediate opportunities for large high-return investments, which should be financed by what appears as excess global savings.
With significant room to move toward the technology frontier, including in services, there are still plenty of opportunities for “catch-up” growth.
Such investments would help close the global savings gap and generate positive feedback for advanced economies as well.
To take advantage of these opportunities, however, regulatory and political uncertainty must be reduced and public-private partnerships in development finance must be scaled up within a framework that leads to inclusive benefits.
It is likely that continued rapid increases in prosperity are possible.
Ultimately, however, political choices will determine whether the diffusion of artificial intelligence leads to widespread increases in median incomes or exacerbates polarization and inequality.
Political will and powerful messaging will be needed to spur the ambitious social and economic reforms, together with the kind of international cooperation, that will be needed to take advantage of opportunities for inclusive growth.
Overcoming the Copenhagen Failure
NEW YORK – Pretty speeches can take you only so far.
A month after the Copenhagen climate conference, it is clear that the world’s leaders were unable to translate rhetoric about global warming into action.
It was, of course, nice that world leaders could agree that it would be bad to risk the devastation that could be wrought by an increase in global temperatures of more than two degrees Celsius.
At least they paid some attention to the mounting scientific evidence.     And certain principles set out in the 1992 Rio Framework Convention, including “common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities,” were affirmed.
So, too, was the developed countries’ agreement to “provide adequate, predictable and sustainable financial resources, technology, and capacity-building….” to developing countries.
The failure of Copenhagen was not the absence of a legally binding agreement.
The real failure was that there was no agreement about how to achieve the lofty goal of saving the planet, no agreement about reductions in carbon emissions, no agreement on how to share the burden, and no agreement on help for developing countries.
Even the commitment of the accord to provide amounts approaching $30 billion for the period 2010-2012 for adaptation and mitigation appears paltry next to the hundreds of billions of dollars that have been doled out to the banks in the bailouts of 2008-2009.
If we can afford that much to save banks, we can afford something more to save the planet.
The consequences of the failure are already apparent: the price of emission rights in the European Union Emission Trading System has fallen, which means that firms will have less incentive to reduce emissions now and less incentive to invest in innovations that will reduce emissions in the future.
Firms that wanted to do the right thing, to spend the money to reduce their emissions, now worry that doing so would put them at a competitive disadvantage as others continue to emit without restraint.
European firms will continue to be at a competitive disadvantage relative to American firms, which bear no cost for their emissions.
Underlying the failure in Copenhagen are some deep problems.
The Kyoto approach allocated emission rights, which are a valuable asset.
If emissions were appropriately restricted, the value of emission rights would be a couple trillion dollars a year – no wonder that there is a squabble over who should get them.
Clearly, the idea that those who emitted more in the past should get more emission rights for the future is unacceptable.
The “minimally” fair allocation to the developing countries requires equal emission rights per capita.
Most ethical principles would suggest that, if one is distributing what amounts to “money” around the world, one should give more (per capita) to the poor.
So, too, most ethical principles would suggest that those that have polluted more in the past – especially after the problem was recognized in 1992 – should have less right to pollute in the future.
But such an allocation would implicitly transfer hundreds of billions of dollars from rich to poor.
Given the difficulty of coming up with even $10 billion a year – let alone the $200 billion a year that is needed for mitigation and adaptation – it is wishful thinking to expect an agreement along these lines.
Perhaps it is time to try another approach: a commitment by each country to raise the price of emissions (whether through a carbon tax or emissions caps) to an agreed level, say, $80 per ton.
Countries could use the revenues as an alternative to other taxes – it makes much more sense to tax bad things than good things.
Developed countries could use some of the revenues generated to fulfill their obligations to help the developing countries in terms of adaptation and to compensate them for maintaining forests, which provide a global public good through carbon sequestration.
We have seen that goodwill alone can get us only so far.
We must now conjoin self-interest with good intentions, especially because leaders in some countries (particularly the United States) seem afraid of competition from emerging markets even without any advantage they might receive from not having to pay for carbon emissions .
A system of border taxes – imposed on imports from countries where firms do not have to pay appropriately for carbon emissions – would level the playing field and provide economic and political incentives for countries to adopt a carbon tax or emission caps.
That, in turn, would provide economic incentives for firms to reduce their emissions.  
Time is of the essence.
While the world dawdles, greenhouse gases are building up in the atmosphere, and the likelihood that the world will meet even the agreed-upon target of limiting global warming to two degrees Celsius is diminishing.
We have given the Kyoto approach, based on emission rights, more than a fair chance.
Given the fundamental problems underlying it, Copenhagen’s failure should not be a surprise.
At the very least, it is worth giving the alternative a chance.
The Eurozone’s Agenda in 2013
PARIS – European Union leaders concluded 2012 with a landmark agreement that places all eurozone banks under a single supervisor.
But the difficult negotiations that led to the agreement eclipsed European Council President Herman Van Rompuy’s recent report, Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union, which calls for unity far beyond a banking union.
Although “no door was closed,” in the words of European Commission President José Manuel Barroso, EU leaders have clearly refused, at least for now, to hold a serious discussion about deeper integration.
Van Rompuy’s report raises a fundamental question: What factors are preventing the eurozone from functioning as everyone would wish?
Answering this question requires, first and foremost, comparing the dynamics at play during the euro’s first decade, 1999-2009, when the eurozone ostensibly performed well, with those of the last three years, which have been marred by crisis.
At first, the eurozone seemed to function like a true currency union: capital-market integration was accelerated; cross-border activity increased; and the per capita income gap between member countries decreased.
But, unlike in a complete currency union, such as that of the United States, eurozone members retained full financial sovereignty, meaning that they controlled all of the levers of macroeconomic policy.
Without external constraints, public and private expenditure grew precipitously in many countries on the eurozone periphery, while wages rose faster than productivity.
As these countries posted current-account deficits, northern European countries accumulated current-account surpluses, exposing a widening competitiveness gap.
In a genuine currency union, wealth transfers and automatic stabilizers mean that such discrepancies do not pose a problem.
With the eurozone as a whole benefiting from a relatively solid balance-of-payments position, European leaders initially failed to foresee the risk incurred by letting competitiveness differentials grow, and underestimated the threat posed by some countries’ accumulation of significant external debt.
Indeed, for ten years, north-to-south income transfers and lending financed excessive aggregate demand, making the eurozone seem stable.
As markets underpriced risk in order to lend to increasingly indebted countries, pressure on interest rates diminished.
(Over the course of the euro’s first decade, interest-rate spreads between ten-year government bonds nearly disappeared.)
The global financial crisis exposed the eurozone’s underlying flaw.
Meanwhile, international bodies, including the International Monetary Fund and the G-20, encouraged struggling countries to implement loose fiscal policies, claiming that they were needed to overcome the crisis.
But fiscal stimulus merely aggravated the problem.
Financial investors soon recognized that risk had been underestimated in some countries, causing interest rates to rise, sometimes to unsustainable levels, as in Greece, Portugal, and Ireland.
While the decline in aggregate demand led to reduced imports, the combination of higher interest rates, lower public expenditure, tax increases, and wage deflation boosted unemployment and triggered recession.
Normally, by decreasing prices relative to their more fiscally sound neighbors, struggling countries can boost exports, thereby reducing their current-account deficits.
But, in the case of the euro crisis, price stickiness caused inflation to increase more in debtor countries than in creditor countries, making adjustment even more painful.
In this context, Van Rompuy’s report is crucial.
It maps out the architecture needed to “guarantee the minimum level of convergence required for the EMU to function effectively,” and calls for a more integrated financial, budgetary, and economic policy framework.
Specifically, the report highlights the need for the eurozone to make two fundamental commitments.
First, eurozone countries must implement reforms aimed at boosting wage and price flexibility through enhanced competition and improved labor and capital mobility within and between member countries.
Second, wealth transfers to peripheral countries, while controversial, are necessary.
To surmount the associated political hurdles, eurozone leaders must create a limited “fiscal capacity,” which should act as a “common but limited shock-absorption function” that would “contribute to cushioning the impact of country-specific shocks and help to prevent contagion across the euro area and beyond.”
This mechanism should also provide financial support for structural reforms through “limited, temporary, flexible, and targeted financial incentives.”
But Van Rompuy’s minimal proposal may be insufficient.
Currency unions require a mechanism for permanent transfers to poorer regions.
The EU budget should facilitate such transfers in the eurozone, using structural funds.
Tax transfers should also act as an automatic stabilizer in the case of asymmetric shocks.
Such reforms undoubtedly require a much more politically integrated, or federalized, eurozone.
Facing up to that reality will be the main challenge for Europe’s leaders in 2013.
Test-Driving Driverless Cars
ANN ARBOR – It is June 15, 2030, and for Sam and Sue of Ann Arbor, Michigan, it is going to be a busy day.
Their daughter Sophia has a 9 a.m. karate match.
At noon, her older sister Sally’s high school graduation will begin.
And, by 3 p.m., the house must be ready for Sally’s graduation party.
At 8:40, Sam uses a smartphone app to order a ride from Maghicle, Ann Arbor’s mobility service, which uses self-driving robotic vehicles.
Within minutes, Sam, Sue, and Sophia are headed for the karate club.
En route, Sophia studies videos of her opponent’s past matches, while Sue catches up on emails and Sam orders appetizers and flowers for the party.
They arrive at the club on time, and the robot proceeds to pick up someone else nearby.
Sally, who must arrive at school by 10:30, has already ordered a Maghicle ride.
When she boards at 10:15, she receives a text message from her best friend Amanda, who wants to ride with her.
Sally enters Amanda’s address in the Maghicle app, and the robot chooses the best route.
At 11:30, as a victorious Sophia trades her karate uniform for something better suited for her sister’s graduation, Sam receives a text message confirming that a small temperature-controlled pod has delivered the appetizers for Sally’s party in the secure, refrigerated drop-box at the house.
When Sophia is ready, the family orders another Maghicle ride, this time to Sally’s school.
They take their seats and, as Sam waves to Sally sitting with her classmates, he is struck by how quickly 17 years have passed.
In 2013, Sam’s day would have been far more difficult, stressful, and expensive.
He would have wasted far too much time in his gas-guzzling SUV, stuck in traffic jams or searching for parking spaces.
Now, because he does not need to own a car, he spends far less money on transportation and has more time to do as he pleases.
With services like Maghicle enabling people to get around safely, affordably, conveniently, and sustainably, Sam does not have to worry about his wife or daughters getting into automobile accidents, as his parents worried about him.
By contrast, today’s road transportation system is inconvenient, unsustainable, and dangerous.
Of the nearly one billion motor vehicles worldwide – enough to circle the planet 100 times if parked end to end – some 95% depend on oil for energy, making car travel subject to resource geopolitics and price volatility.
Furthermore, combustion engines account for more than one-fifth of the world’s carbon emissions, contributing significantly to climate change.
And, with more than 1.2 million people dying on the road each year, car travel remains a proven killer.
Sam’s world of 2030 is not mere fantasy.
But achieving it will require a thorough overhaul of the existing road transportation system – and that means overcoming the complex combination of public and private elements, vested interests, ingrained business models, and massive inertia that has so far impeded its development.
Indeed, with certain institutions and industries benefiting when all of the system’s components – vehicles, roads, fuel stations, traffic laws, regulations, vehicle standards, and licensed drivers – work together, no transformational development has occurred in road transportation since Karl Benz invented the car and Henry Ford popularized it.
A narrow focus on, say, developing better batteries, improving fuel efficiency, or making automobile production more sustainable is inadequate to catalyze the needed transformation.
A genuinely transformational solution is needed – one that meets the needs of consumers, businesses, and governments.
An integrated network of driverless, electric vehicles that are connected, coordinated, and shared should form the core of that solution.
Such vehicles would be programmed to avoid crashes, leading to fewer deaths and injuries and less property damage.
In order to minimize the excessive resource consumption associated with driving, the vehicles would be tailored to trip characteristics, such as the number of passengers.
For example, lightweight, two-passenger vehicles can be up to ten times more energy efficient than a typical car.
In the United States, where 90% of automobiles carry one or two people, reliance on such vehicles would result in a dramatic decline in carbon emissions, which would fall even further as a result of less road congestion and smoother traffic flows.
Moreover, the land and infrastructure needed for parking would be significantly reduced.
Under such a system, personal mobility could cost up to 80% less than owning and operating a car, with time efficiencies augmenting those savings further.
For Americans earning minimum wage ($7.25 per hour), time spent driving at a rate of 30 miles (48 kilometers) per hour costs $0.24 per mile.
At the US median hourly wage of $25, each mile costs $0.83.
Given that Americans drive roughly three trillion miles annually, saving just one cent per mile implies $30 billion in annual savings.
The technology needed to advance such a scheme exists.
The task now is to introduce prototype systems in representative communities, in order to prove what is possible, discover consumers’ preferences, determine the most attractive business models, and identify and avert unexpected consequences.
Once the prototypes have proved effective and practical, they should scale quickly without public incentives.
As with other innovations – such as mobile phones, e-books, digital photography and music, and flat-screen televisions – large-scale deployment will occur when the new technologies reach the market tipping point, when their value to consumers exceeds the costs to businesses of supplying them.
Policymakers would be responsible only for guaranteeing the expanding system’s safety.
A cleaner, safer, more convenient road transportation system is possible – and closer to being realized than many believe.
It needs only the opportunity to prove itself.
Owning Up to Israel’s Bomb
TEL AVIV – President Barack Obama’s vision of a world without nuclear weapons, and the recent agreement he signed with Russia aimed at cutting back the nuclear stockpiles of both countries, enhances his moral and political leadership.
But how will his campaign against nuclear proliferation affect Israel, widely seen as the world’s sixth nuclear weapon state, and so far the only one in the Middle East?
US Assistant Secretary of State Rose Gottemoeller’s recent call for Israel to join the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which would require it to declare and relinquish its nuclear arsenal, has incited fears that America’s diplomatic umbrella for Israel’s nuclear status is ending.
From now on, it appeared to Israelis, the US will treat all states the same when it comes to nuclear weapons.
Israel is especially concerned that Obama might be willing to address Iran’s nuclear ambition by equating it with Israel’s nuclear status.
The intellectual foundations of the new American attitude were laid down in a famous article by Henry Kissinger, Sam Nunn, George Schultz, and William Perry entitled “Toward a Nuclear-Free World.”
In calling upon the world’s nuclear powers to preach by example and dramatically reduce their nuclear arsenals, the article was also a call for equality among nations in the nuclear domain.
Bruce Riedel, who until recently headed the Obama administration’s strategy review  for Afghanistan and Pakistan, and who is by no means hostile to America’s unique relations with Israel, has been explicit about this.
“If you are really serious about a deal with Iran, Israel has to come out of the closet.
A policy based on fiction and double standards is bound to fail sooner or later.
What is remarkable is that it has lasted so long.”
But it was a recent statement to Congress by Secretary of Defense Robert Gates that was especially shocking to Israelis.
He expressed understanding for Iran’s desire to acquire nuclear weapons because, as he said, the Iranians are surrounded by nuclear powers such as Pakistan, India, Russia, and Israel.
Israel is bound to fight against this emerging new American doctrine that equates it with Iran, or even with India and Pakistan for that matter.
Political contexts matter, the Israelis will argue.
Not only has Iran developed its nuclear capabilities while a party to the NPT, the Israelis will say, but it also has put Israel’s destruction high on its agenda.
Israel’s nuclear deterrence is its ultimate defense against an existential threat.
Across-the-board nuclear equality can, in the end, only boost to Iran’s nuclear claims.
India and Pakistan, unlike Israel, which has been committed to a strategy of nuclear opacity, both see themselves as nuclear states and want the world to accept that status.  Moreover, Israel never tested a nuclear weapon, and has unequivocally accepted the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) guidelines, which seek to stem proliferation through the control of nuclear exports.
Israel expects the Obama administration not only to appreciate the unique context of its ambiguous nuclear status, but also to recognize that it cannot be forthcoming in assuring its neighbors or the rest of the world regarding its nuclear program unless the Middle East political environment changes in a radically positive way.
Here, a change in Iran’s pattern of behavior toward Israel is an absolute prerequisite.
The potential for export of nuclear material and know-how by countries such as Pakistan – and perhaps one day Iran – is also a matter of concern for Israel.
Indeed, Israel insists that it is, after all, Iran, not Israel’s supposed nuclear capabilities, that triggered the current Middle East nuclear arms race.
But, as with the issue of the West Bank settlements, the Obama administration seems to be moving definitively away from an automatic endorsement of Israel’s understandings with previous US administrations. A revision of US policy towards Israel’s nuclear status can by no means be ruled out.
Gottemoeller’s declaration, as well as Gates’ explicit recognition of Israel’s nuclear status should be interpreted within the context of the Obama administration’s broader disarmament agenda.
Israel’s policy of nuclear ambiguity has remained practically unchallenged for almost 50 years, not least within Israel itself, where the issue has been a sacred taboo.
But the changing international environment, the threat of uncontrolled nuclear proliferation in the Middle East, and the new policies being worked out in the US might all be good reasons for Israel to consider revising its nuclear doctrine.
After all, the current strategy has not really worked either as a deterrent against conventional attacks (which persisted throughout the years that Israel supposedly developed its nuclear arsenal) or as a warning to rivals (such as Iran) against developing a nuclear weapon.
Israel’s official policy is that of a Middle East Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
By abandoning ambiguity and taking its own bomb out of the “basement,” Israel might be able to affirm its capacity for nuclear deterrence more convincingly, and, more importantly, enhance a serious debate about the urgency of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East.
Pakistan after Bhutto
The assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto has brought Pakistan’s state of turmoil to new heights.
As head of the nation’s most popular political party, Bhutto largely transcended Pakistan’s ethnic and sectarian divides.
Her return from exile in October was seen as a step toward curbing the country’s dangerous fragmentation; her murder shatters those hopes.
President Pervez Musharraf must take immediate steps – most importantly, the formation of a national unity government – to prevent Pakistan from tearing apart at the seams.
In deciding that her People’s Party would participate in the January parliamentary election, Bhutto threw a lifeline to Musharraf, who has been beset by multiple insurgencies, a nationwide terrorist threat, and rock-bottom legitimacy.
Both Musharraf and his supporters in Washington hoped that mainstream parties’ participation in the election would end Pakistan’s governance crisis and provide popular support for a decisive confrontation with the Taliban and al-Qaeda.
Now, however, the election will likely be postponed.
Indeed, Musharraf might be compelled to impose emergency rule again, as he did in November, should Pakistan’s stability further deteriorate.
There are reports of violence in cities across Pakistan.
Karachi, a multi-ethnic metropolis, could erupt into full-scale chaos. During the 1990’s, violence there between Bhutto’s party and a local ethnic party – now allied with Musharraf – took thousands of lives.
In these circumstances, a state of emergency could be warranted. But, given Musharraf’s lack of legitimacy, such a move would further infuriate Bhutto’s supporters, whose street power Bhutto had contained since October.
This could set the stage for a violent confrontation between the Pakistani masses and Musharraf’s regime.
The nightmare scenario envisioned by many in Pakistan ­­– a nuclear-armed country actively targeted by al-Qaeda and the Taliban – could become a reality.
But this need not be a foregone conclusion.
Musharraf, who regularly claims to act on the basis of a “Pakistan first” policy, must now let go of partisan objectives and form a national unity government led by a prime minister from the opposition.
Any subsequent measures, including temporary imposition of emergency rule and full-scale war against the terrorists, require the complete support of the opposition parties.
Musharraf and his political allies cannot be seen as benefiting from Bhutto’s assassination; nor can they afford the perception of a cover-up.
His opponents must be incorporated into the decision-making process.
A national unity government must assume three major responsibilities.
First, it must establish an independent commission to determine who was responsible for Bhutto’s murder.
While political assassination is not unfamiliar – Pakistan’s first prime minister was killed in the same park where Bhutto was murdered – it is imperative that the culprits be apprehended and tried.
Anything short of this would permanently taint Pakistan’s leadership and impede all attempts at political reconciliation.
Second, it must take necessary measures to ensure public safety and political stability, while paving the way for free and fair elections.
It must offer Pakistan a consensual path toward winning back its tribal areas from the insurgents, end the wave of terror in its cities, and ensure the election of a new, legitimate government.
Finally, it must begin a dialogue with Musharraf and the military on a permanent, constitutional separation of powers.
If Bhutto had not been assassinated and, instead, successfully became prime minister, she would likely have clashed with Musharraf over his arbitrary empowerment of the presidency at the expense of the premiership. The issue will not go away with Bhutto’s death.
Pakistan’s civil and military elite must create a broad consensus – perhaps with foreign assistance, but never with foreign meddling – on the constitutional roles of the prime minister, president, and the military.
Ravaged by endemic elite discord since its founding, Pakistan desperately needs an elite reconciliation that includes all of the country’s major stakeholders.
Otherwise, Pakistan’s terrorists, who feed off of political instability, will continue to gain, while the country’s poor and illiterate majority will continue to lose ground.
The murder of Benazir Bhutto need not result in the country’s demise.
Pakistan’s elite have an opportunity to overcome their differences, unite in opposition to militants, and transform their failing state into a stable and prosperous democracy.
If they succeed in bringing about a national renewal, Bhutto, a monumental political figure in Pakistani history, will not have died in vain.
Pakistan’s New Leaf?
NEW DELHI – As US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton bluntly told Pakistan in 2011 that “you can’t keep snakes in your backyard and expect them only to bite your neighbors.”
But her warning (“eventually those snakes are going to turn on” their keeper), like those of other American officials over the years, including presidents and CIA chiefs, went unheeded.
The snake-keeper’s deepening troubles were exemplified by the recent massacre of 132 schoolchildren in Peshawar by militants no longer under the control of Pakistan’s generals.
Such horror is the direct result of the systematic manner in which the Pakistani military establishment has reared jihadist militants since the 1980s as an instrument of state policy against India and Afghanistan.
By continuing to nurture terrorist proxies, the Pakistani military has enabled other militants to become entrenched in the country, making the culture of jihad pervasive.
The Peshawar massacre was not the first time that the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism became a terror victim.
But the attack has underscored how the contradiction between battling one set of terror groups while shielding others for cross-border undertakings has hobbled the Pakistani state.
As a result, the question many are asking is whether, in the wake of the Peshawar killings, the Pakistani military, including its rogue Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agency, will be willing to break its ties with militant groups and dismantle the state-run terrorist infrastructure.
Unfortunately, developments in recent months, including in the aftermath of the Peshawar attack, offer little hope.
On the contrary, with the military back in de facto control, the civilian government led by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is in no position to shape developments.
And, despite the increasing blowback from state-aided militancy, the generals remain too wedded to sponsoring terrorist groups that are under United Nations sanctions – including Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT) and the Haqqani network – to reverse course.
Reliance on jihadist terror has become part of the generals’ DNA.
Who can forget their repeated denial that they knew the whereabouts of Osama bin Laden before he was killed by US naval commandos in a 2011 raid on his safe house in the Pakistani garrison city of Abbottabad?
Recently, in an apparent slip, a senior civilian official – Sharif’s national security adviser, Sartaj Aziz – said that Pakistan should do nothing to stop militants who do not intend to harm Pakistan.
The nexus among military officers, jihadists, and hardline nationalists has created a nuclear-armed “Terroristan” that will most likely continue to threaten regional and global security.
State-reared terror groups and their splinter cells, some now operating autonomously, have morphed into a hydra.
Indeed, as the country’s civilian political institutions corrode, its nuclear arsenal, ominously, is becoming increasingly unsafe.
Pakistan is already a quasi-failed state.
Its anti-India identity is no longer sufficient to stem its mounting contradictions, which are most apparent in the two incarnations of the Taliban: the Afghan Taliban, which is the Pakistani military’s surrogate, and the Pakistani Taliban – formally known as Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) – which is the military’s nemesis.
Pakistan also provides sanctuary to the Afghan Taliban’s chief, Mullah Mohammad Omar (and also harbors a well-known international fugitive, the Indian organized crime boss Dawood Ibrahim).
Meanwhile, Hafiz Saeed, the founder of the ISI’s largest surrogate terror organization, LeT, remains the generals’ darling, leading a public life that mocks America’s $10 million bounty on his head and the UN’s inclusion of him on a terrorist list.
Earlier this month, Pakistani authorities aided a large public rally by Saeed in Lahore, including by running special trains to ferry in participants, so that the architect of the November 2008 Mumbai terrorist attack (among many others) could project himself as some sort of messiah of the Pakistani people.
Yet none of that stopped Pakistan’s Chief of Army Staff, Raheel Sharif, and ISI Director-General Rizwan Akhter from rushing to Kabul after the Peshawar attack to demand that President Ashraf Ghani and the US-led military coalition extradite TTP chief Mullah Fazlullah or allow Pakistani forces to go in after him.
In other words, they seek the help of Afghanistan and the US to fight the Pakistani Taliban while unflinchingly aiding the Afghan Taliban, which has been killing Afghan and NATO troops.
Such is the generals’ Janus-faced approach to terrorism that six years after the Mumbai attacks, Pakistan has yet to try the seven Pakistani perpetrators in its custody.
Indeed, under the cover of indignation over the Peshawar attack, the leading suspect in the case – UN-designated terrorist Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi, who served as LeT’s operations chief – secured bail.
International outrage soon forced Pakistan to place him in preventive detention for up to three months.
Those who believe that the Peshawar massacre might serve as a wakeup call to the Pakistani military should ask why the generals have ignored hundreds of earlier wakeup calls.
Despite the blowback imperiling Pakistan’s future, the generals show no sign that they have tired of running with the hare and hunting with the hounds.
The international community should stop placing its hope in some abrupt change of heart on the generals’ part.
Creating a moderate Pakistan at peace with itself can only be a long-term project, because it hinges on empowering a feeble civil society and, ultimately, reining in the military’s role in politics.
As long as the military, intelligence, and nuclear establishments remain unaccountable to the civilian government, Pakistan, the region, and the world will continue to be at risk from the jihadist snake pit that the country has become.
The Pakistani Nuclear Deal That Wasn’t
LAHORE – Recently, it came to light that the United States was attempting to negotiate with Pakistan a deal to constrain the Pakistanis’ fast-growing nuclear weapons program.
That sounds like good news: Any move toward non-proliferation seems like a positive step.
Unfortunately, in this case the effort has had some dangerous unintended consequences.
It all started last month, when US media reported that an agreement was already near completion.
First, David Ignatius of The Washington Post reported, on the basis of conversations with senior US officials, that agreement had already been reached on a number of steps Pakistan would take to reduce its dependence on nuclear weapons for deterrence.
A few days later, David Sanger of The New York Times confirmed.
Both accounts suggested that the agreement would be announced in a joint statement following the October 23 meeting in Washington, DC, between US President Barack Obama and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
But the reality is that those media reports were the beginning, not the end, of the process.
According to senior Pakistani officials – including Sartaj Aziz, a key adviser on foreign affairs and national security – there was no agreement in the works when the stories appeared.
Rather, it seemed that the US was using the media to put pressure on Pakistan’s government to respond more readily to America’s pleas to cap production of tactical weapons and the short-range missiles that could deliver them.
The reports put Pakistan’s political leaders in an awkward position.
They could not possibly succeed in convincing the country’s powerful military establishment to place constraints on the development of the country’s nuclear arsenal.
Indeed, the US effort merely widened the divide on security issues within Pakistani– a situation that serves no one’s interests.
Pakistan’s leaders were determined to turn attention back toward their country’s rapidly deteriorating relations with India, a challenge with which the US could help.
So when they received America’s draft of the statement to be issued after the Obama-Sharif meeting, and saw that it focused almost entirely on nuclear issues, it was decided that Aziz would head to Washington a day early to agree on revisions.
From Pakistan’s perspective, the draft statement seemed to be driven by the White House.
It seemed that “the office of the National Security Adviser wanted to add another ‘nuclear feather’ to Obama’s cap, following the successful negotiations with Iran,” Aziz speculated to me in a private conversation.
Believing that the US State Department was not “kept in the loop,” Aziz requested that, if he could not agree on the statement’s wording with the designated official, he could meet with Secretary of State John Kerry.
To be sure, the US government’s agenda would have some benefits for Pakistan.
The US would press the Nuclear Supplier Group to issue a waiver to Pakistan, as it has already done for India, so that Pakistan could import the technology, parts, and components needed to build nuclear power plants.
And, in fact, Pakistan needs to build about a half-dozen such plants – in addition to the two already being built by the Chinese near Karachi – to address its energy shortfall, which amounts to an estimated 5,000 megawatts annually.
With voters heading to the polls in early 2018, genuine progress toward resolving the energy crisis would presumably be good for Pakistan’s political leaders.
In exchange for this, however, Pakistan would have to limit the number of tactical nuclear weapons in its arsenal and cease development work on them.
Moreover, Pakistan would have to mothball the short-range “Nasr” missile, which has already been shown to be capable of delivering small nuclear weapons over a distance of 50-75 kilometers.
The US believed that shifting Pakistani leaders’ attention from nuclear-weapons development to power-plant construction would, in addition to bolstering efforts to close the energy gap, limit Pakistan’s dependence on China for nuclear technology and reduce the risk of an immensely destructive war in South Asia.
But these calculations failed to take into account Pakistani security considerations – in particular, the military’s renewed fears about India’s intentions.
For some time, senior military officials have been concentrating on rooting out terrorism at home, and they have scored some impressive successes.
But recent base-building activity by India near its border with Pakistan has been raising red flags in Islamabad.
According to a senior Pakistani military official, India, in pursuit of its “Cold Start” military doctrine, is constructing eight bases at which heavy armor would be stationed.
Developed after the 2001 attack on the Indian Parliament, the doctrine calls for Indian troops to move rapidly to occupy 300-500 square kilometers of Pakistani territory in the event of another terrorist attack.
The occupation would end only when Pakistan formally relinquished its claim to Kashmir and dismantled all terrorist training camps operating within its borders.
“Tactical nuclear weapons,” the Pakistani military official explained, “will deter India from following through on this strategy.”
Against this background, the US should have known that trying to compel Pakistan to limit its nuclear-weapons capability would fail.
But it pushed anyway.
As a result, Pakistan’s reliance on China has been strengthened, not weakened.
And, instead of reducing the chances of a nuclear standoff in South Asia, the White House plan served only to distract attention from efforts to address tensions between India and Pakistan.
Ultimately, the Obama-Sharif statement did emphasize India-Pakistan relations, and made no reference to the nuclear issue.
Obama mentioned Kashmir as an unresolved issue, while pleading for stability in South Asian affairs.
According to Aziz, Pakistan was satisfied with the final statement.
The US, however, may not have felt the same.
Pakistan on the Precipice
ISLAMABAD – Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari abruptly returned to Karachi on the morning of December 19, following a 13-day absence for medical treatment in Dubai, where he lived while in exile.
The government issued no a formal statement about Zadari’s health, but his supporters disclosed that he had suffered a mild stroke, which left him unconscious for several minutes.
Zardari’s sudden return fueled speculation about his future, but, more importantly, about the future of civilian rule in Pakistan.
His decision followed a three-hour meeting between Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani and General Ashfaq Pervez Kayani, the Pakistani army’s chief of the army.
His choice of destination – Karachi, Pakistan’s largest city and his political base, rather than Islamabad, the county’s capital – suggests the depth of the crisis now bubbling below the surface. 
Zardari has held power since 2008, having been elected eight months after the assassination of his wife, Benazir Bhutto.
Even after a constitutional amendment in 2010 made the prime minister the country’s chief executive, Zardari has continued to be the main decision-maker.
His political rise is thus in keeping with South Asia’s tradition of quasi-democratic dynastic politics: he assumed leadership of Bhutto’s Pakistan People’s Party (PPP) – founded in 1967 by her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto – and appointed his son Bilawal as the party’s co-chairperson, basing his decision on a handwritten will left by his wife.
To underscore the link, the son was renamed Bilawal Bhutto Zardari.
But, having deftly out-maneuvered his opponents for three years, Zardari seems to have misread the current political environment, for Pakistan is not the same country in which his wife and father-in-law wielded power.
By trying to play by the old rules, he committed several mistakes that may ultimately cost him his job and the Bhutto family its hold on power.
As many other Pakistani leaders have done before before him, Zardari has relied on American support to stay where he is.
This worked for some time, but an alleged attempt to involve the United States more openly in Pakistani politics weakened, rather than strengthened, his hold on power.
Indeed, while the Arab Spring ended the old corrupt bargain that kept so many autocratic rulers in power across the Muslim world, Zardari and his associates appear not to have received the message.
It was widely believed that Husain Haqqani, Pakistan’s ambassador to the US, had attempted to enlist America’s help in preventing yet another military coup.
An unsigned memorandum, believed to have been written at Haqqani’s suggestion, was sent to Admiral Mike Mullen, then Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, seeking American help in exchange for fighting extremists in Pakistan’s tribal areas who were complicating America’s efforts to extract itself from Afghanistan.
What the lively Pakistani media dubbed “memogate” forced Haqqani to resign and enabled the Supreme Court to assert its authority by deciding to investigate the matter.
The court was already casting an eye at Zadari by examining the deal between former President Pervez Musharraf and Benazir Bhutto.
In exchange for the withdrawal of corruption cases against her, Zardari, and several of their friends and associates, Bhutto agreed to support Musharraf after the elections scheduled for December 2007.
The Bush administration, eager to have a democratically elected government in Pakistan to continue the fight against terrorism, was believed to have brokered the agreement.
That arrangement has now been struck down by the Supreme Court, which ordered the government to reopen corruption cases, including one in Switzerland, where Zardari is alleged to have parked tens of millions of dollars.
The government balked, and now the Court is working to ensure that the executive branch carries out its orders.
But Zardari’s decision to begin grooming his 23-year old son for power may have been his gravest mistake.
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto anointed his wife and daughter to be the PPP’s co-chairpersons in case he was executed by the military regime that had overthrown him.
Benazir Bhutto, in turn, placed control of the party in the hands of her husband and son.
But, this time, an awakened citizenry was not inclined to readily accept that political leadership could be passed on so easily from father to daughter, from wife to husband, from father to son.
Political change in Pakistan is assured, but it will come about in a way that cannot be foreseen.
The Arab Spring, America’s declining influence in the Muslim world, and citizens’ determination to be heard have combined to create an environment in which the unprecedented and the unpredictable are the only certainties.
Pakistan’s Black Revolution
SHANGHAI -- Immediately after taking office last month, Pakistani Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani ordered the release of the 60 judges who had been detained by President Pervez Musharraf since November.
This is a triumph for the rule of law in Pakistan, and above all a triumph for the brave Pakistani lawyers who took to the streets to protest Musharraf’s imposition of a state of emergency last autumn.
The lawyers marched, sang, danced, and exchanged their briefcases for signs and, occasionally, eggs and stones.
As one Pakistani blogger wrote, “They danced in black coats and they danced in black ties.
Their black coats their Kalashnikovs and their black ties their bullets.”
In a world of color revolutions, Pakistan’s was clothed in the sober hues of the law.
Last November, Musharraf effectively declared war on both the bar and the judiciary, dismissing all judges who refused to recognize his declaration of a state of emergency, purportedly aimed at protecting the nation from terrorists.
The seven-member Supreme Court, headed by Chief Justice Iftikar Mohammad Chaudhry, countered by issuing an order barring the government from proclaiming emergency rule.
Musharraf dissolved the Supreme Court and the four High Courts, put Chaudhry and his entire family under house arrest, sealed the Supreme Court premises under army guard, and proceeded to arrest and detain all judges who refused to swear allegiance to the Provisional Constitutional Order upholding the state of emergency.
The result was the detention of most of the senior judiciary, as well as bar association presidents across the country and all leading lawyers and human rights activists seeking to defend judicial independence.
In the ensuing protests, lawyers were routinely beaten, gassed, brutalized, and humiliated.
They stood with and for their judges, making it virtually impossible for judges willing to take Musharraf’s oath of allegiance to operate.
The lawyer’s movement, it seems, drove a historic wedge between the judiciary and the executive.
Yet in Pakistan, the United States, and other countries where lawyers have helped to lead fights for human rights and the rule of law, lofty ideals cloak an equally important set of interests.
The Pakistani lawyers were safeguarding their livelihoods as much as their principles.
Lawyers cannot practice without judges to hear their cases.
And clients will not bring those cases unless they believe that the judges are independent enough to decide cases on the merits, rather than on the basis of bribes or political considerations.
These interests also help explain why Kenya’s lawyers were at the forefront of protests against the corruption of President Daniel Arap Moi’s regime in the early 1990’s, but much less visible in the eruption of tribal violence this past year.
Corruption corrodes the possibility of making a living through the law, which becomes a preserve of the rich.
By contrast, in crises fueled by ethnic conflict, lawyers’ interests are not so clear.
Noting the convergence between ideals and interests does not in any way demean the Pakistani lawyers’ courage and the importance of their protests.
America’s founders, for instance, fully understood that the two must go hand in hand.
Their design for constitutional democracy ensured, in James Madison’s words, that ambition would counter ambition and “the interests of the man” would be “connected to the constitutional rights of the place.”
The best foundation for the rule of law is to build an island of legality wherever it is most needed to advance legitimate government goals – to stop corruption, to protect the environment, to clean up the financial system, or to enforce contracts with foreign investors.
Within these limited areas, independent judges and the lawyers who can argue before them have a home.
As these islands begin to form an archipelago, a legal class emerges, supported by the clients who need them.
And on the day that a judge finally crosses a political line, speaking constitutional truth to usurped power, the government’s refusal to comply threatens the interests and ideals of an articulate and motivated segment of society.
The coming weeks will reveal whether Pakistan’s new government has the courage and integrity not only to release the fired judges, but to restore them to the bench and perhaps to face their scrutiny down the road.
If it does, Pakistan’s lawyers will be able to return to the courtrooms, and Pakistani citizens will have another chance to make democracy work.
If they succeed, perhaps they should add a black border around the proud Islamic green of their flag – the black not of mourning, but of justice.
Schooling and Social Change in Pakistan
ISLAMABAD – The importance of education – and especially schooling – cannot be overestimated.
Not only has the expansion of primary and secondary education been linked to accelerated economic growth, poverty eradication, and improved income equality, but education also appears to be closely associated with social enrichment and inclusion, the upgrading of human capital, increased opportunities, and enhanced freedom and welfare.
That is why, as Pakistan’s prime minister, I have placed universal access to education very high on the national agenda.
Education influences the way people perceive the world around them, understand issues, and find solutions to their problems.
It makes them more aware of their rights and duties and affects how they interact within their communities and with the state and its institutions.
Above all, it enables them to think critically and question established wisdom, thereby enabling them to rise above prejudice, myth, and restrictive historical legacies.
In this sense, education is a major driver of social progress.
And it is the key to fulfilling my promise, made when I took office two years ago, to create a new framework for social change in Pakistan, one that ensures equal opportunities and social justice for everyone and stops the exploitation of the poor and harnesses their potential.
As the Oslo Summit on Education for Development approaches, I remain firm in my commitment to securing the right to a high-quality education for every child in Pakistan – especially for girls, who have long faced high barriers to education.
But there remain considerable obstacles to fulfilling that commitment.
Indeed, nearly six million Pakistani children are currently out of school, and many more are not learning even basic mathematics or reading skills.
Dropout rates are high.
And, perhaps worst of all, terrorists and extremists have been targeting schools, blowing up their buildings and threatening their teachers, particularly in the northern part of the country.
In a particularly tragic incident last December, terrorists attacked young students and teachers at a school in Peshawar.
I now reiterate the promise that I made after that attack.
My government will not allow Pakistan’s schools – so vital to our country’s future – to become targets of terrorism.
Education is the most important investment we can make in our most precious assets – our children – and we will not tolerate even the slightest threat to it.
Protecting schools from extremists today will help to stem the rise of extremism tomorrow.
Indeed, given the contribution of ignorance, lack of choice, and socioeconomic deprivation to the rise of extremism in parts of Pakistan and Afghanistan, ensuring that future generations have better education, improved capabilities, and more opportunities will ensure that the next generation will not become easy prey for terrorist organizations.
In addition to the risk that a few would be tempted by extremism is the certainty that, if we fail to meet our commitment to universal education, millions of children would be relegated to a life of poverty and struggle, with their hopes, dreams, and potential squandered, undermining the country’s development potential.
More than half of Pakistan’s population is under the age of 25; theirs is the generation with the potential to drive progress and prosperity in the country – if, of course, they receive the education they deserve.
Given how unlikely it is that a free-market approach would lead to the equitable provision of education, my government has committed to increase the public resources allocated for education, which averaged only 2.4% of GDP from 2004 to 2013, to 4% percent of GDP over the next three years.
Such funding will support the steps needed to fulfill the promise, contained in our country’s constitution, that the state will “provide free and compulsory secondary education within minimum possible period.”
Those steps include cooperation with provincial governments – which bear the primary responsibility for primary and secondary education in Pakistan – to devise a roadmap for universal enrollment.
In order to improve the quality of teaching and learning, we are working not only to expand facilities for teacher training, but also to draw more talented people to the profession by recognizing and honoring the service of teachers.
And we are investing in computers and other advanced learning tools to ensure that our children can compete internationally.
We have also launched several new initiatives to make education more widely accessible.
One such initiative is the National Endowment Scholarships for Talent, which finances the education of poor students.
Finally, we are strengthening the institutional scaffolding of Pakistan’s education system.
For example, we have created the National Curriculum Council, which will standardize school curricula throughout the country, while ensuring that they are consistent with national requirements and international benchmarks.
Reforms to the examination system are being introduced to complement this effort.
My pledge is being turned into action.
But my government cannot do it alone.
To overcome the challenges we face and fulfill our promise to our children, we need active support from the international community.
The Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of achieving universal primary education was expected to reach its target this year; it has not.
And so now is the ideal moment for the world to renew its commitment to education.
We must approach the Sustainable Development Goals, which aim to carry on the work of the MDGs, with a clear direction, a sense of purpose, and strong resolve.
For our part, we have created a SDG unit in our Ministry of Planning, Development, and Reform to coordinate their timely achievement.
We hope that other countries will show the same commitment.
For Pakistan, education is not merely a priority – it is a policy imperative.
Pakistan’s Iranian Shadow
As the future of both Pakistan and its president, Pervez Musharraf, wallow in uncertainty in the wake of Benazir Bhutto’s assassination, parallels are being drawn to the 1979 fall of the Shah and the Islamic Revolution in Iran.
Once again, a “pro-American” autocrat seems to be rapidly losing his grip on power, with his US ally only half-heartedly standing by him.
The liberal elite and intelligentsia rail against the dictator, confident that their country is primed for secular democracy.
The obvious lesson to be drawn from 1979 is that America unwisely rested its entire strategic relationship with Iran on the shoulders of an unpopular dictator.
When his regime crumbled, so did America’s ability to realize its interests there.
But the Iranian revolution holds another lesson for Pakistani liberals: obsessed with evicting the Shah, Iran’s intelligentsia was delusional about their own society and their potential to emerge victorious via an abrupt political upheaval.
Once the Shah left, the radical minority that was willing to fight and die for its cause devoured the “moderate majority,” establishing Islamist rule in short order.
To be sure, profound political and cultural distinctions exist between Iran in the 1970’s and contemporary Pakistan.
Iran lacked an independent judiciary, basic press freedoms, and civil society organizations.
Contemporary Pakistan has, to varying degrees, all of these.
More importantly, Iran’s Shia clerics were both organized and politically active in a way that Pakistan’s Sunni clergy have not been.
Indeed, Pakistan’s Islamist parties have never won more than 12% of the popular vote.
It would be wrong, however, to think that Pakistan is immune from the Muslim world’s Islamist undercurrents.
Around 40% of Pakistanis live below the poverty line, half the population is illiterate, and, among those who are literate, many have been schooled in Wahhabi-funded madrasas.
Various opinion polls consistently show that a sizable minority of Pakistanis has a favorable view of Osama bin Laden, an unfavorable view of the US, and believe that implementing Islamic law (Sharia) should be a priority.
A Pakistani intellectual once confessed to me, “I fear the weak electoral showings of Islamists in Pakistan has more to do with the fact that a compelling, charismatic Islamist leader – a Pakistani Hassan Nasrallah – has yet to emerge, not that his message wouldn't resonate.”
Few Iranians had ever heard of Ayatollah Khomeini until 1978, but it didn’t take long for his message to electrify millions.
The army has always been the strongest bulwark in assuring that Pakistan does not go the way of Iran.
But while the officer corps may be steadfast defenders of secular rule, the rank and file reflects Pakistani society.
In the event of an Islamist political awakening, the army’s allegiances are not guaranteed.
In Iran, apart from senior commanders, who were either killed or fled the country, the Shah’s powerful, staunchly secular army switched sides to Khomeini’s revolutionary government virtually overnight.       
This is not to suggest than an Islamist awakening in Pakistan is on the horizon, or that Pakistanis must choose between an unpopular autocrat or a Taliban-style government.
On the contrary, Pakistan’s liberals are brave to agitate for democracy, the rule of law, and accountability for Musharraf, whose presidency appears beyond rehabilitation.
But they should learn from Iran’s revolution that their means of agitating for political reform are relevant to the political ends they hope to achieve.
Emotions are raw in the aftermath of Bhutto’s death.
More than 50 people have been killed in riots, and both her party and that of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif are contemplating mass demonstrations to bring down Musharraf's government.
But the politics of rage, retribution, and rioting will not bring the kind of tranquil, pluralistic democracy that Bhutto envisioned.
The desire to exact revenge on Musharraf for stifling democracy and failing to provide Bhutto with sufficient security will only inflame a political atmosphere that Pakistani liberals seek to de-radicalize.
Not only in Iran, but also in Lebanon, Palestine, and Iraq, history has shown that Islamists thrive amid political chaos and violence.
Similarly in Pakistan, it is dangerous to bet that the country’s pro-democracy lawyers, intellectuals, and students will emerge victorious in the tumult and potential carnage of street politics.