The question of how to guide an economy to produce sustainable happiness – combining material well-being with human health, environmental conservation, and psychological and cultural resiliency – is one that needs addressing everywhere.
Bhutan has many things going its way.
It will be able to increase exports of clean, run-of-the-river hydropower to India, thereby earning foreign exchange in a manner that is sustainable and that can fill government coffers to fund education, health care, and infrastructure.
The country is also intent on ensuring that the benefits of growth reach all of the population, regardless of region or income level.
There are serious risks.
Global climate change threatens Bhutan’s ecology and economy.
Incautious and expensive advice from McKinsey and other private consulting firms could help turn Bhutan into a degraded tourist zone.
One must hope that the quest for GNH will help steer the country away from such temptations.
The key for Bhutan is to regard GNH as an enduring quest, rather than as a simple checklist.
Bhutan’s Buddhist tradition understands happiness not as attachment to goods and services, but as the result of the serious work of inner reflection and compassion toward others.
Bhutan has embarked on such a serious journey. The rest of the world’s economies should do the same.
Grumpy Old Men
LONDON – Having reached pensionable age, I qualify to be a grumpy old man.
I should be boring my children, and the students at Oxford University where I am Chancellor, with grumbles about how everything is going to the dogs.
But that is not quite how I see things.
I went to university myself in 1962. My first term coincided with the Cuban missile crisis.
The world seemed to be teetering on the brink of nuclear catastrophe.
Those were the days when global peace was sustained by a concept known suitably enough by the acronym MAD – Mutually Assured Destruction.
Was that world a worse and more dangerous one than today, where our main nuclear concerns are how to prevent proliferation and strengthen the treaty that has deterred it for the last generation?
At the end of my years at Oxford, I went as a student to the United States and visited Alabama.
You may recall the story of Richard Nixon attending the independence celebrations in Ghana.
At a gala reception, he went up to one guest, mistaking him for a local, and asked what it felt like to be able to vote and enjoy freedom under the rule of law.
“I wouldn’t know,” the man replied, “I’m from Alabama.”
Within my adult lifetime, we have moved from the murder of civil-rights campaigners in the US to the election of a black president.
Nothing to be grumpy about there.
Elsewhere, some of our biggest problems have a sort of Hegelian quality. They are the result of solving past problems or of past success.
Consider, for example, the biggest challenge facing us, which deserves to be called existential: global warming and climate change.
In the last century, the world got richer; its population quadrupled; the number of people living in cities grew thirteen-fold; and we consumed more of everything.
Water consumption rose nine-fold and energy use thirteen-fold.
Industrial output soared to 40 times its level at the beginning of the twentieth century.
But – and here comes the real hit – carbon-dioxide emissions grew seventeen-fold.
That is the biggest problem we face – the unforeseen result of increased economic activity and prosperity.
Looking at preparations for the Copenhagen summit in December, when we will try to broker a new global agreement to combat climate change, does not make me grumpy.
At last, the big players are taking the issues seriously.
The US is no longer in denial on the question.
President Barack Obama and his advisers do not deny the scientific evidence of what is happening to us all.
In China, political leaders seem genuine in their commitment to reduce the carbon content of their runaway economy.
The big problems, of course, are how we take account of past responsibility for the carbon in the atmosphere, how we balance aggregate national emissions and per capita figures – China leads in the first category; the US, Australia, and Canada are the biggest culprits in the second – and how we manage technology transfer from developed to emerging and poor economies.
There will be plenty to moan about if we don’t solve these problems sooner rather than later.
This is where old men seem past their political expiration dates.
Let me explain. For all of our lives, my generation has defined success in terms of rising GDP growth: more money in more pockets, more resources for public programs, and more jobs.
None of these will necessarily be a measure of future success.
At the moment, people applaud sustainable growth, but they don’t vote for what it means in practice.
German voters balk at any suggestion that we should limit the environmental damage caused by big and expensive cars. British voters line up behind the truck drivers when protests are launched against hikes in the price of petrol, not least through the introduction of higher energy taxes.
Ideas for carbon taxes run into resistance everywhere.
I have five grandchildren below the age of four.
By the time they qualify for pensions and the license to grumble, the century will be into its seventh or eighth decade.
We hope!
How much will they have to get angry about then because of the way that we are behaving today?
Guilty Democrats
LONDON – When former Czech President Václav Havel knocked on the door of the Chinese embassy in Prague to demand the release of the writer Liu Xiaobo, I had an eerie sense of déjà vu.
Thirty-three years ago, Havel helped initiate Charter 77, the landmark document that crystallized the ideals of all the dissidents – and many others – trapped behind the Iron Curtain.
Havel , of course, was rewarded with a long jail sentence for his efforts.
Now Liu has been sentenced to 11 years imprisonment for much the same crime: initiating Charter 08, perhaps the bravest attempt yet to chart a peaceful way forward to freedom for China.
History is said to repeat itself, first as tragedy, second as farce.
And it is indeed farcical for China’s government to try to suppress the yearning for freedom in the same brutal ways that Soviet-era communists once did.
For jailing Liu on the absurd charge of trying to overthrow the Chinese state is typical of the type of thinking found in the closed societies of twentieth-century communism, where the state asserted its absolute right to judge every thought and every thinker.
In such a state, the only way to survive was for everyone to become his or her own thought police: self-censoring and never daring to question.
But to judge and imprison one’s own mind, or any other mind, is to criminalize civilization.
In today’s Internet age, moreover, no prison or censorship can destroy an idea whose time has come.
In its current fight with Google, for example, China’s government appears to think that its technologists can provide the means to maintain the old thought control.
But, thankfully, for anyone with persistence and a modicum of computer skill, the Internet leaks like a sieve.
The great progress of China’s economy over the past 30 years is something all Chinese celebrate.
But the jailing of Liu also demonstrates in the starkest terms that China’s neglect of human rights is flowing to the rest of world alongside the mass of Chinese goods.
Indeed, it is becoming increasingly clear that China opened its economy only to maintain the country’s over-mighty rulers in power, not to respect and enhance the lives of ordinary Chinese.
Although China’s government does not keep any of its international commitments on economic, social, and cultural rights, the world’s democracies appear to have lost their willingness to stand up for their beliefs, as President Barack Obama’s kowtow to China during his November visit painfully demonstrated.
But it was a refusal to buckle to the values of Nazism and Communism in the twentieth century that assured the success of freedom.
Liberty today needs the same type of stalwart defense.
Yes, civilization seems to be on the defensive.
Though many people seem to be in denial about this, politics has retreated to a renewal of the last century’s long struggle for democracy and freedom.
China’s model of authoritarian capitalism appears triumphant, but there is nothing genuinely new about this model; like all dictatorships, it deprives people of political rights and freedom of speech.
Havel captured this idea perfectly when he criticized Obama’s silence in Beijing on human rights.
Such abasement will only lead people to begin to doubt whether democracy is a living social system.
Fortunately, China’s jailing of Liu Xiaobo will not, as we Chinese say, succeed in its effort to frighten the monkey by killing a chicken.
Liu is too invisible to ordinary Chinese for that to happen.
No, the incarceration of Liu is targeted at those who value democracy, both within China and abroad.
It is an effort to criminalize democratic ideas and force people to choose between them and business with China.
That is a false choice.
China’s economy needs world markets as much as world markets need China, if not more.
Moreover, the West’s inclination to appease China will gradually cause ordinary Chinese to lose confidence that economic modernization will ever set them free.
So continued silence when poets, writers, or lawyers – people like Shi Tao, Yang Tianshui, and Tan Zuoren – are treated like criminals will only assure that China’s markets are eventually lost alongside Chinese freedoms.
A closed society will eventually return to a closed economy.
The real criminal in the Liu Xiaobo affair is, of course, the Chinese state.
But those who think that China’s mutant political authoritarianism and mighty economy can long prevail are guilty as well.
Such a system is as unsuited to the future as Mao’s system was to the past.
Dividen Orang Asing di Negara-negara Teluk
PARIS – Bagaimana sepatutnya pembuat kebijakan di Negara-negara Teluk di Timur Tengah mengelola tenaga kerja asing yang sedemikian besar jumlahnya?
Di Arab Saudi, total WNA mencapai hampir sepertiga populasi penduduk.
Di Qatar dan Uni Emirat Arab, sembilan dari sepuluh warga adalah ekspatriat.
Apakah pemerintah di negara-negara tersebut harus terus berinvestasi besar-besaran dalam mengembangkan tenaga kerja pribumi agar bisa mengurangi ketergantungan pada tenaga kerja asing?
Proporsi tenaga kerja asing yang sedemikian besar di negara-negara anggota Dewan Kerja Sama Negara-negara Teluk (Gulf Cooperation Council atau GCC) sering dianggap problematis, sebab beberapa pihak memandang keberadaan mereka sebagai ancaman terhadap budaya lokal dan identitas nasional, membatasi upah, dan menghambat kemajuan keterampilan dan bakat lokal.
Dengan banyaknya perdagangan dan profesi didominasi oleh buruh asing yang relatif murah, penduduk pribumi umumnya tersisa dengan beberapa pekerjaan yang menawarkan upah yang bersaing.
Bidang pekerjaan tersebut biasanya adalah sektor publik yang mana pendapatan dari minyak digunakan untuk mempertahankan upah tinggi dan kondisi kerja yang atraktif.
Namun satu dimensi penting dalam perdebatan kebijakan di kawasan justru rentan diremehkan: jumlah penduduk asing yang melimpah di Negara-negara Teluk bukan hanya pekerja; mereka juga konsumen.
Ketika jumlah penduduk asing di negara tersebut meningkat, pekerja ekspatriat membantu menguatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Faktanya adalah GCC memperoleh keuntungan dari double expat dividend: tidak hanya basis konsumen yang beragam di sisi permintaan (demand), tapi juga angkatan kerja muda dan fleksibel di sisi pasokan (supply).
Akibatnya, setelah harga minyak merosot selama beberapa tahun terakhir, perusahaan dapat melakukan penghentian hubungan kerja terhadap ribuan pekerja tanpa perlu mengkhawatirkan tentang kenaikan angka pengangguran atau menambah beban pada anggaran belanja pemerintah.
Fitur unik dalam pasar tenaga kerja GCC meningkatkan kemampuan kawasan untuk menyesuaikan diri terhadap siklus perekonomian yang fluktuatif.
Karena negara-negara GCC mampu memperluas angkatan kerjanya tanpa menciptakan risiko adanya kenaikan populasi lanjut usia dalam jangka panjang, mereka mendapatkan “support ratio” yang konstan atas jumlah penduduk muda-lanjut usia dan jumlah konsumen-produsen.
Selain itu, investasi publik dan swasta di kawasan – baik itu dalam bidang infrastruktur, pendidikan, kesehatan, dan layanan lainnya – diarahkan menuju basis konsumen saat ini, ditambah dengan populasi warga asing.
Pemasukan tersebut kini menyebabkan populasi GCC tumbuh empat kali lebih cepat dibandingkan negara-negara emerging market dan Amerika Serikat, tujuh kali lebih cepat dibandingkan Cina, dan sepuluh kali lebih cepat dibandingkan negara-negara Eurozone.
Adanya economies of scale juga memungkinkan layanan kesehatan, pendidikan, serta jasa lainnya seperti hiburan dan  rekreasi, lebih terjangkau.
Dan pasar lebih luas memberi insensif lebih besar bagi investor dan pedagang untuk masuk, serta bagi pemerintah untuk menyediakan barang publik terbaru.
Tanpa populasi warga asing yang tinggal di daerah-daerah terpencil atau pedesaan, sedikit dorongan untuk berinvestasi pada jalan raya, sekolah, dan rumah sakit – apalagi taman, perpustakaan, dan bioskop.
Negara-negara GCC telah menjalankan investasi tersebut selama empat atau lima dekade terakhir dan proyek konstruksi yang tengah berlangsung di GCC diperkirakan mencapai triliunan dolar AS.
Di bidang pendidikan, angka penerimaan siswa di sekolah dari tingkat taman kanak-kanak hingga sekolah menengah atas di GCC melonjak dari 2,7 juta pada tahun 2003 hingga 10,7 juta pada tahun 2012, naik sekitar 16,5%.
Investasi di sektor ini berjumlah sekitar 150 miliar dolar AS.
Di sektor layanan kesehatan, jumlah pengeluaran di kawasan diperkirakan meningkat hingga 133 miliar dolar AS per tahun pada tahun 2018.
Populasi penduduk asing juga menghasilkan human-capital dividend bagi penduduk lokal, ketika ekspatriat yang berbakat memperkenalkan pengetahuan dan inovasi di sektor-sektor yang dikehendaki oleh pemerintah di GCC untuk tumbuh.
Riset dari MIT menyimpulkan bahwa kenaikan jumlah penduduk merupakan pendorong utama dalam kemajuan teknologi.
Dan studi di Jepang menunjukkan bahwa kepadatan penduduk lebih tinggi menciptakan insentif lebih kuat bagi individu untuk menjadi wirausaha; kenaikan 10% dari segi kepadatan penduduk meningkatkan porsi warga yang ingin menjadi wirausaha sebanyak 1%.
Expat Dividend di GCC bisa meningkat lebih tinggi – namun hanya jika pemerintah negara-negara di kawasan mampu merancang mekanisme yang dibutuhkan.
Mekanisme tersebut harus dirancang untuk mengoptimalkan manfaat yang bisa dihasilkan warga asing.
Visa jenis work-and-retire atau invest-and-retire contohnya bisa mendorong ekspat untuk menyimpan dan mengumpulkan dana pensiun – sehingga mereka bisa berkontribusi lebih besar ke dalam pertumbuhan ekonomi yang cepat di kawasan.
Gunboat  Democracy?
In one sense, Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction were also weapons of mass distraction.
Without doubt, President George W. Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair believed that Saddam Hussein either had, or had the wherewithal to produce, such weapons when they decided for pre-emptive war.
In the case of Iraq, there was particular fear of chemical and biological weapons.
But WMD were not the only motive for war.
Both leaders were outraged about a murderous dictator and hoped that toppling him would open the door for democracy in Iraq.
This (they hoped) would automatically bring about a degree of stability that would help resolve other conflicts in the region, and also guarantee the uninterrupted flow of oil.
Mixed motives are not necessarily bad motives.
In fact, most human motives are mixed.
The real question is whether democracy could really have done the trick, and then, whether missiles and tanks are the right method to bring democracy to a country that has suffered dictatorial rule for a long period of time.
Historical precedents played a part in the Iraq decision, not least because President Bush’s national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, cited them often.
One example is Nazi Germany.
To be sure, the Allies did not enter that war to bring democracy to Germany. In any case, Germany started the war.
The Allies defended those to whom they were bound by treaty, and then the integrity of their own countries.
Perhaps the entry of the United States into the (European) war had something to do with the post-war order. But there were actually two views about that order.
One was that Germany should be flattened and reduced to a pre-industrial society from which no effective aggression could ever emerge again.
The other was that Germany should be helped on the way to democracy.
As it happened, the protagonists of the first view were sidelined and the proponents of democratization prevailed.
Indeed, the US was effective in using its “soft power” to build democracy in post-war Germany, though Britain was better.
Democratic manners came more naturally to the British occupation forces.
The second example, the end of the Cold War in 1989, was also a success story.
Of course, communism’s collapse was not the result of a pre-emptive strike by the West (though the arms race helped drive the system to implosion).
After 1989, however, Western assistance, not least by the US and Britain, eased the transition to democracy, the rule of law, and market economies in most post-communist countries.
So why does this not seem to work in Iraq?
Evidently, differences of culture and circumstances abound.
Even so, why has so little come of the intention of the Iraq war’s leaders to give democracy a chance in that country?
One reason is that bringing democracy with missiles and tanks is almost a contradiction in terms.
Democracy is by definition a peaceful method of settling conflicts.
Of course, the bombing of Dresden in 1945 was not exactly peaceful.
One must doubt whether it contributed anything to making democracy more acceptable after WWII.
Still, when the fighting was over, the bombing stopped for good, and out of the tanks came people who were intent on creating democratic conditions and capable of doing so.
There is much talk these days about “hard” and “soft power,” about America having one and Europe the other.
In fact, the two belong together.
Soft power without the backing of hard power changes little: witness Iran.
On the other hand, hard power without soft power means only destruction.
It is the greatest single weakness of the US forces that in 2004 – contrary to 1945 – they do not have the capacity to stop the bombing, get out of their tanks, and encourage indigenous democratic development from the bottom up.
Where such capacity exists, there would also be recognition of the fact that democracy does not mean the same institutions in all cultural contexts.
If there are elections in Iraq in January – and this is a very big “if” – they may not resolve much.
Involving the people and providing for peaceful conflict resolution may require institutions peculiar to the region and its history.
It is a great shame that so many Europeans have steered clear of Iraq with a mixture of self-righteousness and anti-American Schadenfreude .
Greater European input might have balanced the “hard power” of the US military machine with the “soft power” of Europe’s experience of diversity and of dealing with post-war situations.
In fact, Europe’s failure is not just a shame, but a historic calamity.
Missiles and tanks alone cannot bring democracy, but coupled with the civil power of sensitive help for the defeated, democracy can be adapted to Iraq and the rest of the Middle East.
Gross Domestic Wellbeing
LONDON – During a 2008 discussion of the global financial crisis at the London School of Economics, Queen Elizabeth II famously floored a room full of financial heavyweights by asking, “Why did no one see it coming?”
That question has been haunting economists ever since, as the recognition has slowly taken hold that, in the supposed “golden age” preceding the crisis, they were blind not only to the potential consequences of failure – but also to the true cost of “success.”
That period was, in many people’s view, tarnished by greed, with rapid GDP growth accompanied by increasing inequality of income and wellbeing.
Leaders in Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and the United States seem to understand this, as they call for a new, more comprehensive policy target to replace national output.
And such a target can be established.
Indeed, a group of economists (including me) concluded in a report commissioned by the Legatum Institute that, despite its apparent subjectivity, “wellbeing” – or life satisfaction – can be measured robustly, compared internationally, and used to set policies and judge their success.
The task for governments is to commit to putting this focus on wellbeing into practice.
A few key insights should inform that process.
First, governments would be better served by focusing on stability, even if it means sacrificing some output.
As Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart have shown, financial crises are costly because recoveries from them are slow. 
But wellbeing research yields a sharper insight: even if we could bounce back from a crash, the cost would be high.
Boom-and-bust destroy wellbeing, which is diminished far more by a fall in GDP than it is enhanced by an equal and opposite GDP increase.
Second, wellbeing – unlike GDP – is boosted more by increases in income among the poorer segments of the population than by increases among the wealthy.
That is why the richer European economies tend to have large automatic stabilizers built into their public finances.
However, the absence of redistributive mechanisms across countries within the eurozone clearly exacerbated the tensions during the recent crisis.
Third, the implementation of a wellbeing metric to guide policies would have the most rapid – and radical – effect at the national level.
As a measure of policy success, GDP is particularly poorly suited to countries with large public sectors.
The crude output measures that are used, such as the number of medical procedures carried out or the number of fires extinguished, miss a crucial point: while responding to the need for such services is a good thing, reducing the need for them would be better.
And more efficient health services might spend less on hospitals and doctors and more on encouraging healthy lifestyles.
Societies would be better served by a policy focus on factors that have been shown to be critical to life satisfaction: relationships, community, security, and physical and mental health.
For example, while mental health is a key determinant of how people feel about their lives, it remains a low priority in most countries.
In the US, there were more suicides than road deaths last year, and there are three times more suicides than road deaths in Germany and the UK.
In the UK, the vast majority of people diagnosed with mental illness go untreated, at a huge cost not only in wellbeing, but also in disability benefits and lost earning power.
Targeted policies aimed at raising awareness of mental-health issues and improving access to treatment would help to kick-start a recovery in wellbeing.
Of course, specific priorities vary by country.
For example, in aging societies, loneliness and long-term health become particularly important.
The fourth key insight is that indicators of wellbeing interact.
Volunteering does not only enhance the lives of those who are served; it also boosts the life satisfaction of the volunteers.
Likewise, given that unemployment diminishes both wellbeing and national income, effective back-to-work policies score two goals, as do policies aimed at augmenting citizens’ life skills through improved parenting and education.
This has positive implications for funding wellbeing-enhancing programs.
After all, the goal is not to inflate budgets, but to reallocate resources in ways that will ultimately boost citizens’ satisfaction and prosperity.
Finally, reliable data will be critical to guiding efforts and evaluating progress.
Fortunately, most developed countries – and an increasing number of developing countries – recognize the importance of collecting data on wellbeing.
Add to that the parameters for measurement set by the OECD, and international comparisons of wellbeing become possible.
The world is ready for a new, comprehensive metric for national and global progress and prosperity, one that tells us whether people really are better off – and how to ensure that they are.
Hacking for Humanity
CAMBRIDGE – “Life,” Oscar Wilde famously said, “imitates Art far more than Art imitates Life.”
In the case of Sony Pictures’ movie The Interview, the world found itself confronted with a further iteration: life imitating art imitating life.
The movie’s release sparked international intrigue, drama, and shadowy geopolitical power struggles.
It even prompted a grave US Presidential address – all for a simple case of hacking.
Hacking into information systems is nothing new; it goes hand in hand with the emergence of telecommunications.
One of the first attacks struck Guglielmo Marconi’s demonstration of radio transmission in 1903, when he communicated from Cornwall to London, 300 miles away.
Nevil Maskelyne, a music-hall magician and would-be wireless tycoon, who had been frustrated by the Italian inventor’s patents, managed to take control of the system and broadcast obscene messages to the Royal Institution’s scandalized audience.
Though hacking is as old as wireless itself, much has changed since Marconi’s time.
Information networks now blanket our planet, collecting and transferring immense amounts of data in real time.
They enable many familiar activities: instantaneous communications, social media, financial transactions, and logistics management.
Most important, information is no longer sequestered in a virtual realm, but permeates the environment in which we live.
The physical, biological, and digital worlds have begun to converge – giving rise to what scientists refer to as “cyber-physical systems.”
Automobiles, for example, have evolved from straightforward mechanical systems into veritable computers on wheels.
The same thing is happening to other consumer goods: We now have connected washing machines and learning thermostats, not to mention Bluetooth toothbrushes and computerized infant scales.
Indeed, cyber-physical systems range from the macro level (think urban transport, like Uber) to the micro (say, the beating of a human heart).
Our very bodies, strapped with connected wearables, are today imbued with more computing power than all of NASA at the time of the Apollo missions.
All of this promises to revolutionize many aspects of human life – mobility, energy management, health care, and much more – and may point toward a greener and more efficient future.
But cyber-physical systems also heighten our vulnerabilities to malicious hacking, an issue that is being discussed at the World Economic Forum in Davos.
Far from being isolated in cyberspace, attacks can now have devastating consequences in the physical world.
It is an annoyance when a software virus crashes our computers; but what if the virus crashes our cars?
Malicious hackers are difficult to combat with traditional government and industry tools – the Sony Pictures case being a telling example.
Hacking can be carried out anywhere and everywhere, potentially involving multiple networks in obscure locations.
It defies conventional retaliation and protection strategies.
As then-US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta warned in 2012, given its current systems, the United States is vulnerable to a “cyber Pearl Harbor” that could derail trains, poison water supplies, and cripple power grids.
So, how can such a scenario be prevented?
One option, surprisingly, could be to promote widespread adoption of hacking itself.
Familiarity with hackers’ tools and methods provides a powerful advantage in diagnosing the strength of existing systems, and even in designing tighter security from the bottom up – a practice known as “white hat” hacking.
Ethical infiltration enables a security team to render digital networks more resistant to attack by identifying the flaws.
This may become routine practice – a kind of cyber fire drill – for governments and businesses, even as academic and industry research focuses in the coming years on the development of further technical safeguards.
In general, today’s defenses take the form of autonomous, constantly vigilant digital “supervisors” – computers and code that control other computers and code.
Similar to traditional military command-and-control protocols, they gain power in numbers and can quickly react to a broad array of attacks.
Such a digital ecosystem strengthens checks and balances, reducing the possibility of failure and mitigating the effects of an incursion.
In such a future scenario, a Hollywood blockbuster might be about networks of computers fighting each other, while humans stand by.
It would portray the broader idea of “singularity,” a hypothetical turning point when the artificial surpasses the human.
Fortunately, in this case, life is still far from imitating art.
Hail to the Technocrats
COPENHAGEN – Is the European Union’s supposed “democratic deficit” now spreading to individual European countries in the wake of the sovereign-debt crisis?
The rise of unelected technocrats to political power in Greece and Italy suggests, at least superficially, that the old taboo against technocratic governments pursuing an EU-dictated agenda has been shattered.
Consider Italy. Most Italians breathed a collective sigh of relief that three-time Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is being replaced by a technocrat par excellence, former European Commissioner Mario Monti, a respected economist.
Greece, too, is turning over the reigns of government to an unelected, and supposedly apolitical, technocrat, Lucas Papademos, a former vice president of the European Central Bank.
Of course, there are many things wrong with the EU nowadays, but a widening of its so-called “democratic deficit” is not one of them.
Indeed, that perceived deficit is something of a politically convenient canard.
Scholars such as Princeton University’s Andrew Moravcsik have long argued that the EU’s legitimacy comes not from the ballot box, but from its ability to provide concrete benefits to citizens.
What the EU achieves through integrating markets – or even eliminating passport controls – underscores the benefits of its “delegated democracy.”
Indeed, it is precisely the Eurocrats’ detachment from everyday politics that has enabled the EU to deliver.
Contrary to the ranting of Euroskeptic politicians in Britain and, increasingly, in eurozone member countries, the growing disenchantment of voters with politics reflects the distance that has grown between promises and results, not the distance between EU officials and member states’ citizens.
According to an alarming poll published recently by the leading Italian newspaper La Repubblica, more than 22% of Italians find no great differences between an authoritarian and a democratic system of government.
Another 10% believe that an authoritarian regime is better and more effective than a democratic political system.
This disturbing decline of faith in democracy, which is not confined to Italy, brings us back to the powerful rationale underlying Europeans’ growing reliance on technocratic governance: security.
From the end of World War II to the collapse of the Soviet Union, what brought Europeans closer together was not the dream of a Europe-wide, democratic polity, but, above all, their desire to be safe and secure.
Throughout the post-war years, the narrative of European integration almost always focused on the quest for political, social, and economic security.
With violent demonstrations in the streets of Athens, Madrid, and Rome, it is not hard to understand why some people may once again choose to give priority to their security, particularly their economic security.
Europe’s technocrats worked in the service of security ahead of the EU’s enlargement in 2004 to the former communist states of Central Europe.
The EU’s bureaucracy played a key part in helping those countries to navigate the complex transition from socialist autocracy to capitalist democracy.
At the time, few people acknowledged this, because Eurocrats rarely make headlines.
But their success in applying technical standards to countries seeking EU membership earned them huge legitimacy.
The unwritten rule in Europe seems to be that, the more depoliticized the process, the more legitimacy technocrats can earn.
Conversely, whenever politics gets in the way of a decision, bureaucrats lose credibility.
One objection to delegating political authority to technocrats is that such appointments amount to a humiliating constraint on sovereignty.
In normal times, that is unacceptable to most citizens. But in times of crisis, the voice of the neutral technocrat gains greater legitimacy.
Monti, for example, was among the first to sound the alarm about Italy’s dire finances.
But, attesting to the technocrat’s neutrality, back in August he also warned about the implications of demands by non-elected international institutions (in this case, the European Central Bank) for particular policies in exchange for support of Italian bonds in international markets.
Monti called this podestà forestiero, something of a foreign overlordship based in Brussels, Washington, and Frankfurt, as well as Berlin and Paris.
The EU is a voluntary pooling of national sovereignty, but the demands now being made of Italy (and Greece) are the Diktat of other sovereign nations.
A national-unity government run by a technocrat in place of an administration run by elected politicians does not qualitatively change the fact that outsiders are demanding reforms.
But voters in a time of crisis may be wiser than most politicians: for the past two decades, Italy’s most popular statesman has consistently been Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, a former central banker called in to run an emergency interim government in the mid-1990’s.
Of course, a technocratic government is an anomaly to the extent that it constitutes a damning verdict on the performance of a country’s entire political class.
But voters in the battered lands of the eurozone seem to have reached their own damning conclusions about their elected leaders months ago.
Lao Tzu, the founder of Taoism, wrote that “a leader is best when people barely know he exists.”
With Europe’s crisis-stricken governments increasingly turning to unelected technocrats, one can almost see citizens nodding in agreement.
Hair of the Top Dog
NEW YORK – Much has been written about Donald Trump’s peculiar hairstyle, the kind of puffy, dyed comb-over one would associate with a downmarket nightclub manager rather than a presidential candidate.
Is there really any more to be said?
Actually, the question of hair in politics might not be as trivial as it seems.
It is remarkable how many politicians, especially on the populist right, have sported heterodox hairdos.
Silvio Berlusconi, Italy’s former prime minister, used black pencil to fill in the patches not covered by his two hair transplants.
The Dutch demagogue Geert Wilders dyes his Mozartian bouffant platinum blond.
Boris Johnson, the Brexit rabble-rouser, now UK foreign secretary, takes care to keep his straw-colored thatch in a permanent state of studied untidiness.
All have scored highly with voters filled with anger and resentment at polished urban elites.
Then there was the father of modern European populism, the late Dutch politician Pim Fortuyn, who had no hair at all.
But his shiny, clean-shaven pate stood out as much among the neat gray coiffures of mainstream politicians as Johnson’s blond mop or Trump’s gilded comb-over (all these men, except Berlusconi, are blonds, by the way, or fake blonds; dark hair doesn’t seem to work so well with the populist mob).
Standing out is of course the point.
The strange hair, or shaven head, makes the popular leader instantly recognizable.
This type of branding is common among dictators.
Hitler’s visual image could be reduced to a greasy cowlick and a toothbrush moustache.
The oddest-looking of all contemporary dictators must be North Korea’s Kim Jong-un, whose clean-shaven back and sides are cultivated as a deliberate imitation of his grandfather’s 1930s proletarian hairstyle.
His father, Kim Jong-il, tried – albeit with little success – to emulate Elvis Presley’s pompadour.
But self-parody sometimes works in democracies too.
Winston Churchill, who in many ways is Johnson’s model, always made sure to carry a big cigar, even when he had no intention of smoking it.
There was not much he could do about his sparse hair, but he certainly dressed differently than anyone else.
No other British politician, even during the war, wore the kind of zipped-up boilersuit Churchill adopted.
Studied nonchalance, or cultivated eccentricity, was a sign of the typical aristocrat who felt no need to conform to the boring standards of middle-class correctness.
Churchill understood something that many mainstream politicians miss.
The way to the masses’ hearts is not to pretend that you are just like them.
On the contrary, if you are from the upper class, you lay it on thick, you turn yourself into a caricature of the higher born, like the old-fashioned aristocrat who despises the timid bourgeois, but gets on fine with his gamekeeper.
Johnson is not an aristocrat, but he went to Eton and can easily pose as one, a skill he uses to great effect.
The US does not have a formal aristocracy.
Status is more a question of money.
One of the secrets of Trump's popularity is that he flaunts his supposed great wealth.
He even exaggerates it, if necessary.
The absurd golden chairs in his pastiche Louis XIV homes are a coarse imitation of aristocratic style.
Fortuyn, on a more modest Dutch scale, and Berlusconi, on a more grandiose Italian stage, had similar tastes.
People for whom this is the stuff of dreams admired them for it.
Affirming the dreams of people who have little is the key to successful populism.
The main thing is that these politicians are not like the dull and moderate mainstream.
Even insiders have to pose as outsiders, who can stand with the common man against the political establishment.
Weirdness – peculiar upper-class mannerisms, ostentatious living, outrageous jokes, deliberate crassness, and mad hairstyles – is an asset.
I am not sure that people, who rightly see Trump as a great danger to the US and the world, sufficiently appreciate this.
Much has been made of the reasonable and moderate tone of the Democratic National Convention, compared to the “dark,” snarling bombast of the Republicans’ event.
President Barack Obama, Vice President Joe Biden, and Hillary Clinton herself were paragons of dignity, compared to Trump’s Mussolini-like mannerisms and verbal aggression.
Clinton supporters, at the convention and elsewhere, tend to attack Trump with ridicule, the method once used by Voltaire against the dogmas of the Catholic Church.
Ridicule can be an effective weapon.
In the 1920s, journalists like H.L. Mencken made Christian fundamentalists in the US look so foolish that they dropped out of politics for several generations.
Trump’s mad and offensive braggadocio, his vulgar tastes, and his extraordinary looks are all eminently ripe for satire.
Comedians like Jon Stewart have had merciless fun at his expense.
But satire and ridicule will not work to persuade people who love Trump precisely because of his weirdness.
It sets him apart from the establishment they despise.
Charisma does not call for restraint in words, appearance, or manner.
The weirder he gets, the more his supporters like him.
And the more that clever comedians in New York mock him, the more his fans will rally to his side.
This is the great perversity in our age of angry populism.
Reasonable arguments and political optimism can now be turned into negative qualities, the typical marks of a complacent elite, oblivious to the concerns of people who feel that the joke has been on them.
Reasonable argument did not work to convince 51.9% of British voters to remain part of the EU.
It may not work to keep an ignorant and dangerous buffoon – silly hairstyle and all – from becoming President of the US.
Haiti and the Limits of Generosity
MELBOURNE – All over the world, people have responded generously to the devastating earthquake that struck Haiti.
In just three days, more than a million Americans had donated $10 with the aid of text messages from their cellphones.
People with very little themselves, like Maria Pacheco, an unemployed single mother from Chicago, donated food and clothes.
Others did whatever they could – from pedicures to washing cars – to raise money.
On current indications, the amount Americans will give to relief efforts in Haiti could surpass the $1.9 billion they gave to assist victims of the 2004 Asian tsunami, which until now has stood as a record for donations to a disaster outside the United States.
Given that the US is undergoing economic hard times, the size of the response has surprised many.
Haiti ’s proximity, plus the fact that close to a million Haitians live in the US, goes some way towards explaining why Americans have responded so generously.
But the response has been worldwide.
In Melbourne for the Australian Open, Roger Federer, Serena Williams, and other stars held an exhibition match that led to donations of $600,000.
In Rwanda, a group of community health workers making less than $200 a month raised $7,000 for Haiti.
All of this raises many questions about how we respond – and how we should respond – to such tragedies.
The earthquake killed up to 200,000 people. Terrible as that is, it is fewer than the number of children who, according to the United Nations Children’s Fund, UNICEF, die every 10 days from avoidable, poverty-related causes.
Moreover, as Elie Hassenfeld has argued on GiveWell.net, there are good grounds for thinking that disaster relief is less cost-effective than aid aimed at saving the lives of those who are risk from extreme poverty.
Why do people give generously to earthquake victims, but not to prevent the much larger number of deaths brought about by extreme poverty, insufficient food, unsafe water, lack of sanitation, and the absence of even the most basic health care?
Media saturation obviously makes a critical difference.
Scenes from Hurricane Katrina, the Asian tsunami, and now the Haitian earthquake were shown over and over again on all television news broadcasts.
An earthquake in a remote part of Pakistan that killed 80,000 people received relatively little television coverage, and a much less generous response.
The daily deaths of children in poor countries from diarrhea, measles, and malaria are part of the background of the world we live in, and so are not news at all.
Suppose that a million children all in one place seemed likely to be swept away and drowned by approaching floodwaters. The media coverage would be enormous.
Now imagine the jubilation if they were saved!
And imagine the acclaim for the heroes who had saved so many children.
Yet when UNICEF announced, in September of last year, that the number of children dying each year from poverty-related causes had dropped by one million, as compared to two years earlier, the story got very little media attention.
The people who contributed to this drop by delivering effective basic health care, building a supply of safe water, or immunizing children against measles remain largely unknown.
Perhaps people respond more generously to the victims of natural disasters than they do to those in extreme poverty because, after a natural disaster, we tend not to blame the victims.
We seem to accept that to be struck by an earthquake, a tidal wave, or a hurricane is just bad luck (unless, as the American evangelist Pat Robertson suggested after the Haitian earthquake, your ancestors made a pact with the devil in order to free themselves from colonial rule).
Still, many people profess to believe that poverty is the result of not working hard enough, or of having too many children.
But the circumstances that produce extreme poverty are not, except in rare cases, under the control of such poor people.
They may be, to some extent, under the control of governments, and undoubtedly bad government is a major contributor to poverty. But then, bad government can also contribute to the toll exacted by a natural disaster.
Two years ago, a team of geophysicists led by Eric Calais of Purdue University predicted that the fault that produced the recent Haitian earthquake was at high risk of doing exactly what it did.
They urged the Haitian government to take steps to strengthen critical buildings, including hospitals and schools.
Failure to do so contributed to the toll.
What should we do?
Brian Tucker, founder of the non-profit organization Geohazards International, urges that 10% of the money raised by relief efforts should be set aside for mitigating damage from future earthquakes: training builders, improving engineering, and making the public more aware of the risks and how to reduce them.
He claims that every dollar invested in preparing for natural disasters saves ten dollars in future damage.
Tucker’s proposal makes good sense, but it is difficult – and arguably unethical – for charities that raised money to help Haitians now to divert some of those funds to programs to mitigate the damage caused by future earthquakes.
It would be excellent if the general public responded to an appeal for funds for mitigating future damage. But the prospects of that happening are slim, because such an appeal would lack the emotional pull of the desire to help immediate victims.
Instead, governments that are pledging aid to Haiti now should ensure that part of their assistance goes to reducing the chances that such a disaster will affect Haiti so dramatically again.
Haiti’s State-Building Challenge
SANTO DOMINGO -- The $5 billion in short-term aid for Haiti, and the $10 billion pledged for its long-term reconstruction at the International Donors’ Conference on March 31, is a vote of confidence in the potential of collective international action.
The question, however, is not only one of money; it is about whether Haiti’s agony is to be addressed as just one more humanitarian crisis or as a structural problem of state building – a long-term quest for institutional stability and sustainable development.
Conspicuously, Haiti’s Dominican neighbors were the first to gauge the magnitude of the problem and the global nature of the required solution.
The Dominican government’s decision to hold a summit on Haiti’s future has the objective of securing the international community’s ongoing commitment to Haiti, beyond the generous response to the catastrophe produced by the earthquake in January.
In addition to harmonizing the flow of donations and an agreed-upon list of development projects, Dominican President Leonel Fernandez seeks to make clear that the task is a long-term enterprise: re-founding the failing Haitian state.
A believer in the essentially political nature of Haiti’s tragedy, Fernandez rightly aspires to turn the current crisis into the lever for state-building, Haiti’s extraction from political isolation, and its maturation into an active member of the regional and world community.
It is to be hoped that the current global economic crisis does not undermine the reliability of the world’s commitments to Haiti.
After all, even in times of prosperity, the international community has been notorious for making grand pledges, only to renege when it comes to following through with the money.
Keeping alive the international community’s commitment – that is, seeking an international solution to Haiti’s tragedy – is a vital necessity for the Dominicans.
Their initiative is essentially driven by the fear that once Haiti’s immediate humanitarian crisis is addressed, the country’s underlying problems could be left at the door of the “prosperous” neighbors across the border.
A case like the island of La Española (Hispaniola), where a simple border can reflect such vast differences, is not very common.
On one side of the border is the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, a place where 56% of the population survives on less than one dollar a day.  On the other side of the island stands a stable democracy with a promising outlook for a reasonably prosperous future.
For Dominicans, helping Haiti develop and become politically stable is the best way to safeguard their own stability.
That was also the logic of the Barcelona Process in the late 1990’s, whereby the European Union worked to promote the development and democratization of the countries of the Maghreb as the best way to stem the uncontrolled tide of illegal immigration into Europe.
But, unlike the EU, the Dominican Republic is not an economic giant that can assume exclusive responsibility for extracting Haiti from its Biblical destitution.
The Dominicans are right to seek at least a more solid regional commitment.
The Haitian refugee crisis in the early 1990’s tragically showed that no country in the region – including the United States, which either repatriated most illegal immigrants or confined them to the hardship of open camps in Guantánamo Bay – was ready to absorb the Haitians who fled their politically torn country.
So long as the Haitian state remains fragile and the Haitian economy continues to decompose, the network of mafias living on illegal immigration into the Dominican Republic will continue to flourish.
About one million Haitians now live in the Dominican Republic, but only about 10% of the Haitian laborers in the country are there legally, a condition that invites their exploitation by greedy employers.
Cheap Haitian labor has become a substitute for less-skilled Dominican labor in a way that increases income inequalities, and puts a special burden on the country’s public finances and services, owing to lower tax revenues.
Though the Dominican Republic suffers from its own social and economic maladies – it is itself an exporter of emigrants to the US, Puerto Rico, and Spain – it certainly has a role to play in Haiti’s reconstruction.
But it must supersede the exclusivist attitudes held by many members of its political class, particularly given that much of its economic growth in recent years reflects the contribution of Haitian immigration.
The two countries are condemned by history and geography to develop civilized neighborly relations.
Haitians should not be encouraged to seek a solution to their tragic plight simply by crossing the border, but Dominicans should not demonize Haiti as the source of all their problems.
Both sides need to engage in the vital enterprise of turning the border that separates them into a benign space of transnational development and stability.
Precisely because developing a mutually beneficial border regime is, as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton rightly remarked in her 2009 visit to the island, a task that affects the two countries’ stability and well-being, it also needs to be part of the current international reconstruction effort.
But Clinton should be reminded that every free industrial zone that was built along the Israeli-Palestinian border eventually fell victim to political instability.
Haiti’s transition to effective and sustainable statehood is therefore also vital for establishing a prosperous border regime.
Hamas and Fatah at the Crossroads
Palestinian politics is approaching the point of no return.
The power struggle between the Islamist Hamas and Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas and his secular/nationalist Fatah movement is intensifying, with tensions breaking into outright combat.
Since Hamas was founded in the early 1980’s, it has refused to come under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Hamas’s victory in the parliamentary election earlier this year – a democratic watershed – demonstrated that it had come of age politically.
For the first time in Palestinian history, a religious party is dominant.
But Fatah has not accepted defeat, while Hamas is convinced that elements within Fatah agree with Israeli and American plans to topple the Hamas government.
Abbas remains the Palestinian president, and the Basic Law makes him commander of all Palestinian security forces.
However, while most official security forces remain loyal to him, over the past year Hamas has created an alternative security structure, built around a 4000-member “Operational Force.”
Moreover, Hamas has announced plans to recruit 1,500 additional security personnel for the West Bank, Fatah’s stronghold.
In recent weeks, the two sides have clashed frequently across the Gaza strip, heightening tensions further.
The confrontations have come at a time when Abbas has been trying to persuade Hamas to moderate its anti-Israel stance and ally with Fatah in a national unity government.
Abbas believes that Hamas’s acceptance of negotiations with Israel is the only way to break the international sanctions that are devastating Palestinian society.
Despite this, both sides are building up their forces.
Intelligence reports suggest that Hamas is smuggling weapons and explosives from the Sinai into the Gaza Strip at an accelerated pace.
The United States, Israel, and some Arab governments plan to arm and train forces loyal to Abbas, especially his presidential guard.
They want to prepare Abbas’s forces in Gaza for a confrontation with Hamas, which they believe is inevitable.
Israel is considering Abbas’s request to transfer arms and ammunitions from Egypt and Jordan in hopes of bolstering his loyalist forces.
There is also an American proposal to allow the Badr Brigade – a wing of the Palestine Liberation Army that is currently stationed in Jordan – to relocate to the Palestinian territories as Abbas’s rapid reaction force in Gaza in anticipation of a feared civil war.
The Badr Brigade is composed of several thousand Palestinians, mostly long-time PLO activists.
As the maneuvering continues, Israel and Egypt find themselves working together to bolster Abbas and Fatah.
With the Gaza Strip in its backyard, Egypt has already mediated several times between Hamas and Fatah, and has been trying, so far unsuccessfully, to arrange a swap of prisoners with Israel following Hamas’s abduction of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit.
But Egypt’s government is angry with Hamas for opposing the formation of a coalition government.
Indeed, the seizure of Shalit deepened the rift between Hamas and Fatah, which believes that the abduction was staged in order to sabotage discussions about a national unity government.
More generally, Egypt is concerned that Gaza is becoming politically radicalized and may be transformed into “Hamastan.”
This, Egypt fears, would give a boost to its own Islamic radicals, against which the government has long fought.
Egypt also worries about a possible Hamas-Fatah civil war.
Although Hamas has ruled this out, it has shown no hesitation to use heavy force against its opponents.
Likewise, Foreign Minister Mahmoud Al-Zahar of the Hamas-led government says that any dissolution of the government or call for early elections by Abbas would be a recipe for civil war.
Fear of major fighting has already sent many Palestinians into Egypt, leading to the deployment of Egyptian troops on the border to control any mass exodus.
Israel, meanwhile, is worried that Hamas has strengthened its military grip on Gaza, in terms of both fortifications and networks capable of launching Qassam rockets into neighboring Israeli towns.
Israel might not wait for Abbas and his forces, but rather launch a full-scale intervention to weaken Hamas.
Can Hamas and Fatah put aside their differences and form a unity government?
Abbas says that if a coalition government is not agreed upon within the next two weeks, he will dissolve the current government, a move Hamas will not tolerate.
But forming a coalition government is unlikely to ease the tension between Hamas and Fatah.
New confrontations would likely emerge as soon as a new government was formed.
Ironically, the most likely way to avoid large-scale confrontation between Fatah and Hamas is through an Israeli incursion into Gaza.
Facing the Israelis together is the only way that the rival Palestinian groups will postpone their own bloody showdown.
Hamas Comes in from the Cold
GAZA CITY – In the wake of revolutionary change in the Middle East, the forces of political Islam have scored one electoral victory after another.
As the West grapples with the rapid rise of moderate Islamists in Tunisia, Morocco, and Egypt, the issue of Hamas’s role in the Palestinian territories looms large.
The signing of a new unity deal between Hamas and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s secular Fatah party earlier this month has heightened an unprecedented struggle within Hamas over its future course as an Islamist movement.
How the West responds could very well influence the outcome.
As events in recent weeks have proven, Hamas’s days of near-total isolation in the Middle East are over.
While most Western governments continue to consider it a terrorist organization, in Arab capitals, political embargos have given way to engagement.
In December, Ismail Haniyeh, Prime Minister of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority in Gaza, embarked on a tour of the Mediterranean that included stops in Tunis, Cairo, and Istanbul.
In mid-February, he was warmly received in Qatar, Bahrain, and Iran.
This political outreach, however, has not emanated solely from Gaza.
In January, Khaled Mashal, the leader of Hamas’s Damascus-based political bureau, embarked on a diplomatic initiative of his own, and was hosted by King Abdullah of Jordan – the first such visit in more than a decade. In February, Mashal crowned these efforts in Qatar with the signing of the new unity agreement with Fatah, which commits both Palestinian movements to a transitional government under Abbas’s leadership.
Ever since, disagreements within Hamas have been escalating, pitting the movement’s Diaspora leadership against the Hamas-led Gaza administration, which has openly rejected the unity deal.
While personal ambitions certainly play a role in the tensions, what lies at the core is a fundamental conflict over Hamas’s character.
Haniyeh, who represents the conservative wing of Gaza’s Hamas leadership, has sought to cash in on regional changes.
His long-boycotted government was thrown a lifeline by regime change in Egypt and the opening of the border with Gaza.
Notably, Haniyeh’s recent diplomatic tour garnered not only symbolic recognition for Hamas, but also support for his uncompromising stance vis-à-vis Israel.
He missed no opportunity to criticize “futile” peace negotiations, and, in Tehran, he pledged that Hamas’s “resistance” would continue “until all Palestinian land has been liberated.”
What that means needs little clarification.
In a further telling move, Haniyeh also recently suggested merging Hamas with the Islamic Jihad movement, which continues to target Israeli civilians with rockets fired from Gaza.
Mashal, by contrast, has come to represent a force of change.
Last May, he signed an initial reconciliation agreement with Fatah in Cairo, which committed Hamas to a Palestinian unity government, called for a cessation of violence, and accepted the notion of a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders.
Mashal also offered Abbas a one-year mandate for negotiations with Israel, and, unlike Haniyeh, supported recent Israeli-Palestinian “exploratory talks” in Jordan.
One reason for Mashal’s change of heart can be found in the ongoing popular revolt in Syria against President Bashar al-Assad.
The leader of the Sunni Hamas can no longer support his Syrian host, who has cracked down on the Sunni-dominated opposition.
Thus, Mashal has attempted to close ranks with Fatah, and is seeking to move Hamas’s Diaspora headquarters from Damascus – a powerful symbol of his efforts at re-invention.
But Mashal’s refusal to support Assad has not only forced him to re-locate.
It has also unleashed the wrath of Syria’s ally, Iran, which has responded by scaling down its financial support for Hamas – thus denying Mashal a key source of influence within the movement.
Indeed, Mashal’s decision has effectively ended his ties to his two most important allies, thereby not only weakening his position, but also increasing his readiness to embrace political moderation.
Tensions increased dramatically when Mashal signed the unity agreement with Fatah, after stating his intention to resign as head of the political bureau.
While that announcement may have been political blackmail aimed at forcing Gaza into line, it underscored Mashal’s confidence in his popularity, which has since been vindicated by expressions of support from both within and outside of the political bureau for him to remain in charge.
Mashal has more than one option. He may reemerge as the head of a newly established Palestinian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood, or as a leader of a new Islamist political party under the umbrella of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Such a merging of Hamas with the established Palestinian political organizations would signify Hamas’s formal acceptance of a two-state solution, and would mark an important step in transforming the movement.
For the West, using the opportunity to influence Hamas’s future course requires modifying the failed policy of all-encompassing rejection.
As in Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia, Islamist moderates in the Palestinian territories need to be engaged as a legitimate political force.
Leaders such as Mashal, who has expressed a readiness to forsake alliances with Syria and Iran and to accept a two-state solution with Israel, should be bolstered rather than boycotted.
That means supporting the ongoing effort to form an interim Palestinian government of technocrats, as stipulated in the Qatar agreement.
At times, such an approach will be challenging; Hamas will undoubtedly prove to be a difficult counterpart.
But the United States, European governments, and Israel should take this opportunity to engage Hamas’s moderates and test their flexibility.
In the new Middle East, the West’s current approach will only strengthen the hardliners in Gaza and elsewhere.
Hamas, Fatah, and the Palestinian Dilemma
GAZA CITY – With dueling authorities running Gaza and the West Bank, the Palestinian people find themselves in the middle of an experiment.
In Gaza, where Hamas is in charge, the high price of armed resistance to Israel has discredited any attempts to revive the conflict.
In the West Bank, under Fatah rule, negotiations have gone nowhere.
Neither track of Palestinian politics – resistance or negotiation – offers hope of achieving independence.
As a result, Palestinians face their most difficult challenge since 1948. 
Israeli threats of renewing its war on Hamas in the Gaza Strip are taken very seriously.
The scenes of devastation are still vivid in the streets and neighborhoods of Gaza, and Hamas is taking no chances of provoking Israel into a new war.
The fighting cost Hamas two of its top leaders, Saeed Siyam and Nizar Rayan, and significantly weakened its military capabilities.
Only recently have these been rebuilt.
Hamas finds itself in a difficult position, since its policy calls for strong resistance, alongside politics.
Yet this policy has failed.
Hamas has put pressure on all resistance groups in Gaza to refrain from provoking Israel.
In an unprecedented statement, Mahmoud al-Zahar, a top Hamas leader, said any missiles fired at Israel from Gaza would be “betrayal missiles.”
Instead, Hamas has turned its attention to the West Bank, where it has no political authority.
It has called on Palestinians there to launch a new intifada against Israel, even while insisting on calm in the Gaza Strip.
Fatah, which runs the West Bank, wants no part of another Palestinian uprising.
President Mahmoud Abbas has made no secret of his objection to such a strategy.
But, with their government unable to do anything about the expansion of Israeli settlements, including in East Jerusalem, as well as continued conflicts over holy sites in Hebron, Bethlehem, and the Al-Aksa mosque, West Bank Palestinians are extremely frustrated.
Recent street demonstrations could easily turn into an outbreak of ongoing resistance to Israeli rule.
The Palestinian Authority, which runs the West Bank, is afraid that a popular, non-violent intifada might quickly turn violent.
If so, Israel might use it as a pretext to crush the Palestinians and their newly built institutions.
This has happened before, during the last intifada in 2002.
There is another scenario that also terrifies Fatah leaders.
An outbreak of violence could strengthen Hamas and its military wing, Al-Qassam Brigades, in the West Bank.
This, in turn, could produce a repeat of the scenario that brought Hamas to power in Gaza in June 2007, when all Fatah authority in the area collapsed after the Israeli withdrawal.
Yet the peace process has been stalled for more than a year, greatly reducing Fatah’s credibility in the West Bank.
Abbas has repeatedly described peace as a strategic choice for the Palestinians.
But, 17 years since the signing of the Oslo agreement and the launch of bilateral talks between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel, there has been very little movement toward a Palestinian state.
In popular opinion, negotiations have reached a dead end.
Arab diplomats also show few signs of optimism.
At its recent summit in Libya, the Arab League rejected the proximity talks proposed by the United States’ Middle East peace envoy, George Mitchell.
The Arab position is that no proximity talks can be held until Israel freezes its settlement activity in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Palestinian and Arab opinion is waiting for the US, as Israel’s ally, to intervene and press for concessions.
Though the Palestinian economy in the West Bank has improved greatly under Prime Minister Salam Fayyad, this is no substitute for serious peace negotiations.
In August 2009, Fayyad declared his vision of a Palestinian state in two years.
Under his blueprint, which has received strong financial support from the US and the European Union, the political, economic, and security infrastructure of the Palestinian state would be ready by August 2011.
Fayyad has also gained the backing of Fatah and most other Palestinian groups in the West Bank.