This has prompted a modest uptick in expected inflation – the ECB’s favorite measure of price stability – not for the immediate future, but in five years, and then for five years.
In concrete terms, the ECB is measuring its policy’s success today according to the expected inflation rate in 2020-2025.
This figure, calculated from the prices of different types of indexed and non-indexed five- and ten-year bonds, is based on the somewhat heroic assumption that all of the markets for these bonds work efficiently.
This presents a fundamental contradiction.
QE is supposed to work via “portfolio balance effects,” which implies that markets are not fully efficient: purchases of longer-term bonds affect financial conditions by changing the types and quantity of financial assets the public holds.
How can one use market prices as an indicator of inflation far into the future and simultaneously justify QE by claiming that most investors stick to certain asset classes and thus do not follow market signals efficiently?
Another problem with using the five-year, five-year-forward rate of expected inflation to gauge QE’s effectiveness is that the rate is correlated with oil prices.
Indeed, when oil prices fell last year, so did inflation expectations (measured however imperfectly).
And the ECB’s QE announcement coincided with the beginning of the oil-price recovery, which could be expected to increase inflation expectations somewhat.
With such coincidences and contradictions arising in nearly every aspect of the QE debate, it seems that evaluating the policy’s effectiveness is more of an art than a science.
Unfortunately, this leaves plenty of room for distortion and bias.
Most glaring is QE supporters’ tendency to ascribe any decline in interest rates before the policy was announced to market participants’ expectations that QE would be coming.
Yet they do not apply the same reasoning to the decline in inflation expectations that occurred during the same period.
They have followed the same logic since the purchases began, ignoring recent increases in interest rates, while lauding the small rise in inflation expectations as proof of QE’s effectiveness.
In reality, of course, QE – whether the expectation or execution of it – would affect both interest rates, and the inflation expectations that are derived from them.
So, if ECB President Mario Draghi wants to highlight the fact that nominal interest rates are lower today than last August, he must also acknowledge that, given low inflation expectations, real interest rates have moved little.
But such pragmatic thinking has been sorely missing from discussions about QE.
Instead, each side has caricatured the other: supporters emphasize that QE has nowhere led to runaway inflation, while opponents point out that nowhere has QE alone reignited robust growth.
In fact, there has been neither inflation nor growth: central banks can seemingly pour hundreds of billions of dollars, euros, or yen into the market with little discernible effect.
So QE basically consists of an exchange of two low-yielding assets – long-terms bonds and central-bank deposits.
In broad and efficient markets, that exchange does not mean much.
China’s Internet Revolution
BEIJING – It is a story that has played out worldwide.
Internet adoption reaches critical mass, changing how business is conducted and creating billion-dollar markets for digital goods and services – and causing massive “creative destruction.”
It is now China’s turn to experience this phenomenon – only, in China’s case, it is occurring amid broad economic transformation and rapid social change.
The collision of these forces could fundamentally transform the world’s second-largest economy.
With 632 million users, China’s Internet has already produced a dynamic technology sector, thriving social networks, and the world’s largest e-tail (consumer-facing e-commerce) market.
Global investors’ excitement about the IPO of China’s largest online retailer, Alibaba, reflects the scale of the economic value that has already been created.
But most of the action so far has been on the consumer side.
Key sectors, from manufacturing to health care, have not progressed beyond the early stages of the shift online.
Indeed, as of 2012, only about one-quarter of China’s small and medium-size enterprises had started to use the Internet in areas like procurement, sales, and marketing – meaning that the most sweeping changes lie ahead.
As traditional industries increase their usage of the Internet, they streamline their operations, find new methods of collaboration, and expand their reach via e-commerce – all of which accelerate productivity growth.
The McKinsey Global Institute projects that new Web applications could enable as much as 22% of China’s total GDP growth through 2025.
Beyond its effects on GDP and productivity, the Internet can also boost transparency and trust.
E-tailing, for example, began with a cash-on-delivery business model.
But, over time, online-payment platforms gained Chinese consumers’ trust, paving the way for explosive growth in e-tailing.
Other industries are beginning to follow suit.
Online real-estate databases match buyers and sellers faster, while reducing price premiums stemming from information asymmetries.
Such platforms have been created for land auctions and foreclosures, as well as private transactions.
Similarly, China’s nascent used-car market stands to benefit significantly from the Internet revolution, as e-commerce boosts the transparency of vehicle listings and transactions, and new online tools help lenders acquire and analyze credit histories in a more detailed and sophisticated way.
Of course, though the Internet can facilitate competition, forcing companies of all sizes to raise their game, building such a trust-based system is no easy feat.
Much of the Internet’s commercial potential stems from data collection, sharing, and analysis, all of which are fraught with privacy concerns.
Though China’s government established preliminary rules governing online privacy in 2012, many gray areas remain, including basic issues like the types of information companies can share, how that information can be used, and what constitutes consumer consent.
In addition to clarifying the legal framework for data sharing, the government can set an example by using the Internet to render its own data collection and transaction records more uniform and systematic.
Moreover, by making some of its own data sets publicly available, it can kick-start an open-data movement and pave the way for the emergence of related industries.
For Chinese firms, such a movement will have to be accompanied by a fundamental change in mentality.
Instead of focusing on large-scale, one-size-fits-all production, firms must use the data they receive to glean more detailed insights about consumers’ preferences and expectations – and expand their portfolios to include the niche products that consumers crave.
Given that the Internet empowers consumers to compare offerings directly and choose the most economical and attractive option, firms that attempt to adhere to business as usual will quickly be overtaken by their competitors.
Of course, such intense competition will erode firms’ profit margins – a trend that they&nbsp;can offset by integrating Internet technologies into back-office functions and logistics.
Another fundamental shift to be expected from the rise of China’s Internet economy is that the most innovative and flexible – not necessarily the largest or most established – enterprises will be the most successful.
The Internet enables startups to scale up rapidly and at a low cost, unburdened by legacy systems and traditional methods of doing business, while blurring the lines between sectors.
As a result, new players can emerge suddenly to challenge long-established institutions.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in banks’ current scramble to defend their territory from online financial-services providers.
The Internet revolution will also disrupt the labor market, with some jobs being automated away and companies facing a shortage of technologically proficient workers.
A company’s success will depend on its employees’ willingness to acquire new skills, undertake new roles, and adapt to the faster pace and unfamiliar demands of the digital marketplace.
But the onus of adaptation does not rest entirely on workers.
Policymakers and business leaders must ensure that displaced workers have options for retraining, and that the education system is producing enough technology-savvy workers.
The Internet will not only create economic momentum for China in the years ahead; it will help to transform an unsustainable growth model based on fixed investment and cheap labor.
By unleashing the economy’s productivity-growth potential, the Internet can help China attain its goal of developing a growth model that can lift the country to high-income status.
Monetary Mystification
NEW YORK – Central banks on both sides of the Atlantic took extraordinary monetary-policy measures in September: the long awaited “QE3” (the third dose of quantitative easing by the United States Federal Reserve), and the European Central Bank’s announcement that it will purchase unlimited volumes of troubled eurozone members’ government bonds.
Markets responded euphorically, with stock prices in the US, for example, reaching post-recession highs.
Others, especially on the political right, worried that the latest monetary measures would fuel future inflation and encourage unbridled government spending.
In fact, both the critics’ fears and the optimists’ euphoria are unwarranted.
With so much underutilized productive capacity today, and with immediate economic prospects so dismal, the risk of serious inflation is minimal.
Nonetheless, the Fed and ECB actions sent three messages that should have given the markets pause.
First, they were saying that previous actions have not worked; indeed, the major central banks deserve much of the blame for the crisis.
But their ability to undo their mistakes is limited.
Second, the Fed’s announcement that it will keep interest rates at extraordinarily low levels through mid-2015 implied that it does not expect recovery anytime soon.
That should be a warning for Europe, whose economy is now far weaker than America’s.
Finally, the Fed and the ECB were saying that markets will not quickly restore full employment on their own.
A stimulus is needed.
That should serve as a rejoinder to those in Europe and America who are calling for just the opposite – further austerity.
But the stimulus that is needed – on both sides of the Atlantic – is a fiscal stimulus.
Monetary policy has proven ineffective, and more of it is unlikely to return the economy to sustainable growth.
In traditional economic models, increased liquidity results in more lending, mostly to investors and sometimes to consumers, thereby increasing demand and employment.
But consider a case like Spain, where so much money has fled the banking system –&#160;and continues to flee as Europe fiddles over the implementation of a common banking system.
Just adding liquidity, while continuing current austerity policies, will not reignite the Spanish economy.
So, too, in the US, the smaller banks that largely finance small and medium-size enterprises have been all but neglected.
The federal government – under both President George W. Bush and Barack Obama – allocated hundreds of billions of dollars to prop up the mega-banks, while allowing hundreds of these crucially important smaller lenders to fail.
But lending would be inhibited even if the banks were healthier.
After all, small enterprises rely on collateral-based lending, and the value of real estate – the main form of collateral – is still down one-third from its pre-crisis level.
Many who want to refinance their mortgages still cannot, because they are “underwater” (owing more on their mortgages than the underlying property is worth).
In other circumstances, the US would benefit from the exchange-rate weakening that follows from lower interest rates –&#160;a kind of beggar-thy-neighbor competitive devaluation that would come at the expense of America’s trading partners.
But, given lower interest rates in Europe and the global slowdown, the gains are likely to be small even here.
Some worry that the fresh liquidity will lead to worse outcomes – for example, a commodity boom, which would act much like a tax on American and European consumers.
Older people, who were prudent and held their money in government bonds, will see lower returns – further curtailing their consumption.
And low interest rates will encourage firms that do invest to spend on fixed capital like highly automated machines, thereby ensuring that, when recovery comes, it will be relatively jobless.
In short, the benefits are at best small.
In Europe, monetary intervention has greater potential to help –&#160;but with a similar risk of making matters worse.
To allay anxiety about government profligacy, the ECB built conditionality into its bond-purchase program.
But if the conditions operate like austerity measures – imposed without significant accompanying growth measures –&#160;they will be more akin to bloodletting: the patient must risk death before receiving genuine medicine.
Fear of losing economic sovereignty will make governments reluctant to ask for ECB help, and only if they ask will there be any real effect.
There is a further risk for Europe: If the ECB focuses too much on inflation, while the Fed tries to stimulate the US economy, interest-rate differentials will lead to a stronger euro (at least relative to what it otherwise would be), undermining Europe’s competitiveness and growth prospects.
For both Europe and America, the danger now is that politicians and markets believe that monetary policy can revive the economy.
Unfortunately, its main impact at this point is to distract attention from measures that would truly stimulate growth, including an expansionary fiscal policy and financial-sector reforms that boost lending.
The current downturn, already a half-decade long, will not end any time soon.
That, in a nutshell, is what the Fed and the ECB are saying.
The sooner our leaders acknowledge it, the better.
Why is Monetary Policy Underrated?
TOKYO – Last month – just a few days before the European Central Bank announced its intention to initiate quantitative easing (QE) – I attended a seminar in Geneva with international journalists, policymakers, and investors.
The discussions there, much like those in Japan before Prime Minister Shinzo Abe launched his groundbreaking economic-reform strategy in 2012, reflected an inadequate understanding of unconventional monetary policy's transformative potential.
Indeed, at the seminar, European economists and journalists – especially the Germans, and even some of the Britons in the room – adopted a dismissive tone.
“Monetary policy's power is limited, particularly when the interest rate is so low," some said. “We cannot count on accommodative monetary policy to spur a portfolio reshuffling," others added.
These statements were all too familiar – and somewhat surprising, given the progress that Japan's ongoing QE-based strategy has enabled the country to make.
Clearly, many in Europe lack an understanding of the history and significance of so-called “Abenomics"; but such an understanding should inform their monetary-policy debates.
In 2001, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) was struggling to find ways to help the economy escape recession.
Having already reduced the target short-term interest rate to very close to zero, it turned to open market operations – specifically, purchasing long-term government bonds and increasing bank reserves held at the BOJ – in order to increase the money supply and reduce long-term interest rates.
But the BOJ's attempt at QE proved to be too little too late, and no recovery materialized.
Ben Bernanke, then the chairman of Princeton University's economics department, took note of this failing, declaring that the BOJ should pursue a more aggressive monetary policy.
When the US investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed in 2008, triggering a global financial crisis, Bernanke – who had since become US Federal Reserve Chair – took his own advice, instituting a bold QE program to revive the United States' moribund economy.
The United Kingdom, too, pursued robust QE – and, like the US, it is now experiencing relatively strong economic growth (which is why the British participants in Geneva should have known better).
Japan, by contrast, hesitated to expand its money supply substantially, leaving the yen's exchange rate against the US dollar to appreciate to 76 (from less than 100 before the Lehman crisis), and causing GDP growth to decline further.
In 2009, Japan's economy was performing at 8% below potential, even though its financial system was sound.
In short, the Japanese economy suffered far more than the US and UK economies, which were directly affected by the Lehman shock.
A small group of economists, including me, recognized this discrepancy, and argued strenuously that monetary easing was critical to fight deflation and extreme currency appreciation.
But our arguments were consistently dismissed.
Sound familiar?
Abe changed everything.
With monetary policy as the basis of his political agenda, he became Prime Minister (for the second time) in December 2012.
Soon after, QE was off and running.
Almost immediately, the yen depreciated, exports increased, and the stock market soared.
After nearly two decades of recession, the Japanese economy was growing again – and it had Abenomics to thank for it.
Of course, everything did not go entirely smoothly; a 3% consumption-tax hike, which had been put in place by the previous government, interrupted Japan's progress.
And Japan still has a long way to go to achieve robust long-term economic growth, with the next phase of Abenomics – supply-side reforms – requiring the government to overcome resistance from bureaucrats and special interests.
Nonetheless, QE's effectiveness was clear – so clear, in fact, that last October the BOJ announced an additional round of it.
Judging by the overwhelming victory of Abe's Liberal Democratic Party in a snap general election two months later, Japanese voters are satisfied with this approach.
Now it is Europe's turn to benefit from the power of monetary policy.
But, for the ECB's plan to work, its QE must be robust – and that will require broad support.
After all, eurozone monetary policy is the product of joint decision-making within the ECB governing council, where Germany's influence is strong.
Given QE's success in the US, the UK, and Japan, attracting such support should, one might assume, be relatively easy.
Yet my experience in Geneva was not an isolated incident; many policymakers remain convinced that monetary policy is not all that powerful.
At last year's World Knowledge Forum, several leading central bankers – including former BOJ Governor Masaaki Shirakawa, former ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, and former Bank of Korea Governor Kim Choong-soo – also dismissed the potential of unconventional monetary policy.
The belief that monetary policy does not matter is not just “the most dangerous idea in Federal Reserve economic history," as the economists Christina and David Romer have noted; it is exceedingly hazardous to any economy.
Europe faces enough serious risks already; it should not needlessly add to them.
The Shortcomings of Quantitative Easing in Europe
CAMBRIDGE – Why has the US Federal Reserve’s policy of quantitative easing been so much more successful than the version of QE implemented by the European Central Bank?
That intellectual question leads directly to a practical one: Will the ECB ever be able to translate quantitative easing into stronger economic growth and higher inflation?
The Fed introduced quantitative easing – buying large quantities of long-term bonds and promising to keep short-term interest rates low for a prolonged period – after it concluded that the US economy was not responding adequately to traditional monetary policy and to the fiscal stimulus package enacted in 2009.
The Fed’s chairman at the time, Ben Bernanke, reasoned that unconventional monetary policy would drive down long-term rates, inducing investors to shift from high-quality bonds to equities and other risky securities.
This would drive up the value of those assets, increasing household wealth and therefore consumer spending.
The strategy worked well.
Share prices rose 30% in 2013 alone, and house prices increased 13% in the same twelve months.
As a result, the net worth of households increased by $10 trillion that year.
Because Europe lacks the widespread share ownership that exists in the United States, quantitative easing cannot be used to stimulate consumer spending by raising household wealth.
One reason for this is that much of the eurozone countries’ trade is with other eurozone countries that use the same currency.
Moreover, exports to the US don’t benefit much from the decline of the euro-dollar exchange rate.
European exporters generally invoice their exports in dollars and adjust their dollar prices very slowly, a point made clear in an important paper that Gita Gopinath of Harvard presented at the Federal Reserve’s Jackson Hole conference in August 2015.
As a result, total net exports from the eurozone rose less than €3 billion ($3.2 billion) between September 2014 and September 2015 – a negligible amount in an €11 trillion economy.
A further motive of the ECB’s bond purchases has been to increase the cash that eurozone banks have available to lend to businesses and households.
But, as of now, there has been very little increase in such lending.
Finally, the ECB is eager to raise the eurozone inflation rate to its target of just under 2%.
In the US, the QE strategy has increased the “core” inflation rate – which excludes the direct effect of declining prices of energy and food – to 2.1% over the past 12 months.
This has been a by-product of the increase in real demand, achieved by reducing unemployment to a level at which rising wages contribute to faster price growth.
This strategy is unlikely to work in the eurozone, because the unemployment rate is still nearly 12%, about five percentage points higher than it was before the recession began.
The ECB’s quantitative easing policy can probably achieve higher inflation only through the increase in import prices resulting from a decline in the value of the euro.
This very limited process still leaves core inflation in the eurozone below 1%.
ECB President Mario Draghi recently responded to the new evidence of eurozone weakness and super-low inflation by indicating that the Bank is likely to ease monetary conditions further at its next policy-setting meeting in March.
This could mean further reducing already-negative short-term interest rates and expanding and/or extending its bond-purchase program.
Eurozone financial markets reacted in the expected way.
Long-term interest rates fell, equity prices rose, and the euro declined relative to the dollar.
But past experience and the reasons spelled out here suggest that these policies will do very little to increase real activity and price inflation in the eurozone.
To make real progress toward reviving their economies, the individual countries need to depend less on quantitative easing by the ECB and focus squarely on structural reforms and fiscal stimulus.
China’s Inscrutable Contraction
CAMBRIDGE – While virtually every country in the world is trying to boost growth, China’s government is trying to slow it down to a sustainable level.
As China shifts to a more domestic-demand driven, services-oriented economy, a transition to slower trend growth is both inevitable and desirable.
But the challenges are immense, and no one should take a soft landing for granted.
As China’s economy grows relative to the economies of its trading partners, the efficacy of its export-led growth model must inevitably fade.
As a corollary, the returns on massive infrastructure investment, much of which is directed toward supporting export growth, must also fade.
Consumption and quality of life need to rise, even as China’s air pollution and water shortages become more acute in many areas.
But, in an economy where debt has exploded to more than 200% of GDP, it is not easy to rein in growth gradually without triggering widespread failure of ambitious investment projects.
Even in China, where the government has deep pockets to cushion the fall, one Lehman Brothers-size bankruptcy could lead to a major panic.
Think of how hard it is to engineer a soft landing in market-based economies.
Many a recession has been catalyzed or amplified by monetary-tightening cycles; former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan was christened the “maestro” in the 1990s, because he managed to slow inflation and maintain strong growth simultaneously.
The idea that controlled tightening is easier in a more centrally planned economy, where policymakers must rely on far noisier market signals, is highly questionable.
If one were to judge by official and market growth forecasts, one would think that the risks were modest.
Of course, Chinese growth almost surely fluctuates far more than the official numbers reveal, in part because local officials have incentives to smooth the data that they report to the central authorities.
So where is China’s economy now?
Most evidence suggests that the economy has slowed significantly.
One striking fact is that annual growth in electricity demand has fallen sharply, to below 4% for the first eight months of 2014, a level recorded previously only in the depths of the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008.
For most of China’s modernization drive, electricity consumption has grown faster than output, not slower.
Weakening electricity demand has tipped China’s coal industry into severe distress, with many mines effectively bankrupt.
Falling house prices are another classic indicator of a vulnerable economy, though the exact pace of decline is difficult to assess.
The main house-price indices measure only asking prices and not actual sales prices.
(Data in many other countries – for example, Spain – suffer from the same deficiency.)
Of course, exports have also slowed, given sluggish growth in the rest of the world.
Commodity exporters such as Australia, Indonesia, and Brazil have already felt the effects of slowing Chinese growth, as have countries, such as Germany and Switzerland, that depend on satisfying China’s voracious demand for capital-intensive goods.
Unfortunately, China’s data are not nearly as reliable as those measuring a developed economy, which makes it difficult for anyone to be sure of what is happening.
Electricity usage is typically one of the most reliable measures of growth; but, with the economy shifting toward services, and with many energy-intensive industries such as cement and steel production slowing down, it is perfectly possible that slow electricity growth is simply a symptom of rebalancing.
Likewise, the softening of housing prices follows a short period in which prices more than doubled, which makes it difficult to tell whether China is facing a modest and healthy correction or outright collapse.
And if continental Europe eventually recovers, as the US and the United Kingdom are, export growth could pick up again.
What seems clear is that China’s leadership is intent on pursuing many of the market-oriented reforms approved by the Third Plenary in 2013.
President Xi Jinping’s aggressive anti-corruption campaign might be seen as preparation for political resistance to further economic liberalization.
On the other hand, one can argue that, until now, Chinese corruption was more of a tax than a paralyzing force, and that dramatically changing the rules of the game could by itself catalyze a sharp drop in output.
Can China’s government engineer a soft landing while weeding out corruption, reducing pollution, and liberalizing markets to ensure long-term growth?
The stakes are high.
If Chinese growth collapses, the global fallout could be far worse than that caused by a normal US recession.
China’s growth rate remains perched at a very high level, so there is a great deal of room to fall.
The potential vulnerability of Western exports and equity prices is massive.
Of the two major instances of policy tightening occurring in the world today, the US Fed’s may be the easier one to understand, but it is not necessarily more consequential for the world than what is happening in China.
What’s Wrong With Executive Compensation?
LONDON – It’s annual general meeting (AGM) season for public companies around the world, and, as in previous years, one issue has been moving company news from the business section to the front page: executive pay.
Companies continue to announce compensation packages for their top managers that leave people agape, not just because the gap between companies’ highest- and lowest-paid workers is so wide, but also because the compensation bears so little relation to firms’ performance.
Nonetheless, a concerted pushback has begun, led by a group that companies and their boards might actually pay attention to: their largest and most influential investors.
Hedge funds, pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds are stating that they are looking closely at C-suite remuneration, and that it is time to take reform seriously.
Norway’s sovereign wealth fund, worth $870 billion, has said that it is setting its sights on pay structures.
Aberdeen Asset Management and Royal London Asset Management were among a group of shareholders who strongly objected to BP’s proposed 20% increase in compensation for CEO Bob Dudley in a year when BP made record losses, and they joined 59% of investors in rejecting the package.
Though the BP vote was non-binding, it was a clear signal to the company and its board.
Similarly, 54% of Renault SA’s shareholders, which include the French state, opposed CEO Carlos Ghosn’s €25 million ($28 million) remuneration package at the company’s AGM in April.
It, too, was a non-binding vote, and the board chose to disregard it.
But ignoring shareholder sentiment is becoming untenable.
This happens when a “very greedy chief executive…designs a pyramid so that a whole bunch of other people down the line get overpaid… just so it doesn’t look like he’s all by himself, in terms of that fantastic pay-off he’s arranged for himself.”
Part of the issue is that executive remuneration packages have become too complex.
Gone are the days when CEOs did the job and were paid a wage.
It is almost as if remuneration committees have taken a leaf from Sun Tzu's The Art of War: “The whole secret lies in confusing the enemy, so that he cannot fathom our real intent.”
Explanations for remuneration calculations can run for pages, and often board members who aren’t on the remuneration committee cannot unravel them.
Moreover, bonus targets are fundamentally flawed.
Markets are fraught with “unknown unknowns.”
Boards often don’t know now what will need to happen later.
And that means goals based on the past or the supposed future reward what we currently think rather than actual performance.
When pay is driven by strict adherence to targets set 12 months before, CEOs look back, instead of focusing on the present and on what comes next.
Compensation needs to reflect whether the CEO won all the battles but lost the war.
But avoiding what might be called the “Dudley Paradox” – a CEO is paid a huge bonus for hitting targets, even as the company suffers major losses – requires boards to stop delegating the entire pay discussion to the compensation committee and waiting for the decisions to arrive, fait accompli, tied up in a bow.
The full board should review the company’s operations and strategy thoroughly; only then should the compensation committee set about creating the program to act on it.
Having such a program in place is especially important when a new CEO or senior executive is hired.
At a time of great hope and a desire to woo the candidate, desperation or enthusiasm can lead to poor judgment and badly formulated packages, which, once negotiated, are not subject to shareholder vote.
A prime example is Yahoo’s firing of Henrique De Castro in 2014.
After only 15 months on the job as COO, De Castro walked away with $109 million.
Lastly, CEOs should show leadership in how they manage their own compensation negotiations.
If they are responsible for all aspects of the company, then they cannot abdicate responsibility with a “Because I’m worth it” attitude when news of their large pay packages becomes public.
More important, they need to recognize that no law obliges them to take what they can get.
They could hit the targets and earn the pay, but look at the company’s results and choose to adjust the total accordingly.
The CEO needs to be talking about the business of the company to its workforce, investors, and the wider world, not be stuck at the AGM defending the executive team’s salaries.
The revolt against large pay packages won’t go away.
For all the reported cases, many more are simmering beneath the surface of public scrutiny.
Unless these companies address head-on the quiet hand-wringing among board members and grumbling among investors, they will find themselves on the front pages next.
Questions for Robert Zoellick
Paul Wolfowitz’s resignation from the World Bank solved one problem, but brought another to light.
When Wolfowitz’s name was first mentioned as a candidate to lead the world’s premier development bank, the idea that the architect of America’s failure in Iraq would be so rewarded was met by incredulity.
But President George W. Bush had, from the beginning of his administration, sought to undermine multilateral institutions and agreements.
Wolfowitz’s nomination seemed to be part of that effort.
Should Bush, a lame duck president with little support at home and less abroad, now be allowed to appoint the next World Bank president?
Bush has already demonstrated his lack of judgment.
Why give him another chance?
The arguments against the “old boy” system – by which the United States appoints the head of the World Bank and Europe the head of the IMF – are especially compelling today How effective can the Bank be in promoting good governance and fighting corruption if its president is chosen in a process that demonstrates flaws in its own governance?
How credible will an anti-corruption message be when delivered by an appointee of what is considered one of the most corrupt and incompetent administrations in US history?
Interestingly, as several heads of US Congressional committees have pointed out, it is in America’s interest for the Bank to be led by the most qualified person, selected in an open and transparent process, regardless of nationality, gender, or race.
This requires a change in how its president is chosen, and, at Congressional hearings on the World Bank – the first in 13 years – I, like everyone who testified, called for this key reform.
Presidential appointments to senior posts in America’s government are subject to open hearings.
Regardless of whether the old boy system is preserved – but especially if it is – the Bank’s Board should likewise conduct open hearings on Bush’s nominee to succeed Wolfowitz.
Here are some of the questions – with some hints at right and wrong answers – that it should ask any proposed candidate for the Bank’s presidency, including Bush’s nominee, Robert Zoellick:
Do you believe that the president of the World Bank should put the interests of developing countries first?
Will you press for Europe and America to eliminate their agricultural subsidies?
Will you advocate a development round that emphasizes liberalization of labor markets more than capital markets, elimination of non-tariff barriers that keep developing countries’ goods out of advanced industrial countries, and abolition of so-called “escalating tariffs,” which impede development?
Will you be open to research even when that research shows that policies of the advanced industrial countries may, at least in some circumstances, not be in the interests of developing countries?
During James Wolfensohn’s presidency of the Bank, there was a change in philosophy.
We encouraged research-based policies, even when that research was critical of policies being pushed by certain advanced industrial countries and by some in the Bank.
When our research showed that certain policies (like agricultural subsidies) were hurting developing countries, we publicized the findings, helping to redefine the debate.
Will you support the initiative of developing countries to have a development-oriented intellectual property regime?
What separates developing countries from developed countries is not only the gap in resources, but also a gap in knowledge.
The Bank should be viewed, in part, as a Knowledge Bank, and it should advocate reforms that enhance developing countries’ access to knowledge.
Access to generic medicines is essential if developing countries, with their limited budgets, are to improve the health of the poor.
TRIPs, the intellectual property provisions of the Uruguay round, were designed to reduce access to generic medicines – and they succeeded.
But as bad as TRIPs are, the bilateral trade agreements that Bush has been pushing are worse.
Any candidate claiming to represent the interests of developing countries must distance himself from these policies.
Will you work to redefine the criteria by which countries get access to funds?
Today, money goes to countries that are neither most in need nor can most effectively use it.
Complying with current orthodoxies – for example, on privatization and liberalization – can earn you points on “good governance,” and thus increase aid allocations—even when they reduce true aid effectiveness.
Do you think countries that are corrupt should be cut off from funding?
If so, will do you so in a consistent way?
If not, how should the Bank respond?
Will you support a comprehensive anti-corruption agenda, including closing down secret bank accounts?
One of the flaws of Wolfowitz’s anti-corruption agenda that expansion or continuation of aid for countries favored by the Bush administration, like Iraq or Pakistan, was pushed, regardless of how corrupt they were, while there was little tolerance elsewhere.
Problems with Uzbekistan were overlooked – until it fell out of favor with the US.
Likewise, the Bush administration opposed the OECD initiative to restrict bank secrecy – until it realized that secret bank accounts help finance terrorists.
Since then, it has shown that it can close secret bank accounts, but has chosen to do so only for terrorists.
Do you think the World Bank should do more to encourage countries to adopt core labor standards?
Not only has the Bank not been active in promoting these globally agreed standards, there is a concern that the Bank discourages collective bargaining and protections for workers when it talks about “flexible labor markets” and conditions that are conducive to private investment.
The old boy system of choosing the head of the World Bank must go.
It has done enough damage.
But if the advanced industrial countries that control the Bank refuse to stand by their principles, at least they should give a nod to greater transparency.
The world should know what it is getting.
Open hearings would be a step in the right direction.
Race and Republicanism
Race has always been a provocative subject when the needs of science and statistics intersect with politics.
Now that debate is once again heating up in France, as the planned introduction of “ethnic statistics” has caused a fierce dispute that touches the very heart of French republicanism.
According to a law that dates back to the French Revolution, and reconfirmed in 1978, French government officials are forbidden to collect information about a citizen’s ethnic or racial origins, whether real or alleged, when conducting a census or other efforts to gathering statistical information on the population.
There are two main reasons for this.
The first is the republican principle, enshrined in the Constitution, that recognizes only citizens and does not accept any distinction among them due to origin, race, or religion.
The second reason is historic: the painful and still vivid memories of the Vichy regime of WWII, when citizens’ “racial” and religious origin was stamped on national identification documents and was used as a key tool in rounding up French Jews for delivery to the death camps.
Today, the issue has returned to the forefront because of a new fight against racial discrimination, which appears to require more accurate measures of social inequality.
Existing public statistics, it is believed, do not provide enough relevant information to analyze the possibility of discrimination in employment or housing.
After all, without appropriate statistics, it is difficult to prove discrimination.
Indeed, many argue that by refusing to take into account distinctions linked to ethnic and religious origin, these distinctions are legitimized.
One British social critic, quoted by the sociologist Dominique Schnapper, compares the behavior of the French, unwilling to mention ethnic discrimination, with English people of the Victorian era, who refused to talk about sex.
Supporters of gathering statistics on race and religion also look to the experiences of the United States, Britain, or the Netherlands, where census takers are free to inquire about ethnic origins and a citizen’s sense of belonging.
Since 1990, the US has collected data on ethnic origins.
Although the First Amendment of the US Constitution bans any religious test for citizenship or political office, ruling out questions on religious beliefs, it is possible to gather information on ethnicity, even in certain cases of multiple ethnic origins, such as “White,” “Black,” “Asian,” and “native American.”
In Britain, the concern about social promotion of minorities led to the introduction in 1991 of statistics that indicate ethnic status.
As for the Netherlands, companies were obliged to report the ethnic composition of their workforces until the law was repealed in 2003.
Thus, there is a distinction between mentioning the original nationality, which is allowed, and mentioning ethnic and racial origins, which is not.
Is it necessary to go further just because the indicators linked to national origin are not enough to identify discrimination – especially indirect discrimination – based on ethnic grounds?
Some surveys show that the groups involved are doubtful about this.
Statistics are not only a reflection of reality: they help to shape it.
Statistical categories often tend to become social categories.
Not only are racial indications (White, Black, Arabic, Asian) very inaccurate in a world where racial mixing is now common, but, as François Héran, the head of France’s National Institute of Demographic Studies, argues, it is also necessary to prove that difference means inequality and that inequality necessarily means discrimination.
Indeed, ethnic counting could merely reinforce the logic of community separation.
Given the desire to penalize ethnic discrimination, the push for government to gain this knowledge is understandable.
But the state has other means to encourage equality on the basis of national, social, or economic criteria.
In view of the risk of inciting fresh antagonism, gathering racial, religious, and ethnic statistics may not be worth it.
The ban against ethnic and racial data is a taboo that should not be overthrown easily, and not without carefully weighing the risk to social peace.
Racial Medicine\u0027s Revival
It wasn't supposed to be this way.
In the spring of 2000, Francis Collins and Craig Venter announced at a White House news conference the completion of "the first draft" of the mapping and sequencing of the human DNA.
With President Bill Clinton and Prime Minister Tony Blair nodding their approval, Collins and Venter agreed that racial classifications make no sense at the molecular level; we humans are 99.9% alike in our DNA.
News media around the world picked up the story, intrigued by science's definitive refutation of racial thinking.
Not so fast.
The original idea was that greater computing capacity would enable particularized therapies, because we could now turn our attention to individual differences in everything from gene therapy to the delivery of pharmaceuticals.
But gene therapy has run up against a brick wall.
An experiment at the University of Pennsylvania resulted in the death of the patient, Jesse Gelsinger, in late 1999.
Then another gene therapy experiment in France generated leukemia in several patients - and the protocols were stopped immediately. 
So the blind alley of gene therapy has sent biotechnology heading full throttle down the road of drug development, based on the new genomics.
What is worrisome, however, is the putative "ethnic purity" of the database.
According to the magazine 
 Science
 , Iceland's "isolated position" and catastrophes that "wiped out large parts of [its] population" have left it with "a remarkably homogenic gene pool."
This makes it "relatively easy to track down disease-causing mutations that might form the basis for new tests and therapies."
Here was the foot in the door, the first step toward conceptualizing strategies of research and then delivery of drugs to populations that are defined by ethnicity and race. The next step was not long in coming.
In March 2001, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) allowed the biotech firm NitroMed to proceed with a full-scale clinical trial of what has been touted as "the first ethnic drug."
The trial itself was the first ever "conducted exclusively in black men and women suffering from heart failure."
The drug, BiDil, is designed to treat or prevent congestive heart failure by raising low or depleted levels of nitric oxide in the blood.
It was originally designed for a wide population base, and race was irrelevant.
But early clinical studies revealed no compelling results, and an FDA advisory panel voted 9 to 3 against the drug's approval. 
However, BiDil was suddenly born again as a racialized remedy.
This is all the more remarkable because, by concentrating only on blacks, the clinical trials now under way can have little or nothing compelling to say about comparative results according to supposed racial differences between humans.
Moreover, the underlying epidemiological mistake of such "racial medicine" is obvious.
As Michael Klag and his colleagues showed a decade ago, in general, the darker one's skin color, the higher the rate of hypertension for American blacks, even 
 within
 the African American community.
The differences were not biological or genetic in 
 origin
 , but biological in 
 effect
 due to stress-related outcomes of darker skin color: reduced access to valued social goods such as employment, promotion, housing, etc.
Unfortunately, while the new mantra of biotechnology is to claim that someday soon pharmaceuticals will be marketed to individuals based on their DNA, the fundamental truth is that selling drugs is still a mass-market business.
Target markets consist of groups and population aggregates, not individuals.
So, for the pharmaceutical industry, racial categorizations make economic sense.
It has always been difficult to use the market to battle racial discrimination, and many governments nowadays behave as though they would prefer to give up the fight. But racialized drugs?
They may be coming soon, accompanied by the retrograde racial thinking - with its full range of dangerous assumptions and historical associations - that molecular biology was supposed to have dispelled.
Mazowiecki’s Miracle
WARSAW – It was a hot day and a tense moment.
As Poland’s first post-communist prime minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, laid out his government’s ground-breaking program, he wobbled and appeared to faint.
While the packed parliament speculated nervously, Mazowiecki slipped out of a side entrance to get some fresh air in nearby Ujazdowski Park in central Warsaw.
“Who’s that?” a child playing in a sandbox asked his mother.
“Nasz premier,” she replied – “Our prime minister.”
That was not a phrase that had been readily used to describe Poland’s Communist leaders over the previous four decades.
When Mazowiecki returned to the podium, he apologized and, with his customary dry wit, suggested that the Polish economy was as unsteady on its feet as he was.
He was right.
Communism had left Poland politically and economically bankrupt.
Marxist ideology had become all but a façade; not even party apparatchiks pretended to believe it.
Poland’s economy, close to outright collapse, struggled to meet citizens’ basic needs, let alone repay foreign loans.
It fell to the Catholic journalist and opposition activist Mazowiecki to be modern Poland’s first non-Communist prime minister and to start the road to recovery.
Though he was in office for less than 17 months, from August 1989 to January 1991, he managed to set Poland on a path toward a market economy and NATO and European Union membership.
In the final weeks of Communist rule, Mazowiecki helped to establish a model for negotiated political transition that still informs, inspires, and guides other societies on the cusp of change.
I am proud that Poland, thanks to the expertise gained in the Mazowiecki years and after, can provide advice to the European Union’s eastern and southern neighbors, as well as countries like Tunisia and Burma.
The gaunt, gentlemanly Mazowiecki had served as an adviser to Lech Wałęsa, the leader of the Solidarity movement.
He had seen the movement swell to more than nine million members in the heady days after the August 1980 Gdansk Shipyard strike – and, like the rest of the movement’s leadership, had been interned when General Wojciech Jaruzelski declared martial law and banned Solidarity 16 months later.
The union survived as an underground operation, printing discussion documents and organizing rallies.
Gradually, the balance of advantage swung away from the Communist leadership – especially after Mikhail Gorbachev took over as Soviet leader – and back toward Solidarity.
Exhausted, the Polish Communist regime agreed to sit down to talks with Solidarity.
The negotiations, known as the Round Table Talks, led to the Communist world’s first competitive – though not entirely free – parliamentary election, on June 4, 1989.
Five months before the fall of the Berlin Wall and Czechoslovakia’s Velvet Revolution, Poland had negotiated its way out of totalitarianism.
But the Mazowiecki government faced a nearly impossible task: building democratic political institutions while resuscitating the country’s torpid economy.
One of the Mazowiecki team’s greatest achievements was the introduction, led by Finance Minister Leszek Balcerowicz, of fast and far-reaching market reforms and privatization.
The “shock therapy” of the Balcerowicz Plan unsettled Poles, but it brought the country’s terrifyingly high inflation under control.
Mazowiecki backed Balcerowicz, and the success of economic reform underpinned Poland’s relatively smooth political transition.
Indeed, despite some initial hiccups, the positive effects of economic reform quickly became apparent.
Poland recorded impressive growth.
Within 20 years, GDP increased four-fold, while exports increased more than ten-fold.
Once a peripheral European country economically and politically, Poland has become one of Europe’s leading states and a co-shaper of its future.
The Round Table Talks and the political transition overseen by Mazowiecki marked a period of compromise that had advantages and disadvantages.
The advantages included a rapid political changeover and the assistance of some of the former Communist elite in building a free, democratic, and pro-Western state.
The disadvantages included the lack of a clean break between Poland’s authoritarian past and its democratic present.
The price of a smooth transition was also that many members of the Communist regime – including Jaruzelski – were not held accountable for their crimes while in power.
At the time, I was critical of the path Mazowiecki was taking.
I believed that Poland’s transformation could be accomplished faster and more effectively.
But this never tarnished my high opinion of him.
On the contrary, looking back on that era, it is amazing how much was achieved within such a short amount of time.
Together with Wałęsa, Mazowiecki was a founder of Polish independence.
His place in the history books is guaranteed.
It is thanks to him that Poles can be proud that theirs was the first Soviet Bloc country to free itself of Communist tyranny.
We have not looked back since.
Sekutu yang Ganjil bagi Ekstremisme
FLORENCE – Akhir-akhir ini kita mengaitkan politik sayap kanan dengan semangat Islamophobia, walaupun ini tidak selalu benar.
Faktanya, hubungan antara ekstrim kanan, terutama di Eropa, dan radikalisme islamis sudah sedemikian kuat yang mana pengikut dari kedua kelompok ini memiliki beberapa karakteristik yang sama.
Keterkaitan antara keduanya sudah nampak jelas.
Amin al-Husseini, mufti agung dari Yerussalem pada tahun 1921-1937, mempertahankan hubungan erat dengan rezim fasis di Italia dan Jerman.
Banyak tentara Nazi mencari perlindungan di Timur Tengah setelah Perang Dunia II  dan beberapa diantaranya bahkan pindah agama dan memeluk Islam.
Julius Evola, tokoh pemikir reaksioner asal Italia yang karyanya menginspirasi sayap kanan Eropa pasca perang, secara tegas mengagumi konsep jihad dan pengorbanan diri yang dituntut dalam jihad.
Setelah serangan teroris terjadi di Amerika Serikat pada tanggal 11 September 2014, kelompok neo-Nazi di Amerika Serikat dan Eropa menyambut dan memuji pelaku serangan.
Salah seorang pejabat di National Alliance, kelompok neo-Nazi terkenal di AS, menyatakan betapa ia berharap seandainya anggotanya sendiri memiliki “nyali yang sebesar itu.”
Di Perancis, perayaan atas serangan tersebut dilakukan di kantor pusat National Front, dan anggota neo-Nazi Jerman membakar bendera AS.
Kelompok islamis, Hizbut Tahrir, dilarang di Jerman pada tahun 2003, sebagian dikarenakan kedekatannya dengan sayap kanan.
Musuh bersama – Yahudi, pemerintah Amerika Serikat, terduga kelompok “Tatanan Dunia Baru” (New World Order) – mempertahankan aliansi politik yang kudus.
Tetapi pengamatan lebih dalam atas komponen-komponen ideologis dan psikologisnya telah mengungkapkan adanya hubungan yang lebih kuat.
Berbeda dengan kaum liberal dan sayap kiri, kelompok sayap kanan dan ideolog Islam menyebarkan visi otoriter, hierarkis, dan tatanan sosial dan kehidupan sehari-hari yang cenderung penuh dengan ritual.
Mereka berjanji akan membersihkan masyarakat dari korupsi yang menjauhkannya dari masa lalu yang berjaya.
Mereka juga meyakini bahwa “supremasi” ras atau agama membenarkan penindasan dan bahkan perbudakan terhadap orang lain.
Menurut psikolog politik, pemikiran kaum konservatif dan sayap kanan cenderung disertai dengan kecenderungan untuk mudah merasa jijik, “kebutuhan akan closure” (preferensi pada tatanan, struktur, dan kepastian), dan pemisahan jelas antara “in-group” dan “out-group”.
Meskipun riset-riset tersebut berfokus pada orang-orang pacifist, terdapat bukti bahwa kaum sayap kanan dan ekstremis Islam juga memiliki karakter/sifat tersebut.
Dimulai dengan kelompok Islamis.
Beberapa pelaku jihad dikenal terobsesi dengan kebersihan.
Faisal Shahzad, yang memasang bom di Times Square di New York City, membersihkan apartemennya di Bridgeport, Connecticut, sebelum pergi melakukan misi pemboman yang gagal.
Mohamed Atta, pemimpin pembajakan dalam peristiwa 9/11, meninggalkan arahan untuk pemakamannya, meminta agar tubuhnya tidak akan didekati oleh wanita manapun dan pria-pria yang memandikannya hanya akan menyeka alat kelaminnya dengan menggunakan sarung tangan.
Salafi jihadi menjalani kehidupan mereka sesuai dengan pemahaman harafiah terhadap kitab suci Al-Qur’an – cara sederhana yang dianut untuk memenuhi “kebutuhan akan closure”.
Adapun obsesi dengan mengidentifikasi “in-group”, disebut al-wala’ wal-bara, yakni suatu doktrin dasar dalam Salafisme yang mewajibkan penganutnya untuk memisahkan/membedakan dirinya dari kaum kafir, termasuk Muslim yang tidak taat.
Kebutuhan akan kepastian juga ditemukan di dalam agama.
Sebagaimana kami telusuri dalam buku kami yang berjudul Engineers of Jihad, sejak tahun 1970-an, sebagian besar pengikut radikal Islam memilih bidang-bidang teknik “keras” daripada bidang-bidang “lebih lembut” yang tidak terlalu banyak menawarkan jawaban-jawaban yang jelas.
Faisal Shahzad dan Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, pelaku “Bom Celana Dalam” asal Nigeria yang mencoba meledakkan bom di pesawat pada tahun 2009, mempelajari ilmu teknik.
Dari 25 orang yang terlibat langsung dalam serangan 9/11, delapan diantaranya adalah insinyur, termasuk 2 orang pemimpin, yaitu Mohamed Atta dan Khalid Sheik Mohammed.
Untuk menentukan apakah sesuatu yang sistematik yang terjadi, kami mengkaji pendidikan lebih dari 4.000 ekstremis dari berbagai jenis di seluruh dunia.
Kami menemukan, diantara pengikut radikal Islam yang dilahirkan dan dididik di negara-negara mayoritas Muslim, bahwa insinyur ditemukan 17 kali lebih sering dibandingkan di populasi umum; proporsi lulusan perguruan tinggi di kalangan kelompok radikal adalah empat kali lebih besar.
Dalam dunia Islam, lebih banyak insinyur cenderung bergabung dengan kelompok radikal di negara-negara dimana krisis ekonomi merusak kesempatan kerja bagi lulusan elit.
Kemungkinan mereka bergabung semakin tinggi di awal krisis tersebut.
Diantara semua lulusan perguruan tinggi, insinyur (dan kadang, dokter) nampaknya paling frustrasi akibat rendahnya kesempatan, hal ini mungkin mencerminkan ambisi dan pengorbanan yang diperlukan untuk memperoleh gelar tersebut.
Namun ini bukan kisah lengkapnya.
Insinyur disini juga termasuk sejumlah radikal Islam yang tumbuh di negara-negara Barat, dimana peluang kerja lebih besar.
Kecil kemungkinannya bagi mereka untuk membelot dan meninggalkan Islamisme penuh kekerasan, dibandingkan lulusan lainnya.
Selain itu, kelompok radikal Islam bukanlah satu-satunya kelompok yang memiliki ketimpangan jumlah insinyur.
Diantara pengikut kelompok sayap kanan radikal yang memiliki gelar sarjana, jumlah insinyur juga lebih besar.
Sementara itu, hampir tidak ada insinyur di kelompok sayap kiri radikal, yang mungkin lebih menarik bagi lulusan dari ilmu sosial dan humaniora.
Dari analisis data 11.000 lulusan pria dari 17 negara Eropa, kami menemukan bahwa selain dari hak politik, para insinyur ini rata-rata memberi bobot lebih pada semua unsur terkait dengan kecenderungan pada perasaan jijik, kebutuhan atas closure, dan preferensi in-group yang kuat, bila dibandingkan dengan lulusan dari latar belakang ilmu lain.
Pada lulusan dari ilmu sosial dan humaniora, sifat-sifat ini tidak terlalu kuat/dominan.
Sifat-sifat ini juga lebih lemah di kalangan perempuan, yang memiliki kedudukan kuat di kelompok sayap kiri radikal, dan hampir tidak ada di kelompok Islam radikal dan sayap kanan radikal.
Korelasi antara ciri-ciri psikologis, disiplin ilmu, dan kedudukan atau keterwakilan dalam berbagai kelompok radikal hampir sempurna.
Tentu saja, kebanyakan orang yang belajar teknik atau memiliki preferensi kuat terhadap struktur atau tatanan tidak akan menjadi radikal, yang berarti faktor-faktor tersebut tidak bisa digunakan secara efektif dalam profiling.
Namun pemahaman tentang psikologi radikalisasi tetap penting.
Pemerintah di negara-negara Barat dan Arab mempekerjakan ratusan orang untuk menghindarkan penduduknya terperangkap radikalisme, tanpa memahami kebutuhan psikologis yang mendasari ideologi tersebut.
Kita masih perlu melakukan lebih banyak penelitian, tapi pemahaman seperti ini akan membantu mengungkap cara-cara yang lebih baik untuk memenuhi kebutuhan mereka, sebelum atau sesudah radikalisasi terjadi.
The War with Radical Islam
NEW YORK – French Prime Minister Manuel Valls was not speaking metaphorically when he said that France is at war with radical Islam.
There is, indeed, a full-fledged war underway, and the heinous terrorist attacks in Paris were part of it.
Yet, like most wars, this one is about more than religion, fanaticism, and ideology.
It is also about geopolitics, and its ultimate solution lies in geopolitics as well.
Crimes like those in Paris, New York, London, and Madrid – attacks on countless cafes, malls, buses, trains, and nightclubs – affront our most basic human values, because they involve the deliberate murder of innocents and seek to spread fear throughout society.
We are wont to declare them the work of lunatics and sociopaths, and we feel repulsed by the very idea that they may have an explanation beyond the insanity of their perpetrators.
Yet, in most cases, terrorism is not rooted in insanity.
It is more often an act of war, albeit war by the weak rather than by organized states and their armies.
Islamist terrorism is a reflection, indeed an extension, of today’s wars in the Middle East.
And with the meddling of outside powers, those wars are becoming a single regional war – one that is continually morphing, expanding, and becoming increasingly violent.
From the jihadist perspective – the one that American or French Muslims, for example, may pick up in training camps in Afghanistan, Syria, and Yemen – daily life is ultra-violent.
Death is pervasive, coming as often as not from the bombs, drones, and troops of the United States, France, and other Western powers.
And the victims are often the innocent “collateral damage” of Western strikes that hit homes, weddings, funerals, and community meetings.
We in the West hate to acknowledge – and most refuse to believe – that our leaders have been flagrantly wasteful of Muslim lives for a century now, in countless wars and military encounters instigated by overwhelming Western power.
What is the message to Muslims of the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003?
More than 100,000 Iraqi civilians – a very conservative estimate – died in a war that was based on utterly false pretenses.
The US has never apologized, much less even recognized the civilian slaughter.
Or consider Syria, where an estimated 200,000 Syrians have recently died, 3.7 million have fled the country, and 7.6 million have been internally displaced in a civil war that was stoked in no small part by the US, Saudi Arabia, and other allied powers.
Since 2011, the CIA and US allies have poured in weapons, finance, and training in an attempt to topple President Bashar al-Assad.
For the US and its allies, the war is little more than a proxy battle to weaken Assad’s patrons, Iran and Russia.
Yet Syrian civilians are the cannon fodder.
Long before there was Islamist terrorism in the West, the United Kingdom, France, and the US relied on diplomatic chicanery and launched coups, wars, and covert operations in the Middle East to assert and maintain Western political control over the region.
Historians know this sordid story, but most Westerners do not (in no small part because many of the interventions have been covert).
Since the fall of the Ottoman Empire a century ago, Western powers have sought to control the Middle East for a variety of reasons, including claims on oil, access to international sea routes, Israel’s security, and geopolitical competition with Russia in Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Iran.
The fact that jihadist terrorist attacks in the West are relatively new, occurring only in the last generation or so, indicates that they are a blowback – or at least an extension – of the Middle East wars.
With very few exceptions, the countries that have been attacked are those that have been engaged in the post-1990 Western-led military operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria.
The terrorists themselves cast their actions in political terms, even though we rarely listen; indeed, the terrorists’ words are typically reported only briefly, if at all.
But the fact is that almost every terrorist attack in the West or against Western embassies and personnel has been accompanied by the message that it is in retaliation for Western meddling in the Middle East.
The Paris terrorists pointed to France’s operations in Syria.
To be clear, Western actions do not provide Islamist terrorism with a scintilla of justification.
The reason to point out these actions is to make clear what Islamist terrorism in the West represents to the terrorists: Middle East violence on an expanded front.
The West has done much to create that front, arming favored actors, launching proxy wars, and taking the lives of civilians in unconscionable numbers.
Ending the terror of radical Islam will require ending the West’s wars for control in the Middle East.
Fortunately, the Age of Oil is gradually coming to an end.
We should make that end come faster: climate safety will require that we leave most fossil-fuel resources in the ground.
Nor do the other ancient motives for Western interference apply any longer.
The UK no longer needs to protect its trade routes to colonial India, and the US no longer needs a ring of military bases to contain the Soviet Union.
It is time for the West to allow the Arab world to govern itself and to choose its path without Western military interference.
And there are heartening reasons to believe that a self-governing Arab Middle East would wisely choose to become a peaceful global crossroads and a partner in science, culture, and development.
The Arab world has played that beneficent role in the past, and it can do so again.
The region is filled with talented people, and the overwhelming majority in the region want to get on with their lives in peace, educate and raise their children in health and safety, and participate in global society.
Their objectives – prosperity and human security – are our own.
Radical Goals for Sustainable Development
BERLIN – Let us imagine for a moment that we could change the world according to our wishes.
Dramatic economic inequality gives way to social and political inclusion.
Universal human rights become a reality.
We end deforestation and the destruction of arable land.
Fish stocks recover.
Two billion people look forward to a life without poverty, hunger, and violence.
Rather than paying lip service to climate change and resource scarcity, we start to respect and uphold the limits of our planet and its atmosphere.
That was the aim in 2001, when the United Nations adopted the Millennium Development Goals.
And it will be the aim next year, when the MDGs expire and the UN adopts a successor framework for environmental and development policy.
The coming set of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will seek to protect ecosystems, conserve resources, and, as with the MDGs, lift millions of people out of poverty.
Combining environmental and developmental frameworks is a good idea – one that builds on the success of a host of legally binding international conventions and agreements crafted under the UN’s auspices to protect the climate, conserve biodiversity, uphold human rights, and reduce poverty.
Though they may not be perfect – and, unfortunately, the countries that ratify them do not always achieve the targets – they have led to the creation of institutional processes that encourage countries to meet their promises and embolden citizens to hold governments accountable.
But, though the SDGs will thus stand on solid legal ground, that ground must be developed further.
For starters, global agreements and targets have not yet been put in place for major environmental challenges, including the destruction of fertile topsoil and global plastic production.
Such agreements will be necessary to enable the SDGs to consider human rights, the environment, and development holistically.
Researchers and civil-society organizations have been calling for a reversal of soil degradation by 2020, and are pressing for at least one international panel of experts to meet at the UN to address this central aspect of global food security.
Every year, 12 million hectares of land – an area the size of Austria and Switzerland – are lost to overuse and excessive application of fertilizers.