It also demonstrates why more conclusive economic policy making is proving so elusive.
Here is a quick reminder of Ireland’s sad recent economic history.
Lulled into complacency and excess by ample supplies of artificially cheap financing, Irish banks went on a lending binge.
Irresponsible risk-taking and excessive greed outpaced prudential regulation and supervision.
The banking system ended up fueling massive speculation, including a huge run-up in real-estate prices, only to be brought to its knees when the bubbles popped.
Unlike the many Irish households that lost jobs and part of their wealth, the banks were deemed to be “too big to fail,” so Ireland’s political elites intervened with state funding.
But, by under-estimating both the domestic and international aspects of the problem, the authorities transformed a banking problem into a national tragedy.
Rather than restoring the banks to financial health and ensuring responsible behavior, the Irish economy as a whole was dragged down.
Growth collapsed; unemployment spiked.
Lacking opportunities, emigration increased – a vivid reminder of how economic crises have wreaked havoc on the country’s demographics throughout its history.
Investors withdrew in droves from what was once deemed the “Celtic Tiger.”
The government had no choice but to request a bailout from the “troika” – the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission – thereby transferring an important component of national economic governance to an ad hoc, fragile, and sometimes feuding group of institutions.
While other struggling eurozone members also turned to the troika, Ireland stands out in at least two notable ways.
First, two democratically-elected governments have steadfastly implemented the agreed austerity programs with little need for waivers and modifications – and thus without the associated political drama.
All of this, they argue, provides the basis for sustainable growth and declining unemployment.
Ireland, they conclude, was right to stay in the eurozone, especially because small, open economies that are unanchored can be easily buffeted by a fluid global economy.
“Not so fast,” says the other side.
The critics of austerity point to the fact that Irish GDP has still not returned to its 2007 level.
Unemployment remains far too high, with alarming levels of long-term and youth joblessness.
Public debt remains too high as well, and, making matters worse, much more of it is now owed to official rather than private creditors (which would complicate debt restructuring should it become necessary).
The critics reject the argument that small, open economies are necessarily better off in a monetary union, pointing to how well Switzerland is coping.
And they lament that eurozone membership means that Ireland’s “internal devaluations,” which involve significant cuts in real wages, have not yet run their course.
The data on the “Irish experiment” – including the lack of solid counterfactuals – are not conclusive enough for one side to declare a decisive victory.
Yet there is some good analytical news.
Ireland provides insights that are helpful in understanding how sociopolitical systems, including economically devastated countries like Cyprus and Greece, have coped so far with shocks that were essentially unthinkable just a few years ago.
On my current visit, most of the Irish citizens with whom I have spoken say that the country had no alternative but to follow the path of austerity.
While they appreciate the urgent need for growth and jobs, they believe that this can be achieved only after Ireland’s finances are put back on a sound footing.
They also argue that, given the banks’ irresponsibility, there is no quick way to promote sustained expansion.
They are still angry at bankers, but have yet to gain proper retribution.
Ireland’s accumulation of wealth during its Celtic Tiger period, when the country surged toward the top of Europe’s economic league table, has also been an effective shock absorber.
This, together with fears about being left out in the geopolitical cold (despite the country’s historical links with Britain and America), dampens Irish enthusiasm for economic experiments outside the eurozone.
Indeed, Irish society seems remarkably hesitant to change course. Right or wrong, Ireland will stick with austerity.
Efforts to regain national control of the country’s destiny, the Irish seem to believe, must take time.
In some of Europe’s other struggling countries, however, citizens may well prove less patient.
What is Full Employment?
CAMBRIDGE – In an important sense, the US economy is now at full employment.
The link between wages and prices is currently being offset by the sharp decline in the price of oil and gasoline relative to a year ago, and by the strengthening of the dollar relative to other currencies.
But, as these factors’ impact on the overall price level diminishes, the inflation rate will rise more rapidly.
Accelerating wage growth implies that the economy is now at a point at which increases in demand created by easier monetary policy or expansionary fiscal policy would not achieve a sustained rise in output and employment.
Instead, this demand would be channeled into higher wages and prices.
There are of course other definitions of full employment.
Some would say that the United States is not at full employment, because 8.7 million people – about 6% of those who are employed – are looking for work.
There are millions more who would like to work but are not actively looking, because they believe that there are no available jobs for people like themselves.
And an additional 6.7 million are working part-time but would like to work more hours per week.
In many cases, these unemployed and underemployed individuals are experiencing real hardship.
By that indicator, the US economy is not at full employment.
But, for the Fed, it is, in the sense that excessively easy monetary policy can no longer achieve a sustained increase in employment.
At the same time, other types of policies that change incentives or remove barriers can lead to increased employment and higher real incomes, without raising wage and price inflation.
Consider, for example, the high rate of non-employment among men aged 25 to 54, a group too old to be in school and too young to retire.
More than 15% of men in this age group are not employed.
Among those in this age range who have less than a high school education, 35% are not employed.
Programs to provide market-relevant education and training should be able to raise employment among this group.
Or consider the employment experience of men and women over age 65.
This group is eligible for Social Security (pensions) and Medicare (health insurance), and the majority are retired.
But experience shows that the decision to retire or to work fewer hours is influenced by the compensation that members of this group receive.
And this amount partly reflects the fact that employed people who collect Social Security and Medicare are subject to the payroll tax that finances them.
The payroll tax paid by employees is 6.65% (employers pay the same rate), and is in addition to the personal income tax.
Moreover, because of the complex rules that govern the level of Social Security benefits, the older worker who pays this payroll tax is likely to receive no extra benefits.
For many older workers, the choice is not whether to work, but how much.
We now have less than full employment in the sense that the payroll tax encourages older workers to work fewer hours than they otherwise would.
The Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) also reduces hours worked, in two different ways.
First, for some individuals, working fewer hours reduces incomes enough to entitle them to a larger government subsidy for health insurance.
Second, some employers are being incented to reduce the number of working hours for individual employees, because, above a specified number, Obamacare imposes a larger burden on them.
Or consider minimum-wage legislation, which reduces employers’ willingness to hire low-skilled workers.
As the minimum wage is increased, employers’ incentive to substitute equipment or more skilled employees strengthens.
This reduction in the demand for low-skilled workers could be offset by taking into account the hourly equivalent of transfer payments when calculating the minimum wage.
For example, someone who receives $8,000 a year in transfer payments (such as food stamps, housing assistance, and the Earned Income Tax Credit) might be deemed to have received the equivalent of $4 an hour toward meeting the minimum wage.
That individual’s combined income would be achieved with a lower cost to the employer, increasing the individual’s ability to find employment.
I could easily extend this list.
The basic point is that employment can be increased, and unemployment decreased, by removing barriers to job creation and reducing marginal tax rates.
By contrast, increasing demand by prolonging easy monetary policy or expanding fiscal spending is likely to result in rising inflation rather than rising employment.
What is the Deficit Endgame?
REYKJAVIK – No one yet has any real idea about when the global financial crisis will end, but one thing is certain: government budget deficits are headed into the stratosphere.
Investors in the coming years will need to be persuaded to hold mountains of new debt.
Although governments may try to cram public debt down the throats of local savers (by using, for example, their rising influence over banks to force them to hold a disproportionate quantity of government paper), they will eventually find themselves having to pay much higher interest rates as well.
Within a couple years, interest rates on long-term US Treasury notes could easily rise 3-4%, with interest rates on other governments’ paper rising as much, or more.
Interest rates will rise to compensate investors both for having to accept a larger share of government bonds in their portfolio and for an increasing risk that governments will be tempted to inflate away the value of their debts, or even default.
In research that Carmen Reinhart and I have done on the history of financial crises, we find that public debt typically doubles, even adjusting for inflation, in the three years following a crisis.
Many nations, large and small, are now well on the way to meeting this projection.
China’s government has clearly indicated that it will use any means necessary to backstop growth in the face of a free fall in exports.
The Chinese have $2 trillion in hard currency reserves to back up their promise.
President Barack Obama’s new budget calls for a stunning $1.75 trillion deficit in the United States, a multiple of the previous record.
Even those countries that are not actively engaged in a fiscal orgy are seeing their surpluses collapse and their deficits soar, mainly in the face of falling tax revenues.
Indeed, few governments have submitted remotely realistic budget projections, typically relying on overly rosy economic scenarios.
Unfortunately, in 2009, the global economy will not be a bed of roses.
Income in the US and euro-area both appear to have declined at an annualized rate of roughly 6% in the fourth quarter of 2008; Japan’s GDP fell at perhaps twice that rate.
China’s claim that its GDP grew at a 6% rate, during the end of last year, is suspect.
Exports have collapsed throughout Asia, including Korea, Japan, and Singapore.  Arguably India, and to a lesser extent Brazil, have been holding out a bit better.
But few emerging markets have reached a stage at which they can withstand a sustained collapse in the developed economies, much less serve as substitute engines of global growth.
With the credit crisis still making it difficult for many small and medium-size businesses to obtain even the minimal level of financing necessary to maintain inventories and conduct trade, global GDP is on a precipice in 2009.
There is a real possibility that global growth will register its first contraction since World War II.
In all likelihood, a slew of countries will see output declines of 4-5% in 2009, with some. having true depression level drops, of 10% or more.
Worse yet, unless financial systems spring back, growth  could disappoint for years to come, especially in “ground zero” countries such as the United States, Britain, Ireland and Spain.  US long-term growth could be particularly dismal, as the Obama administration steers the country toward  more European levels of welfare assistance and income redistribution,
Countries with European-style growth rates could handle debt obligations of 60% of GDP when interest rates were low.
But, with debts in many countries rising to 80% or 90% of GDP, and with today’s low interest rates clearly a temporary phenomenon, trouble is brewing.
Many of the countries that are piling on massive quantities of debt to bail out their banks have only tepid medium term growth prospects, raising real questions of solvency and sustainability
Italy, for example with a debt-to-income ratio already exceeding 100%, has been able to manage so far thanks to falling global rates.
But as debts mount, and global interest rates rise, investors will become rightly nervous about the risk of debt restructuring.
Other countries, such as Ireland, Britain, and the US, started with a much stronger fiscal position, but may not be much better off when the smoke clears.
Exchange rates are another wild card.
Asian central banks are still nervously clinging to the dollar.  But with the US printing debt and money like it is going out of style, it would appear the euro is set to appreciate against the dollar two or three years down the road, if the euro is still around, that is.
As debt mounts and the recession lingers, we are surely going to see a number of governments trying to lighten their load through financial repression, higher inflation, partial default, or a combinations of all three.
Unfortunately, the endgame to the great recession of the 2000’s will not be a pretty picture.
What is the West?
PARIS &#45;&#45; Everyone everywhere has by now heard about the “clash of civilizations.”
This Samuel Huntington concept has become universal.
In the 1950’s, the French economist, Alfred Sauvy had a comparable success with the expression “third world.”
One reason these phrases gain wide acceptance is their lack of clear definition.
The “clash of civilizations,” basically the West against the rest, is supposed to describe the world as it is.
In reality, the West is vague enough to include a vast array of areas without describing their unifying characteristics.
So what exactly is West?
What does Westernization mean?
Why is Japan considered Western and China not?
Where does Shanghai stand?
Is Russia part of the West?
From these uncertainties, we can conclude that the West is not a geographic entity.
It probably first established itself as a mindset when the Greeks, 25 centuries ago, perceived themselves as Western versus the Oriental Persians.
Since the West has lost any clear territorial basis since then, the phrase “the West” has become a universal not a local notion.
To be Western or Westernized, above all, is a mindset which does not coincide with any continent, nor with any specific nation or religion.
The non-Westerner, however, would rather place tradition above innovation.
But innovation as a fundamental value explains the scientific breakthroughs of the West versus the East.  It explains unavoidable conflicts with conservative non-Western societies and it also explains what we should call ‘the Westernization of the West.’
The West keeps destroying its own traditions, including its religions.  The economist Joseph Schumpeter defined this process as one of “creative destruction.”
The term could be applied to all walks of life in the West.
Western conservatives are no less prone to creative destruction than Western liberals: conservatives, indeed, are well known for inventing traditions.  Take the 19th century British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, who invented most of the supposedly ancient traditions around the British monarchy.
Innovation in the West seems to be a never-ending, self-transforming process.
Self-criticism, even more than innovation, is a defining characteristic of the West.
In most if not all non-Western civilizations, pride and self love exclude self-criticism or at least the criticism of one’s civilization as such.
A true Muslim or Chinese scholar cannot be defined as a true Chinese or a true Muslim by being critical of his own world.
Not so in the West.
The Western scholar remains perfectly legitimate when putting to death Western values: there is no Chinese or Muslim Nietzsche claiming that his own God is dead.
Is there a Chinese or a Muslim Montaigne ready to write that the “Indian savages” may be wiser than us, as Montaigne did in 16th century France?
Of course there must be some Chinese or Muslim Montaigne or Nietzsche, but they would not be considered beacons of their civilizations.
Self-criticism, not self-love, and cultural relativism are the nuts and bolts of the Western mindset.
The same goes with gender equality.
This has not always been so.  In the ancient Greek, Jewish, and Christian religions, women were perceived as inferior to men.
But this notion has been contentious in the West for centuries.  Nowadays, gender equality has become the norm.
This is not the case in most non-Western civilizations.
Some would argue that gender equality is a consequence of the modernization process, not of Westernization.
This may be true, but the status of women is clearly one issue that puts non-Western Muslims into opposition to the West.
If we accept the above definition of the West as a mindset, this leaves open three major questions: can the East be modernized without being Westernized?
Where do we draw the line between West and East?
Will the West remain Western?    
So far, there is no case in history of non-Western modernization; the discourse on Asian values, initially started in Singapore, is basically a political discourse.
It is after retooling their mindset towards innovation and self-criticism that Asian countries have become modern.
This does not make them less Asian.
Contemporary Koreans or Japanese remain fully Korean or Japanese but are closer to a Westerner than they would be to their own ancestors.
Similarly, a modern Egyptian or a modern Saudi will be more on par with a French or an American than they would be with an ancient Arab.
Does this Westernization make the Egyptian or the Saudi less authentic Arabs?
Such a debate does take place within all Eastern societies, which leads us to the real clash of civilizations: all societies today are fragmented between Westernizers and non-Westernizers.
This clash within civilizations on what modernization means is more significant than Huntington’s alleged conflict between geographical entities. 
The controversy on the essential meaning of modernization, also known as an identity crisis, does impact Western countries as well.
Vast groups who live in the West, Western and non-Western fundamentalists, fight the unending Westernization process in the name of tradition.
Many would like to stop the engine by using various guises like ecology or identity, but a Western society where you could not start your day by asking ‘What's new?’ would not be Western any more.
What Lies Ahead in 2011?
NEW YORK – The global economy ends 2010 more divided than it was at the beginning of the year.
On one side, emerging-market countries like India, China, and the Southeast Asian economies, are experiencing robust growth.
On the other side, Europe and the United States face stagnation – indeed, a Japanese-style malaise – and stubbornly high unemployment.
The problem in the advanced countries is not a jobless recovery, but an anemic recovery – or worse, the possibility of a double-dip recession.
This two-track world poses some unusual risks. While Asia’s economic output is too small to pull up growth in the rest of the world, it may be enough to push up commodity prices.
Meanwhile, US efforts to stimulate its economy through the Federal Reserve’s policy of “quantitative easing” may backfire.
After all, in globalized financial markets, money looks for the best prospects around the world, and these prospects are in Asia, not the US.  So the money won’t go where it’s needed, and much of it will wind up where it’s not wanted – causing further increases in asset and commodity prices, especially in emerging markets.
Given the high levels of excess capacity and unemployment in Europe and America, quantitative easing is unlikely to trigger a bout of inflation.
It could, however, increase anxieties about future inflation, leading to higher long-term interest rates – precisely the opposite of the Fed’s goal.
This is not the only, or even the most important, downside risk facing the global economy.
The gravest threat comes from the wave of austerity sweeping the world, as governments, particularly in Europe, confront the large deficits brought on by the Great Recession, and as anxieties about some countries’ ability to meet their debt payments contributes to financial-market instability.
The outcome of premature fiscal consolidation is all but foretold: growth will slow, tax revenues will diminish, and the reduction in deficits will be disappointing.
And, in our globally integrated world, the slowdown in Europe will exacerbate the slowdown in the US, and vice versa.
With the US able to borrow at record-low interest rates, and with the promise of high returns on public investments after a decade of neglect, it is clear what it should do.
A large-scale public-investment program would stimulate employment in the short term, and growth in the long term, leading in the end to a lower national debt.
But financial markets demonstrated their shortsightedness in the years preceding the crisis, and are doing so once again, by applying pressure for spending cuts, even if that implies reducing badly needed public investments.
Moreover, political gridlock will ensure that little is done about the other festering problems confronting the American economy: mortgage foreclosures are likely to continue unabated (legal complications aside); small and medium-sized enterprises are likely to continue to be starved of funds; and the small and medium-sized banks that traditionally provide them with credit are likely to continue to struggle to survive.
In Europe, meanwhile, matters are unlikely to be any better.
Europe has finally managed to come to the rescue of Greece and Ireland. In the run up to the crisis, both were governed by right-wing governments marked by crony capitalism or worse, demonstrating once again that free-market economics didn’t work in Europe any better than it did in the US.
In Greece, as in the US, a new government was left to clean up the mess.
The Irish government that encouraged reckless bank lending and the creation of a property bubble was, perhaps not surprisingly, no more adept in managing the economy after the crisis that it was before.
Politics aside, property bubbles leave in their wake a legacy of debt and excess capacity in real estate that is not easily rectified – especially when politically connected banks resist restructuring mortgages.
To me, attempting to discern the economic prospects for 2011 is not a particularly interesting question: the answer is bleak, with little upside potential and a lot of downside risk.
More importantly, how long will it take Europe and America to recover, and can Asia’s seemingly export-dependent economies continue to grow if their historical markets languish?
My best bet is that these countries will maintain rapid growth as they shift their economic focus to their vast and untapped domestic markets.
This will require considerable restructuring of their economies, but China and India are both dynamic, and proved their resilience in their response to the Great Recession.
I am not so bullish on Europe and America.
In both cases, the underlying problem is insufficient aggregate demand.
The ultimate irony is that there are simultaneously excess capacity and vast unmet needs – and policies that could restore growth by using the former to address the latter.
Both the US and Europe, for instance, must retrofit their economies to address the challenges of global warming. There are feasible policies that would work within long-term budget constraints.
The problem is politics: in the US, the Republican Party would rather see President Barack Obama fail than the economy succeed.
In Europe, 27 countries with different interests and perspectives are pulling in different directions, without enough solidarity to compensate.
The bailout packages are, in this light, impressive achievements.
In both Europe and America, the free-market ideology that allowed asset bubbles to grow unfettered – markets always know best, so government must not intervene – now ties policymakers’ hands in designing effective responses to the crisis.
One might have thought that the crisis itself would undermine confidence in that ideology.
Instead, it has resurfaced to drag governments and economies down the sinkhole of austerity.
If politics is the problem in Europe and America, only political changes are likely to restore them to growth.
Or else they can wait until the overhang of excess capacity diminishes, capital goods become obsolete, and the economy’s internal restorative forces work their gradual magic.
Either way, victory is not around the corner.
India’s Outrage
NEW DELHI – Last year ended for India on a note of public outrage that has burdened the country with anger, frustration, and pessimism.
The cause, as all the world knows, was the fatally brutal rape of a young woman on a moving bus, after which she and her male companion – himself beaten nearly to death – were thrown, naked, into the street on a freezing night.
Of course, the government deserves – and has received – no quarter.
The government failed to prevent the crime, then failed again when its unresponsive, inefficient, and crooked police force was unable to respond appropriately.
A wholly moribund and sclerotic administration simply did not know where its duty lay.
When protests erupted, the government, in a fit of blind idiocy, set the police upon peaceful protesters, men and women, with long batons, water cannon, and tear gas.
This heavy-handedness of course resolved nothing.
Citizens’ fury deepened into grim resolve; the government’s repressive impulse was challenged and defeated.
Since then, tokenism has replaced leadership.
Not one government official had the courage, skill, or decency to rise to the occasion.
The opposition, too, floundered, doing no more than simply faulting the ruling establishment.&#160;
After an unconscionably long delay of seven days, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh finally broke his incomprehensible silence about the rape.
But his public statement offered no answers and no balm – indeed, nothing but platitudes.
Then, humiliatingly, Singh inquired, sotto voce, of those surrounding him: “Was it all right?”
A torrent of electronic wrath burst forth.
Protest placards could be seen all over the country: “No!
Prime Minister, it is not all right.”
Clearly, Machiavelli was correct: for a political leader, the people’s contempt is worse than their hatred.
Then, in another mindless act, the victim, struggling for life, was flown to a hospital in Singapore.
No one would or could say why.
It was there that she died – some say that she arrived already brain-dead.
Her body was then hurriedly flown back to India, where it was quietly, almost surreptitiously, cremated.
If the government feared her alive, it was petrified of her dead.
All of India was shamed by this callous and inhuman folly.
As a result, India’s Congress-led government has irretrievably lost the public’s confidence; the establishment’s authority has evaporated.
A blunt question is now being asked frequently and openly: “Is this India’s Tahrir Square?”
Even if it is not, how can an internally roiled India respond adequately to its many external tests, the severity of which was underscored recently by Pakistani troops’ killing of two Indian soldiers along the Line of Control in Kashmir.
Meanwhile, as India flounders, Northeast Asia has been astir choosing new leaders, who have now been installed in China, Japan, and North and South Korea.
With an assertive China, ongoing regime change in Myanmar, a troubled Bangladesh, a constitutionally stymied Nepal, and continuing ethnic tensions in Sri Lanka, India’s eastern challenges are many and mighty.
But they are even more severe to India’s west, with Pakistan heading into elections (one hopes) in the spring of 2013, and NATO troops withdrawing from Afghanistan.
Indian diplomacy faces a time of trial in both countries.
Farther west, too, India’s statecraft is in question.
Where does India, which remains dependent on Middle Eastern energy, stand on that region’s many crises?
How will it address the nuclear issue in Iran – a country with which it has close historical, cultural, and economic ties – or the civil war in Syria, the rise of Salafism in Egypt, and the Israel-Palestine standoff?
Moreover, India no longer appears to be the vigorous economic dynamo that was the darling of global investors only five years ago.
Already some say that the “I” in BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) should now stand for Indonesia.
A possible answer lies in an early election: a new mandate for an India that is in desperate need of renewal.
What McCain and Obama Ignore
PRINCETON – Barack Obama worked for three years as a community organizer on Chicago’s blighted South Side, so he knows all about the real poverty that exists in America.
He knows that in one of the world’s richest nations, 37 million people live in poverty, a far higher proportion than in Europe’s wealthy nations.
Yet Obama’s campaigning has focused on “Main Street” and tax cuts for the middle class, bypassing the issue of what to do about poverty. 
It’s not as if Obama has no policies for helping the poor.
Go to his Web site, click on “The Issues” and then on “Poverty.”
There you will find a set of thoughtful proposals ranging from raising the minimum wage to establishing model “Promise Neighborhoods” that will attempt to turn around areas with high levels of poverty and low levels of educational achievement by providing services such as early childhood education and crime prevention.
(Go to John McCain’s Web site, and you won’t even find “poverty” among the list of issues to click on – although “Space Program” is there.)
So why isn’t Obama speaking up about an issue on which he has so much more first-hand experience than his opponent, and better policies, too?
Perhaps not enough of the poor vote, or they will vote Democratic anyway.
Moreover, his researchers presumably have told him that independent middle-class voters are more likely to be won over by appeals to their wallets than to concern for America’s poor.
If America’s poor don’t rank high among voters’ concerns, it is no surprise that the poor abroad are virtually invisible.
Again, Obama has both the background – with his family ties to Kenya – and a promising policy, to increase America’s foreign assistance to $50 billion by 2012, using the money to stabilize failing states and bring sustainable growth to Africa.
(Currently, of all the OECD donor nations, only Greece gives a lower percentage of its gross national income than the United States does.)
But when Obama’s running mate, Joe Biden, was asked, in his debate with his Republican counterpart, Sarah Palin, what proposals an Obama-Biden administration might have to scale back as a result of the $700 billion Wall Street bailout, the only specific proposal he mentioned was the increase in foreign assistance.
McCain has never gotten down to specifics about how much foreign aid he would like the US to give.
Both candidates refer to deaths of American military personnel in Iraq, but there has been less attention to the war’s civilian causalities.
In her debate with Biden, Palin actually attacked Obama for saying that, in her words, “All we’re doing in Afghanistan is air-raiding villages and killing civilians.”
She called that comment “reckless” and “untrue,” because, “That’s not what we’re doing there.
We’re fighting terrorists, and we’re securing democracy.”
Of course, killing civilians is not all that the US and its NATO allies are doing in Afghanistan, and if Obama implied that it was, his rhetoric was careless.
But what is extraordinary about Palin’s comment is that, despite being a strong proponent of the sanctity of human life, in criticizing Obama she did not pause to deplore the serious loss of innocent human life that American air strikes in Afghanistan have caused.
Afghanistan’s president, Hamid Karzai, has repeatedly expressed outrage at American air strikes that have killed civilians – most recently in August, when he said that 95 Afghans, including 50 children, were killed in the bombing of a village.
The global ethical challenge that has been most prominent in the campaign is climate change.
Here, the candidates’ goals are virtually identical: they both support a cap-and-trade system to make deep cuts in US greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050.
Obama wants the goal to be an 80% reduction and McCain says 66%, but, since the next president will leave office no later than 2016, that difference is irrelevant.
Interestingly, one ethical issue on which neither candidate has campaigned has been shown to have the potential to move voters.
A group called Defenders of Wildlife has been running an ad graphically highlighting Palin’s support for shooting wolves from aircraft.
A study of Republicans, Democrats, and independents showed that viewing the ad led to greater support for Obama.
According to Glenn Kessler, the head of HCD research, which conducted the study with the Muhlenberg College Institute of Public Opinion, whereas recent ads from both parties have had little impact among voters, “This is the first ad in over a month that seems to have broken through.”
Consistent with that finding, an historic ballot initiative in California to ban cruel forms of animal confinement on factory farms, including the battery cage system of keeping hens, is also showing strong support.
What Monetary Policy Does China Need?
China’s remarkable growth has been financed recently by a rapid expansion of money and bank credit that is producing an increasingly unsustainable investment boom.
This renews concerns that the country may not be able to avert a replay of the painful boom–and-bust cycle such as the one it endured in the mid-1990’s.
Monetary policy is usually the first line of defense in such situations.
But China’s monetary policy has been hamstrung by the tightly managed exchange-rate regime.
This regime prevents the central bank – the People’s Bank of China (PBC) – from taking appropriate policy decisions to manage domestic demand, because interest-rate hikes could encourage capital inflows and put further pressure on the exchange rate.
There is, of course, a vigorous ongoing debate about China’s exchange-rate policy.
China’s rising trade surplus has led some observers to call for a revaluation of the renminbi to correct what they see as an unfair competitive advantage that China maintains in international markets.
Others argue that the stable exchange rate fosters macroeconomic stability in China.
But this debate misses the point.
What China really needs is a truly independent monetary policy oriented to domestic objectives.
This would enable the PBC to manage domestic demand by allowing interest rates to rise in order to rein in credit growth and deter reckless investment.
An independent monetary policy requires a flexible exchange rate, not a revaluation.
But what could take the place of the stable exchange rate as an anchor for monetary policy and for tying down inflation expectations?
We recommend a low inflation objective as the anchor for monetary policy in China.
Theoretical research and the practical experiences of many countries both show that focusing on price stability is the best way for monetary policy to achieve the broader objectives in the charter of the PBC: macroeconomic and financial stability, high employment growth, etc.
The low inflation objective need not involve the formalities of an inflation-targeting regime, such as that practiced by the European Central Bank and the Bank of England, and is similar in approach to that recommended for the United States by US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke.
How could such a framework be operated effectively in an economy in which financial sector problems have weakened the monetary transmission mechanism?
This is a key concern because, notwithstanding recent reforms, the banking system remains fragile.
Nevertheless, we believe that a minimal set of financial sector reforms – essentially making banks’ balance sheets strong enough to withstand substantial interest-rate policy actions – should suffice to implement a low inflation objective.
Although full modernization of the financial sector is a long way off even in the best of circumstances, the minimal reforms that we recommend could strengthen the banking system sufficiently in the near term to support a more flexible exchange rate anchored by an inflation objective.
Indeed, price stability, and the broader macroeconomic stability emanating from it, would provide a good foundation for pushing forward with other financial sector reforms.
The framework we suggest has the important benefit of continuity.
The PBC would not have to change its operational approach to monetary policy.
Only a shift in strategic focus would be needed to anchor monetary policy with a long-run target range for low inflation.
Monitoring of monetary (and credit) targets would still be important in achieving the inflation objective.
Furthermore, it should be easier to adopt the new framework when times are good – like now, when growth is strong and inflation is low.
There is some risk that appreciation of the exchange rate if greater flexibility were allowed could precipitate deflation.
What this really highlights, however, is the importance of framing the debate about exchange-rate flexibility in a broader context.
Having an independent monetary policy that could counteract boom-and-bust cycles would be the best way for China to deal with such risks.
Contrary to those who regard the discussion of an alternative monetary framework as premature, there are good reasons for China to begin right now to build the institutional foundation for the transition to an independent monetary policy.
Indeed, early adoption of a low inflation objective would help secure the monetary and financial stability that China needs as it allows greater exchange-rate flexibility.
What Money Can Buy
CHICAGO – In an interesting recent book, What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of the Market, the Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel points to the range of things that money can buy in modern societies and gently tries to stoke our outrage at the market’s growing dominance.
Is he right that we should be alarmed?
While Sandel worries about the corrupting nature of some monetized transactions (do kids really develop a love of reading if they are bribed to read books?), he is also concerned about unequal access to money, which makes trades using money inherently unequal.
More generally, he fears that the expansion of anonymous monetary exchange erodes social cohesion, and argues for reducing money’s role in society.
Sandel’s concerns are not entirely new, but his examples are worth reflecting upon.
In the United States, some companies pay the unemployed to stand in line for free public tickets to congressional hearings.
They then sell the tickets to lobbyists and corporate lawyers who have a business interest in the hearing but are too busy to stand in line.
Clearly, public hearings are an important element of participatory democracy.
All citizens should have equal access.
So selling access seems to be a perversion of democratic principles.
The fundamental problem, though, is scarcity.
We cannot accommodate everyone in the room who might have an interest in a particularly important hearing.
So we have to “sell” entry.
We can either allow people to use their time (standing in line) to bid for seats, or we can auction seats for money.
The former seems fairer, because all citizens seemingly start with equal endowments of time.
But is a single mother with a high-pressure job and three young children as equally endowed with spare time as a student on summer vacation?
And is society better off if she, the chief legal counsel for a large corporation, spends much of her time standing in line?
Whether it is better to sell entry tickets for time or for money thus depends on what we hope to achieve.
If we want to increase society’s productive efficiency, people’s willingness to pay with money is a reasonable indicator of how much they will gain if they have access to the hearing.
Auctioning seats for money makes sense – the lawyer contributes more to society by preparing briefs than by standing in line.
On the other hand, if it is important that young, impressionable citizens see how their democracy works, and that we build social solidarity by making corporate executives stand in line with jobless teenagers, it makes sense to force people to bid with their time and to make entry tickets non-transferable.
But if we think that both objectives – efficiency and solidarity – should play some role, perhaps we should turn a blind eye to hiring the unemployed to stand in line in lieu of busy lawyers, so long as they do not corner all of the seats.
What about the sale of human organs, another example Sandel worries about?
Something seems wrong when a lung or a kidney is sold for money.
Yet we celebrate the kindness of a stranger who donates a kidney to a young child.
So, clearly, it is not the transfer of the organ that outrages us – we do not think that the donor is misinformed about the value of a kidney or is being fooled into parting with it.
Nor, I think, do we have concerns about the scruples of the person selling the organ – after all, they are parting irreversibly with something that is dear to them for a price that few of us would accept.
I think part of our discomfort has to do with the circumstances in which the transaction takes place.
What kind of society do we live in if people have to sell their organs to survive?
But, while a ban on organ sales may make us feel better, does it really make society better off?
Possibly, if it makes society work harder to ensure that people are never driven to the circumstances that would make them contemplate selling a vital organ.
But possibly not, if it allows society to ignore the underlying problem, either moving the trade underground, or forcing people in such circumstances to resort to worse remedies.
Then again, part of our unease probably has to do with what we perceive as an unequal exchange.
The seller is giving up part of her body in an irreversible transaction.
The buyer is giving up only money – perhaps earned on a lucky stock trade or at an overpaid job.
If that money had been earned by selling a portion of a lung, or represented savings painfully accumulated during years of backbreaking work, we might consider the exchange more equal.
Of course, the central virtue of money is precisely its anonymity.
I need know nothing about the dollar bill I receive to be able to use it.
But, because money’s anonymity obscures its provenance, it may be socially less acceptable as a medium of payment for some objects.
In both examples – congressional tickets and organ sales – Sandel suggests reducing money’s role.
But money has many virtues in facilitating transactions – hence its ubiquitous use.
So, perhaps the more important message is that society’s tolerance for monetization is proportional to the legitimacy accorded to the distribution of money.
The more people believe that it is the hardworking and the deserving who have money, the more they are willing to tolerate transactions for money (though some transactions remain beyond the pale).
But if people believe that the moneyed are primarily those who are well connected or crooked, their tolerance for monetary transactions falls.
Rather than focusing on prohibiting monetary transactions, perhaps a more important lesson imparted by Sandel’s examples is that we should work continuously to improve the perceived legitimacy of money’s distribution.
The Moral Limits of Markets
TOKYO – Today, there are very few things that money can’t buy.
If you are sentenced to a jail term in Santa Barbara, California, and don’t like the standard accommodations, you can buy a prison-cell upgrade for about $90 per night.
If you want to help to prevent the tragic fact that, each year, thousands of babies are born to drug-addicted mothers, you can contribute to a charity that uses a market mechanism to ameliorate the problem: a $300 cash grant to any drug-addicted woman willing to be sterilized.
Or, if you want to attend a US Congressional hearing, but don’t want to wait for hours in line, you can enlist the services of a line-standing company.
The company hires homeless people and others in need of work to wait in line – overnight if necessary.
Just before the hearing begins, the paying customer can take his or her line-stander’s place in the queue, and claim a front-row seat in the hearing room.
Is there anything wrong with buying and selling these things?
Some would say no; people should be free to spend their money to buy whatever someone else is willing to sell.
Others believe that there are some things that money should not be able to buy.
But why?&#160; What exactly is wrong with selling prison-cell upgrades to those who can afford them, or offering cash for sterilization, or hiring line-standers?
To answer questions such as these, we need to pose a bigger question: What role should money and markets play in a good society?
A market society, by contrast, is a place where almost everything is up for sale.
It is a way of life in which market values seep into social relations and govern every domain.
We should be worried about this trend for two reasons.
First, as money looms larger in our societies, affluence – and its absence – matters more.
If the main advantages of affluence were the ability to afford yachts and fancy vacations, inequality would matter less than it does today.
But, as money comes to govern access to education, health care, political influence, and safe neighborhoods, life becomes harder for those of modest means.
The marketization of everything sharpens the sting of inequality.
A second reason to resist putting a price tag on all human activities is that doing so can be corrupting.
Prostitution is a classic example.
Some object to it on the grounds that it typically exploits the poor, for whom the choice to sell their bodies may not be truly voluntary.
But others object on the grounds that reducing sex to a commodity is inherently degrading and objectifying.
The idea that market relations can corrupt higher goods is not restricted to matters of sex and the body.
It also applies to civic goods and practices.
Consider voting. We don’t allow a free market in votes, even though such a market would arguably be “efficient,” in the economist’s sense of the term.
Many people don’t use their votes, so why let them go to waste?
Why not let those who don’t much care about an election’s outcome sell their vote to someone who does?
Both parties to the transaction would be better off.
The best argument against a market in votes is that the vote is not a piece of private property; rather, it is a public responsibility.
To treat a vote as an instrument of profit would be to degrade it, to corrupt its meaning as an expression of civic duty.
But, if a market in votes is objectionable because it corrupts democracy, what about systems of campaign finance (including the one currently in place in the United States) that give wealthy donors a disproportionate voice in elections?
The reason to reject a market in votes –&#160;preserving the integrity of democracy – may be a reason to limit financial contributions to political candidates as well.
Of course, we often disagree about what counts as “corrupting” or “degrading.”
To decide whether prostitution is degrading, we have to decide how human sexuality is properly valued.
To decide whether selling prison-cell upgrades corrupts the meaning of criminal justice, we have to decide what purpose criminal punishment should serve.
To decide whether we should allow the buying and selling of human organs for transplantation, or hire mercenaries to fight our wars, we have to think through hard questions about human dignity and civic responsibility.
These are controversial questions, and we often try to avoid addressing them in public discourse.
But that is a mistake.
Our reluctance to engage morally contested questions in politics has left us ill-equipped to deliberate about one of the most important issues of our time: Where do markets serve the public good, and where do they not belong?
What Next after Failed Sanctions on Iran?
LOS ANGELES amp#45;amp#45; The approval of fresh sanctions on Iran marks the third time that the United Nations Security Council has been galvanized to stem the Islamic Republic’s feared uranium enrichment efforts.
Unfortunately, the new sanctions are unlikely to be any more effective than the first two rounds.
Consider the two earlier Security Council resolutions.
The December 2006 resolution curbed international assistance to Iran in mastering the nuclear fuel cycle.
The March 2007 resolution called for “vigilance and restraint” in the sale of heavy weapons to Iran and avoidance of new grants, financial assistance, or concessional loans.
Neither moved the country’s ruling mullahs.
Few expect a different outcome from the new sanctions, which authorize international interception of Iranian contraband and tightened monitoring of the regime’s financial institutions, along with travel limitations and asset freezes applied to people and companies involved in Iran’s nuclear program.
The failure of targeted UN sanctions should come as no surprise.
The US has been on the sanctions treadmill for years.
Between 2003 and 2007 the US Treasury Department brought litigation against 94 companies for violating the ban against trade and investment in Iran.  The State Department imposed sanctions 111 times against foreign entities that engaged in proliferation or terrorism-related activities with Iran.
And both departments have used their power to freeze financial assets or access to the US financial system.
The results amounted to little more than a pin prick.
Iran’s nuclear programs continued to be financed by international commerce.
In 1994, Iran exported $37 billion in goods; by 2007, the figure had nearly doubled, to $70 billion.
In roughly the same period, Iran’s imports also soared, from $22 billion in 1994 to $45 billion in 2006.
Evaluating two decades of US sanctions to curb Iran’s nuclear appetite, the US Congress’s Government Accountability Office recently concluded that the results are “unclear,” adding with candid obliqueness that “some evidence, such as foreign firms signing contracts to invest in Iran’s energy and Iran’s continued proliferation efforts, raise questions about the extent of the sanctions’ impact.”
Not only have sanctions failed to halt Iran’s fuel cycle programs, but so have other avenues.
The European Union’s multiple offers of political and economic inducements went nowhere, as did cajoling by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
To be sure Iran offered, in 2005 and subsequently, to tether its program to international co-management, which arguably could have placed resident international monitors on site.
But both the international community and Iran failed to follow through, and now that opportunity has increasingly become moot as Iranian engineers gain confidence in their handiwork.
Some hope that the next US administration can stem Iran’s nuclear ambitions through bilateral diplomacy.
But Europe’s negotiating experience raises doubts about that prospect, as Iran remains unequivocal about never abandoning its nuclear fuel cycle program.
Assuming that concern over Iran’s nuclear “breakout” capacity mounts, this leaves the US and its allies with three options, each with its own risks.
First, a naval blockade (reminiscent of the Cuban missile crisis) that halted both Iran’s oil exports and imports of refined fuel would cripple the country’s economy.
But the US military would have to be able to prevent Iran from closing the Strait of Hormuz, through which much of the world’s oil supply passes.
A halt in Iran’s oil exports alone would dramatically upset international oil markets, and the Iranian leadership would likely  dig in its heels to continue, if not accelerate, nuclear development.
Second, while a military strike would slow Iran’s nuclear program, facilities could be rebuilt in the absence of inspectors to find and destroy remnants, regime change, and/or military occupation.
Moreover, the attack shock could trigger Iranian vengeance regionally and elsewhere, with a global economic impact far exceeding that implied by a blockade.
This leaves an unsettling fallback option.
An Iran on the cusp of becoming a nuclear-armed state confronting a nuclear-armed Israel bringing its bomb out of the basement.
In that event, there remains the hope that mutual nuclear deterrence will promote mutual common sense.
Absent a dramatic improvement in the Middle East’s grim political landscape, the failure of deterrence would bring the sum of all the fears of our nuclear age upon us.
What Next After the Gaza Withdrawal?
The withdrawal of Israeli troops and the evacuation of Jewish settlers from Gaza, after 38 years of occupation, is the most recent proof of the limits of military power, even when that power is overwhelming.
Now is the time to take stock of the lessons learned from the years of occupation and resistance in order to understand what Israelis and Palestinians should do next.
To begin with, it is imperative to understand how much credit Palestinians can credibly claim for the Israeli withdrawal.
True, Palestinian resistance and sacrifices were a contributing factor in Ariel Sharon’s decision to reverse a policy he had espoused for decades. But it would be a mistake to attribute the Israeli withdrawal exclusively to Palestinian militancy.
After all, this bittersweet Israeli action was neither a clear result of military defeat nor a consequence of political negotiations.
But unilateralism is not a rational long-term and effective policy, for it will not lead to a genuine and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Just as President Bush has discovered in Iraq, Sharon will also be forced to acknowledge the limits of his strategy.
Unilateralism seems very expedient to shortsighted politicians, for it obviates the need for what they perceive as the mess of actual negotiations – that is, meeting their counterparts face to face and discovering the human results of their policies.
Going it alone also seems politically advantageous domestically, because leaders can decide how much and how far they want to carry out a particular policy.
To be fair, unilateralism is convenient not only for a reluctant Israeli prime minister who does not wish to make substantial compromises during negotiations; it is also attractive to hard-line Palestinians who regard multilateralism as a means of pressing them to make unpopular concessions.
In any case, the day after the completion of the Gaza withdrawal, Israelis and Palestinians will be confronted with important unresolved questions.
There is no doubt that the evacuation of Jewish settlers in areas that Israelis consider part of their God-given territory represents a huge ideological reversal.
But after years of preaching and practicing one of Zionism’s main tenets, will the removal of settlements continue in the West Bank, or will this be a one-time exception?
Palestinians, for their part, will be expected to answer questions – in deeds, not just in words – about their ability to build a modern pluralistic state.
How will the Palestinian body politic deal with the growing power of the Islamic movements that undoubtedly will expect a significant share of power in post-withdrawal Gaza?
The international community also will have to answer some key questions.
According to the Palestinian Economic Council for Reconstruction and Development (PECDAR), annual per capita income in Gaza continues to average roughly $700, while Israelis enjoy incomes averaging a $16,000 per capita.
In the absence of relatively well-paying jobs, what will happen to the lines of unemployed Gazans?
The potential flight of employment seekers – a formidable force worldwide – is only one problem.
More immediately, if Gazan families are not well fed, the recurrence of cross-border violence, if not the eruption of a third intifada, will only be a matter of time.
While the economic situation in Gaza is a critical issue, the future of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict will be determined mainly by the next steps in the peace process.
Permanent-status issues concerning borders, the West Bank, Jerusalem, and refugees must be dealt with bilaterally.
Any serious observer of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict will no doubt acknowledge that there can be no unilateral solution to these issues.
As for the peace process’s multilateral guarantors, the United States and its quartet partners – the European Union, the United Nations, and Russia – have failed to provide even the most basic facts regarding Israel’s withdrawal or how it relates to the “road map” agreed in 2003.
They cannot continue to sit on the sidelines. Washington’s quixotic decision to call Israel’s unilateral move part of the road map has failed to convince many Palestinians.
The prevailing opinion among Palestinians is that the road map will be put into deep freeze once the Israelis complete their Gaza withdrawal.
But the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, their leaders, and the international community must all respond to the challenges that will follow.
Most importantly, the future of the conflict and the chances for genuine peace in the region will depend on understanding the limits of offensive military power, defensive resistance, and unilateralism.
Serious face-to-face talks, in accordance to international law and with the help of the international community, are the only way forward.
What Next After the Likud Referendum?
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's proposal for a unilateral Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and part of the West Bank has been overwhelmingly defeated by a referendum within his own party, Likud, in what seems to be a humiliating defeat.
Yet this is likely to have little or no effect on Sharon's intention to carry through with the plan.
At first, this seems surprising, since he said before the referendum that he would abide by its outcome.
But Sharon is 75 years old and probably within two years of retirement.
He is determined that his plan becomes his political legacy.
Since there is no precedent for a party referendum, he can argue that the vote does not bind him.
Moreover, Sharon made sure that his main political rivals - notably former Prime Minister Benjamin (Bibi) Netanyahu - supported his plan.
They are now in no position to challenge him as the champions of the opposition within Likud.
So while some members may walk out, Sharon can easily hold on to control of the party.
In addition, many Sharon supporters, torn by what they saw as the plan's combination of costs and benefits, stayed home or even voted against it, but still want Sharon as their leader.
But Sharon is prepared to go even further in taking political risks to push through the withdrawal.
Small right-wing parties in his coalition have already announced that his determination to do so will make them walk out of the government.
Sharon will then turn to the leader of the opposition, 80-year-old former prime minister Shimon Peres, to form a national unity government.
And Peres is ready to do so.
The passionate debate stirred up by Sharon's plan shows how truly revolutionary his proposal is.
Having the army uproot Jewish settlements - with inevitable scenes of settlers resisting and being dragged off - will be a traumatic event for the country.
The plan also entails considerable strategic risks, which, probably more than the prospect of uprooted settlements, account for the large "no" by Likud members.
A key concern is the precedent of withdrawal from southern Lebanon in 2000.
Today, most Israelis believe that this step, though justified on strategic grounds in the face of constant attacks by the Lebanese group Hizbollah, convinced Palestinians that violence worked.
In the same manner, a withdrawal from Gaza, many people worry, will bring increased anarchy there and a rise in overall terrorist attacks.
But convinced - as are most Israelis - that there is no Palestinian partner ready to negotiate seriously and implement its promises, the prime minister wants to prepare for an extended interim period.
Assuming that terrorist attacks against Israel are going to continue under any circumstances, he seeks to improve the country's strategic position to handle this war.
Combined with the long-completed security fence around the Gaza Strip and one being built near Israel's border with the West Bank, pulling out of the most exposed positions is intended to reduce casualties and the number of clashes with the Palestinians.
A secondary intention is to show the world that Israel is ready to withdraw from most of the remaining territories it captured in 1967 in exchange for real peace.
The United States and Britain have supported the withdrawal plan, while most other European countries have been critical.
While demanding an Israeli withdrawal for years, the Palestinian leadership opposes Sharon's plan, arguing it is intended to create permanent borders.
Nevertheless, if implemented, Sharon's proposal would leave them in control of about 99 percent of the Gaza Strip and roughly 50 percent of the West Bank.
If it appears that the withdrawal will proceed and Sharon can assemble a government to implement it, the Palestinian side will then face a major challenge.
Will it be able to put together an effective governmental authority to rule the Gaza Strip, or will that area dissolve into bloody battles among Palestinian factions and a staging area for attacks into Israel that will bring reprisal raids?
A key issue in this mix is the division of power between the nationalist Fatah group and the Islamist Hamas organization.
Local Fatah officials want support from their leader, Yassir Arafat, to take firm control of the territory.
But Arafat has shown a willingness to let groups act as they please, apparently believing that continuing unrest will bring international sympathy and intervention on his behalf.
Yet Arafat himself will be 75 in a few months and is clearly reaching the end of his career.
He has been the only leader his movement has ever known, having led Fatah for 40 years and the Palestinians as a whole for 35 years.
With no apparent successor, his departure from the scene will bring a massive and unpredictable shake-up in Palestinian politics.
The Israeli government's projection has been that both the withdrawal and the security fence will be completed by the end of 2005.
Sharon's retirement is likely to come within another twelve months, with a new opposition leader having to be chosen as well.
Thus, while the Likud referendum seems to have left the Israeli-Palestinian dispute at yet another impasse, both sides are on the verge of enormous changes.
What Next for Europe?
In many ways, 2005 has been Europe’s annus horibilis.
It began well, when Spanish voters approved the draft European Union constitution, but it turned sour when French and Dutch voters spurned it soon after.
Those votes partly reflected displeasure with domestic policies, and partly disappointment with the way governments conduct European affairs.
Governments promptly obliged with more of the same.
Within days of the votes, they failed to agree on the EU budget for 2007-13.
French and British leaders engaged in a heated quarrel that derailed the subsequent summit, before Britain assumed the rotating six-month EU presidency in July.
Normally, countries use their EU presidencies to display their ability to solve problems and move the Union forward.
But, as of early December, Britain has remained dormant.
Besides burying the draft constitution, it has largely sidestepped the budget issue.
Chances that it gets the budget approved this year are slim, and, unless the dispute is resolved soon, the Union will not have an operational budget by 2007.
Even if a budget is adopted, there is no lack of depressing business for the Austrian presidency, which starts on January 1.
The deepest problem is Europe’s inability to grow at more than a snail’s pace and to provide jobs to its citizens.
This is mostly due to the Big Three – France, Germany, and Italy – which produce 70% of Europe’s GDP.
The collective response, adopted in 2000, has been the “Lisbon Strategy,” which aims at making the EU “the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world” by 2010.
More realistically, it is designed to provide governments with the incentive to undertake the reforms that stimulate economic growth and productivity.
That means facing down the myriad interest groups – from industry lobbies to trade unions and entrenched bureaucracies – that have (so far) successfully protected their turfs.
The strategy rests on peer pressure, naming and shaming governments that fail to make progress.