As he explained in his memoir Dreams from My Father , visiting his father’s native Kenya for the first time made him feel more American – and less African – than ever.
In deciding to visit Ghana, a former British colony and a leading node in the global slave trade of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Obama bypassed the Kenya of his father.
Kenya is embroiled in bitter tribal disputes, and saddled with a brazenly corrupt government.
By contrast, Ghana represents the sunny side Africa.
The country recently completed a well-run election in which the opposition took power.
Its economy is growing.
Ethnic relations in this highly diverse nation are as good as they are anywhere in the world.
Obama will be on African soil for a mere two days, during which time he is expected to emphasize America’s role in promoting good governance and non-violence in Africa – goals long high on America’s public agenda.
Obama’s one new priority – to expand US support for African farmers – reflects a shrewd appreciation of how the expansion of agriculture can quickly lift many rural Africans out of poverty.
“The administration plans over a number of years to put a substantial amount of money into agricultural development,” Obama’s choice for Secretary of State for African Affairs, Johnnie Carson, said in advance of the president’s trip.
Don’t expect Obama to confront the most controversial aspect of US relations with Africa: the American military’s new African command.
Bush, who created the command, gave the US Department of Defense new powers to work on civilian issues in Africa and to expand its military partnerships with governments in the region.
Obama isn’t likely to say whether he’ll scale back the US military role in the region, or whether America’s growing reliance on African oil is the real reason – not Obama’s heritage – for wooing Africans.
Obama’s lack of candor won’t hurt him in the US, where domestic political calculations take precedence.
In truth, his visit to Africa is a reward to his stalwart African-American supporters, who voted overwhelmingly for him in the November election and who remain one pillar of his base.
For African-Americans, Ghana has special meaning.
The country played an important role in the push for civil rights in America, for instance.
In 1957, when legal segregation seemed entrenched in the US, Ghana’s first president, Kwame Nkrumah, used the occasion of his country’s independence from Britain to highlight the injustices experienced daily by black Americans.
He invited Martin Luther King, Jr. to his inauguration, giving the Atlanta-based civil rights leader a global platform for the first time.
Malcolm X, the black nationalist leader, visited Ghana two years later, and again in 1964.
Nkrumah invited W.E.B. Du Bois, the most important black intellectual of the twentieth century, to Ghana in 1961.
Du Bois became a citizen and lived in Ghana until his death.
Hundreds of African-Americans live year round in Ghana today, some within a short walk of Cape Coast Castle, the slaving fort that shipped human cargo until Britain halted the trade in 1807.
Learned and deeply reflective, Obama knows that black Americans will view his visit to Ghana very differently than white Americans will.
His tendency to view Africa through an American lens is thus both understandable and inevitable.
Yet his African roots give him a unique capacity to transform American relations with Africa, elevating the importance of African self-reliance and achievement, while striving to make American aid more intelligent and effective.
Obama in Cuba
MEXICO CITY – Barack Obama’s upcoming visit to Cuba is undoubtedly an historic moment, as it will mark the first time in 88 years that a sitting American president has set foot on the island.
But superlatives are far less useful than a pragmatic look at the practical implications – for both the United States and Cuba – of Obama’s legacy-enhancing move.
In fact, pragmatism is among the main shapers of Obama’s approach to Cuba.
He recognizes the failure of the trade embargo, in place since 1960, to push the country to strengthen human-rights protections, much less to move toward democracy.
Thus, Obama has pragmatically – perhaps even somewhat cynically – decided to abandon trying to compel Cuba’s leaders to change their political system.
After all, if the US had set a political opening in Cuba, or even a modicum of respect for human rights by the government, as a precondition for normalization of diplomatic relations, the two countries would still be at an impasse.
But while Obama may be burnishing his legacy by pursuing unconditional normalization – so-called “engagement” – what he is not doing is securing any actual change in Cuba.
“Engagement” is, ultimately, just rhetoric.
Indeed, if engagement is supposed to result in political change, US engagement with Cuba is most likely doomed to fail; after all, trade and investment have done nothing to bring about a democratic opening in Vietnam over the last 20 years.
Nor have 30 years of massive trade with, and investment in, China brought that country’s leaders any closer to democracy.
If engagement entails setting aside matters relating to democracy and human rights, at least partly, it is still a sensible policy, if not a very altruistic one.
In any case, attending a baseball game in Havana in the company of Cuban President Raúl Castro, as Obama is set to do, is not a necessary element of this policy.
On the contrary, as the columnist Andrés Oppenheimer has argued, it is a serious mistake, as it amounts to a slap in the face for the victims of the Castro regime’s human-right abuses.
Jettisoning the trade embargo, a failed policy, makes sense, but it does not require “playing nice” with a dictator.
One never knows whether other dictators will invoke a regrettable precedent set by an American head of state, particularly one who is highly admired nearly everywhere in the world.
This is not to say that Obama has forsaken Cuba’s small and beleaguered opposition.
Indeed, he is scheduled to meet with Cuban dissidents, much to the displeasure of the Castro regime.
Moreover, Obama will address questions of democracy and respect for human rights in his live televised address to the Cuban public.
The media representatives who will flank Obama during his visit – including, unfortunately, at that ill-advised baseball game – will take up these crucial issues in their reports, even if they are peppered with platitudes about Cuban music and published alongside silly shots of vintage automobiles on Havana’s streets.
While the US cannot – and, it seems, will not – ignore the principles of democracy and human rights in its dealings with Cuba, there is a distinction between democratic norms and economic policies.
In fact, the biggest challenge facing the US as it attempts to normalize ties with Cuba is on the economic front.
In the 15 months since ties were reestablished and prospectors headed to the island in search of investment opportunities, little has actually happened, in terms of trade, tourism, and new projects.
Indeed, as the New York Times reports, American and Cuban players have signed only a handful of business deals – a reality that “threatens to sap momentum from the process of building relations.”
Part of the problem is the lingering embargo.
While support for lifting it has grown within the Cuban-American community and the US Congress, it is unlikely to happen before Obama leaves office.
Though a number of restrictions on travel and financial transactions have been rescinded, the obstacles in the path of a real change in the island’s economic situation remain formidable.
Even without the embargo, Cuba would still be held back by its dilapidated infrastructure; strict labor laws; restrictions on foreign-investment; an educated but unskilled workforce, unaccustomed to Western workplace practices; and a lack of contracts and legal instruments to enforce those practices.
All of this makes it highly unlikely that US engagement will have much of an impact on ordinary Cubans.
For Cuba’s leaders, the absence of concrete economic benefits is a massive disappointment.
With Venezuela facing economic devastation, owing partly to collapsing oil prices, its people are no longer interested in subsidizing Cuban socialism to the tune of several billion dollars per year; indeed, they have already rejected their own left-wing leadership.
Castro saw this shift coming even before the Venezuelans did, and began looking to the US to take up the slack.
But the US hasn’t, and probably won’t, at least not for some time.
Without a strong economic impact, America’s opening to Cuba will not make even a small contribution to political liberalization on the island.
This will not matter much for Obama’s legacy.
But it does raise questions about how important an individual leader’s legacy should be in shaping policy toward an endearing but impoverished and still-repressive country.
Obama’s Passage to India
CAMBRIDGE – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s vigorous foreign policy in the seven months since he took office has surprised observers.
After inviting the leaders of Pakistan and other neighboring countries to his inauguration, he embarked on trips to China, Australia, and the United States.
More recently, he welcomed Russian President Vladimir Putin to New Delhi and signed a large number of trade deals and orders to import Russian nuclear reactors.
India, Modi is telling his fellow citizens, is strong and well regarded around the world.
Next month, US President Barack Obama will travel to New Delhi as Modi’s special guest at events commemorating Republic Day, India’s national holiday – just three months after the two leaders held substantive talks in Washington, DC.
The visit should thus be regarded as a clear signal of Obama’s desire, no less than Modi’s, to strengthen US-India relations.
So what is likely to be on Obama’s mind when he meets his Indian counterpart again, and what does he think can be done to cement bilateral ties?
Three issues stand out – beginning with trade, which is as important politically as it is economically.
Obama hopes that the Trans-Pacific Partnership will be concluded in 2015 and ratified by the US Senate.
The TPP will not be as powerful a free-trade agreement as originally intended, owing to exclusions and a very long phase-in period.
But it will tie the US and 11 other Pacific Rim countries (including Japan but excluding China) together in a new economic bloc.
Obama should be eager to stress that India’s exclusion from the TPP is a matter solely of geography – India does not abut the Pacific – and that the US wants to increase bilateral trade and direct investment by American firms.
The second issue is terrorism.
The US authorities are worried that American citizens who have been fighting with the Islamic State and Al Qaeda in the Middle East will return home to commit terrorist acts.
India has experienced horrific acts of terrorism on its own territory.
Continued cooperation between the US and Indian intelligence agencies can help both countries prevent future incidents.
Terrorism includes not just physical violence, but also assaults in cyberspace.
China, Russia, and Iran have been the source of frequent cyber attacks on banks, companies, and government agencies; North Korea, the US alleges, was behind the recent breach of Sony Pictures’ computers.
Though Obama presented evidence to Chinese President Xi Jinping of technology theft by hackers based in China, the Chinese authorities continue to deny it.
More recently, Russia and others have been planting malware in the control systems of the US power grid and other sensitive networks.
Looking ahead, the US worries about cyber attacks by non-state actors like the Islamic State and Al Qaeda.
Although these groups’ members may lack the sophistication to commit such acts, they may try to hire individuals with the necessary skills.
India has a large number of talented computer engineers, including some who might be sympathetic to the Islamist cause.
The US and India could both benefit from cooperating to prevent and disrupt such recruitment efforts.
The third issue on Obama’s mind is bound to be China’s asserted goal of dominating Asia and excluding the US from the region.
Chinese hegemonic ambition runs counter to India’s strategic interests as well – reason enough for Modi’s eagerness to strengthen his country’s relations with its neighbors as well as with the US.
Obama has already made it clear that the US understands that Modi’s willingness to cooperate with Russia, despite Western sanctions imposed on the country, stems from India’s desire to discourage a Sino-Russian alliance against it.
Modi won a landslide victory in an election that reflected the Indian public’s disappointment with the policies and performance of the previous government, led by the Indian National Congress.
Though India had experienced annual real GDP growth of more than 8% for several years, growth has slowed since 2010, to less than 5% in 2013, owing to a populist shift in policies dictated by Congress party leader Sonia Gandhi.
By contrast, the Modi government plans to pursue a pro-growth agenda that includes reducing bureaucratic delays, increasing infrastructure investment, stimulating manufacturing activity, and shifting to a simpler unified tax system.
Modi’s agenda also evidently includes an active foreign policy – as it should.
Cultivating India as a reliable partner in the global economy and in international affairs is a high priority for the US as well.
Obama’s visit to India can help to realize that relationship’s potential.
Immigration and American Power
CAMBRIDGE – The United States is a nation of immigrants.
Except for a small number of Native Americans, everyone is originally from somewhere else, and even recent immigrants can rise to top economic and political roles.
President Franklin Roosevelt once famously addressed the Daughters of the American Revolution – a group that prided itself on the early arrival of its ancestors – as “fellow immigrants.”
In recent years, however, US politics has had a strong anti-immigration slant, and the issue played an important role in the Republican Party’s presidential nomination battle in 2012.
But Barack Obama’s re-election demonstrated the electoral power of Latino voters, who rejected Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney by a 3-1 majority, as did Asian-Americans.
As a result, several prominent Republican politicians are now urging their party to reconsider its anti-immigration policies, and plans for immigration reform will be on the agenda at the beginning of Obama’s second term.
Successful reform will be an important step in preventing the decline of American power.
Fears about the impact of immigration on national values and on a coherent sense of American identity are not new.
The nineteenth-century “Know Nothing” movement was built on opposition to immigrants, particularly the Irish.
Chinese were singled out for exclusion from 1882 onward, and, with the more restrictive Immigration Act of 1924, immigration in general slowed for the next four decades.
During the twentieth century, the US recorded its highest percentage of foreign-born residents, 14.7%, in 1910.
A century later, according to the 2010 census, 13% of the American population is foreign born.
But, despite being a nation of immigrants, more Americans are skeptical about immigration than are sympathetic to it.
Various opinion polls show either a plurality or a majority favoring less immigration.
The recession exacerbated such views: in 2009, one-half of the US public favored allowing fewer immigrants, up from 39% in 2008.
Both the number of immigrants and their origin have caused concerns about immigration’s effects on American culture.
Demographers portray a country in 2050 in which non-Hispanic whites will be only a slim majority.
Hispanics will comprise 25% of the population, with African- and Asian-Americans making up 14% and 8%, respectively.
But mass communications and market forces produce powerful incentives to master the English language and accept a degree of assimilation.
Modern media help new immigrants to learn more about their new country beforehand than immigrants did a century ago.
Indeed, most of the evidence suggests that the latest immigrants are assimilating at least as quickly as their predecessors.
While too rapid a rate of immigration can cause social problems, over the long term, immigration strengthens US power.
It is estimated that at least 83 countries and territories currently have fertility rates that are below the level needed to keep their population constant.
Whereas most developed countries will experience a shortage of people as the century progresses, America is one of the few that may avoid demographic decline and maintain its share of world population.
For example, to maintain its current population size, Japan would have to accept 350,000 newcomers annually for the next 50 years, which is difficult for a culture that has historically been hostile to immigration.
In contrast, the Census Bureau projects that the US population will grow by 49% over the next four decades.
Today, the US is the world’s third most populous country; 50 years from now it is still likely to be third (after only China and India).
This is highly relevant to economic power: whereas nearly all other developed countries will face a growing burden of providing for the older generation, immigration could help to attenuate the policy problem for the US.
In addition, though studies suggest that the short-term economic benefits of immigration are relatively small, and that unskilled workers may suffer from competition, skilled immigrants can be important to particular sectors – and to long-term growth.
There is a strong correlation between the number of visas for skilled applicants and patents filed in the US.
At the beginning of this century, Chinese- and Indian-born engineers were running one-quarter of Silicon Valley’s technology businesses, which accounted for $17.8 billion in sales; and, in 2005, immigrants had helped to start one-quarter of all US technology start-ups during the previous decade.
Immigrants or children of immigrants founded roughly 40% of the 2010 Fortune 500 companies.
Equally important are immigration’s benefits for America’s soft power.
The fact that people want to come to the US enhances its appeal, and immigrants’ upward mobility is attractive to people in other countries.
The US is a magnet, and many people can envisage themselves as Americans, in part because so many successful Americans look like them.
Moreover, connections between immigrants and their families and friends back home help to convey accurate and positive information about the US.
Likewise, because the presence of many cultures creates avenues of connection with other countries, it helps to broaden Americans’ attitudes and views of the world in an era of globalization.
Rather than diluting hard and soft power, immigration enhances both.
Singapore’s former leader, Lee Kwan Yew, an astute observer of both the US and China, argues that China will not surpass the US as the leading power of the twenty-first century, precisely because the US attracts the best and brightest from the rest of the world and melds them into a diverse culture of creativity.
China has a larger population to recruit from domestically, but, in Lee’s view, its Sino-centric culture will make it less creative than the US.
That is a view that Americans should take to heart.
If Obama succeeds in enacting immigration reform in his second term, he will have gone a long way toward fulfilling his promise to maintain the strength of the US.
Obamanomics: Year One and Beyond
BERKELEY – President Barack Obama has not had an easy first year economically.
He inherited a financial system on the verge of collapse. He was bequeathed an economy in recession and an unemployment rate destined to rise.
And he faced a Congress and an economics profession with a tendency to confuse these real demons with imaginary ones.
His strength has been not to allow the perfect to become the enemy of the good.
His $787 billion fiscal stimulus was good.
To be sure, it was based on unrealistically optimistic assumptions about the depth of the recession, the strength of the recovery, and the level at which unemployment would peak.
It was too heavily tilted toward tax cuts that would tend to boost saving rather than consumption.
However distasteful the uses to which those earnings have been put, they at least prevented the financial system from falling off a cliff.
Finally, Obama’s Quaker-meeting approach to legislating health-care reform has produced, of all things, health-care reform.
For the end of the story we will have to wait and see what emerges from the House-Senate reconciliation process.
But it will certainly prevent the insurance companies from denying coverage on grounds of preexisting conditions.
It will address adverse selection by including an individual mandate.
And it will subsidize insurance coverage for the poor. While it will presumably lack the public option many of us prefer, this is still a real achievement.
The same middle-of-the-road approach can be taken in the second year to address the still-outstanding fiscal issues.
Obama can use his State of the Union message to flesh out a bipartisan strategy for narrowing the budget deficit to sustainable levels.
This would entail reinstating pay-as-you-go rules and establishing an independent commission to submit to Congress amendment-proof (and filibuster-proof) recommendations for tax and expenditure reform.
But Obama needs to provide stronger leadership on financial reform, where, as with health care, there is a welter of conflicting proposals.
There are two reasons to doubt that the light-touch approach used in the case of health care is appropriate to reforming financial regulation.
First, unlike health care, where we can afford to proceed incrementally, the need for comprehensive financial reform is pressing.
If health-insurance exchanges don’t work, we can always reconsider the public option.
But if the initial approach to financial reform doesn’t work, we face the prospect of another financial crisis every bit as serious as the last.
Second, health care had effective proponents – in Congress, among consumers, and even among some of its providers.
Medium-term fiscal reform, for its part, will be pushed by bond-market vigilantes.
But financial reform is too technical for non-specialists.
And the specialists, the financiers themselves, prefer a status quo that rewards them lavishly.
This is one area where Obama’s consensual instincts do not serve him well.
He needs to use his bully pulpit.
He needs to mobilize the general interest effectively.
Finally, in his second year, Obama must, as he put it last summer in a speech to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), “aim higher.”
He was elected not simply because he is a cool crisis manager, but because he had a vision for a more economically just society.
Now that the time for crisis management is, one hopes, over, he needs to flesh out and implement that vision.
The time for any old kind of public spending simply to support aggregate demand, if not already over, soon will be.
The need then will be for more spending on education and training – the only thing that in the long run will make American workers more productive and reduce income inequality.
Similarly, the United States needs more productivity-enhancing infrastructure – roads, bridges, and ports – and not frills such as high-speed trains between Sacramento and San Diego.
Only measures like these can create the good jobs that will reduce income inequality and make America again resemble a normal advanced economy, not one where inequality approaches Latin American levels.
But more spending on these items will require less spending on other things – or higher taxes.
America’s consensus-oriented president needs to make that case.
The Problem with Politicians as Historians
STANFORD – “History doesn’t repeat itself, but it does rhyme,” quipped Mark Twain.
For generations, political leaders have been lending credence to that observation, as they have attempted to shape their legacies, taking credit for what worked and blaming predecessors or political opponents for what failed.
Many politicians continue to spin the facts even after they have left office.
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill once boasted that, “History will be kind to me, for I intend to write it.”
And, indeed, his multi-volume opus on World War II contains not only many of his most memorable lines (“their finest hour,” “so much owed by so many to so few”); it is also packed with justifications for his actions during the war.
Churchill’s writings may be biased, but they offer remarkable inside information and details that are not readily inferred from memos and briefs, which usually are incomplete and guarded in style.
As historians know, there is great pressure to remember the past as the victors want it remembered.
As Napoleon Bonaparte once put it, “History is a set of lies agreed upon.”
Today, it is US President Barack Obama’s turn to attempt to define his legacy, as his presidency winds down and attention turns to the election of his successor.
And he has already been busy.
During Obama’s recent visit to Japan for the G7 summit, for example, he became the first sitting US president to visit Hiroshima, devastated in 1945 by the nuclear attack ordered by President Harry S. Truman to avoid a ground invasion and hasten the end of World War II.
Obama has also been touting his economic accomplishments, claiming he prevented another Great Depression.
He has said that his Recovery Act stopped the unemployment rate from soaring to 30% – five points higher than what it was at the peak of the Great Depression.
That is a priori nonsense.
Obama’s own advisers have estimated that his stimulus package prevented a rise in unemployment of one percentage point at peak unemployment, not the 20-percentage-point increase the president seems to be claiming.
Obama is not the first political leader to engage in hyperbole, but even by the standards of the Internet age, that one is a whopper.
He has also frequently claimed that all economists agree that his policies worked.
The truth is that while some agree with his advisers’ assessments, others believe the stimulus had little or even a negative effect.
It is interesting that Obama feels the need, as his days count down, to glorify his actions.
And it will be even more interesting to see how he uses his intelligence, eloquence, and experience after his retirement.
The two presidents with whom I worked most closely, Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush, mostly let others do the talking and writing.
Both seemed comfortable with what they had accomplished and what they had to leave undone; and both grew in stature and popularity with time.
Instant evaluations of political leaders are usually modified, often considerably, by subsequent generations.
Historians and journalists have touted few presidents’ accomplishments more than those of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
I consider FDR the greatest president of the twentieth century because of his leadership during WWII.
But most economists now reject the early claims that his New Deal ended the Great Depression.
Indeed, in 1938, unemployment remained at more than 17%.
FDR’s close friend, Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr., worried that “after eight years…we [will] have just as much unemployment as when we started…and an enormous debt, to boot.”
Some economists believe that FDR’s programs, by propping up prices and wages, were counterproductive, preventing markets from clearing and rebounding.
Most economic historians now believe that it was only the massive mobilization of WWII that ended the depression.
In contrast to FDR, Truman was initially considered a mediocre president, a haberdasher from Missouri who just happened to be the vice president who succeeded FDR after his death.
Truman almost lost the 1948 election to the Republican Thomas Dewey.
In 1953, when he was succeeded by Dwight Eisenhower, few would have predicted that he would later be included among the ranks of the near-great presidents.
And yet it was Truman who ended WWII and oversaw creation of the postwar global security and economic architecture: the Marshall Plan, NATO, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank.
And it was his policies that allowed war-devastated societies to rebuild and made strong allies of defeated Germany and Japan, in contrast to the havoc perpetrated at the end of World War I by the Treaty of Versailles.
Moreover, it was under Truman that the first great step in America’s civil-rights revolution, the desegregation of the army, took place.
Legend has it that shortly after President Richard Nixon re-established relations with China, Premier Zhou Enlai, asked what he thought of the French Revolution, replied, “It’s too early to say.”
Similarly, it is likely too early for a fair assessment of leaders such as German Chancellor Angela Merkel and British Prime Minister David Cameron.
While both have had promising tenures, each has been confronted by a major, if not quite existential, challenge: immigration from the Middle East for Merkel and the relationship with Europe for Cameron.
Sometimes there is a clear connection between a leader’s policies and the condition of a country during his or her tenure.
I will not disagree with a historian who determines that Venezuela was eviscerated by President Hugo Chávez’s populist socialism and economic illiteracy.
But, in the case of other important leaders – China’s Xi Jinping, India’s Narendra Modi, Argentina’s Mauricio Macri, Mexico’s Enrique Peña Nieto – it is still early days.
They will preside over many more challenges, and they will be judged by what they bequeath to their successors (and how their successors deal with it).
History is fickle that way; the historians who write it are more fickle still.
Obama’s Asian Vision
NEW YORK – Now that Barack Obama has made history by being elected President of the United States, people throughout the Asia-Pacific region fervently hope he will focus on Asia in a way that he did not during the election season.
In the past few months, every time I visited an Asian country – whether South Korea or India, China or Japan – I was asked repeatedly about candidate Obama’s positions on three issues: trade, foreign policy, and the new geo-economic order.
We all now hope that President-elect Obama will provide the answers, not only in words, but also in actions.
Policy wonks and interested Asians alike often say that when Republicans are in power in America, Asians breathe a confident sigh of relief.
Their assumption is that Republicans will back free trade and oppose protectionism.
This time around, they have not heard much from the President-elect, who is a Democrat, on trade with Asia, and what they have heard about his position on the North American Free Trade Agreement – an alleged desire to rewrite that trade pact unilaterally – does not inspire confidence.
At the same time, countries like India feel that the US, along with Europe, have been on both sides of “free” and “fair” trade – but always from a narrow nationalistic perspective.
If the US is serious about “fair” trade, they say, the new administration will need, for example, to deal with the unfairness of agricultural subsidies, which led to the collapse of the Doha round of World Trade Organization talks.
Most importantly, a trade policy must be articulated that is both free and fair (not only for US workers, but also for Asian workers), and that reassures Asians that Obama will be aware of their needs.
While the US economy falls into a deep recession, the economies of large Asian countries like China and India will continue to grow at an annual rate of 7% to 9%.
They will remain an important source of import demand, especially for high technology and industrial goods.
This could be a great boon to the US economy.  
Asian leaders have often complained that at a time when Asia became increasingly interconnected and China began to enlarge its sphere of influence, America was largely absent in the region.
Indeed, for the past seven years America’s foreign policy seems to have been conducted entirely through the prism of the “war on terror” and the Iraq war.
While there were some singular bilateral accomplishments, such as the adoption of the US-India civil nuclear energy deal, the US has been perceived to be less effective in dealing with the region’s burgeoning multilateral frameworks.
Now, fully aware of Obama’s claims for a presidency that will be about the future, Asians are eager to hear about his vision of the Asia-Pacific region and how the US will deal with Asia’s giants – China and India – while maintaining strong connections to Japan.
The need for Obama to address the region’s new realities early in his tenure has been underlined by the current financial crisis, which has made abundantly clear that the center of global economic power has shifted toward the East.
I was in Korea last week, and several of my friends and colleagues, some in prominent public positions, were thrilled at the prospect of the new US president.
They marveled at the fact that America’s democracy can actually make it possible for a youngish African-American to become the leader of the free world.
Now, this rising region is desperate to hear Obama’s thoughts about America’s role in Asia, thoughts that are commensurate with Asia’s importance – and with the scope of his vision.
Obama in Arabia
PRINCETON – US President Barack Obama’s visit to Saudi Arabia this week, to attend the summit of the Gulf Cooperation Council, comes at a time when relations between the two countries have rarely been worse.
And yet, however negatively most Americans view Saudi Arabia, the country remains an important regional ally.
Obama would be wise to mend the bilateral relationship.
Saudi Arabia, the source of one in nine barrels of oil consumed globally, is not just a linchpin of the global economy; its government’s stability is crucial to the international order.
Should the Al Saud dynasty fall and the country splinter into rival territories ruled by jihadi factions and tribes, the civil wars in Syria and Libya will seem like minor conflicts in comparison.
The collapse of the Saudi state would quickly spill over into neighboring Gulf countries, triggering a regional implosion, with unthinkable humanitarian consequences.
The US would not be able to avoid being dragged militarily into the region, if only to safeguard the supplies of oil and gas on which the global economy depends.
A major cause of the deterioration of the US-Saudi relationship is Obama’s decision to diminish America’s direct involvement in the Middle East.
In a long interview with the journalist Jeffrey Goldberg, Obama expressed his desire for Saudi Arabia to “share” the region with Iran, its principal regional rival.
Obama expended an enormous amount of time and political capital to obtain a nuclear deal with Iran.
He hopes that lifting sanctions in exchange for Iran’s promise to halt its nuclear program for about 15 years will lead Iran to change its behavior, become a more responsible state actor, and abandon its revolutionary agenda and frequent use of non-state actors (including terrorist groups) to advance its goals.
If Iran does as Obama hopes, the US will be able to reduce its military presence in the Gulf.
And if Iran’s leaders stop promoting terror, another important foreign policy achievement will be added to Obama’s legacy.
Unfortunately for Obama – and for the Middle East – his strategy is failing.
As America’s shadow has receded, Saudi Arabia and Iran have become more aggressive, even irresponsible, in pursuing their interests.
Iran remains the principal backer of both Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and the Shia-led government in Baghdad, making it a leading contributor to the humanitarian tragedy in both countries, where Sunni Arabs comprise the majority of the victims of violence.
Saudi Arabia’s behavior has changed even more dramatically in response to its perceived abandonment by the US.
The Kingdom’s leadership has become convinced that the Obama administration no longer has its back, calling into question a decades-old relationship in which America guaranteed Saudi Arabia’s security in exchange for economic and political support.
Americans in Riyadh are repeatedly asked whether Obama’s approach represents an exception or a permanent feature of US policy toward the Gulf.
Obama’s policy has led the Kingdom to break with its long tradition of quiet diplomacy and behind-the-scenes maneuvers.
Instead, Saudi Arabia has become aggressive and militaristic.
It has severed diplomatic relations with Iran, withdrawn financial support from Lebanon, and carried out an inconclusive but devastating war in Yemen against what it sees as Iranian proxies.
Most recently, the Saudis threatened to sell off its US financial assets should Congress enact a proposed law exposing its leadership to lawsuits for the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Repairing the relationship will not be easy.
Offering to sell more weapons to the Gulf countries, as Obama is certain to do this week, is likely to embolden regional players, further inflaming the situation.
He would likely accomplish far more if, instead, he offered an explicit promise that the US would come to the GCC countries’ defense against external aggression in all its forms.
Such a move would not be unprecedented.
US presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan offered similar guarantees, and Obama would be reiterating and strengthening this commitment while taking into account Iran’s potential use of non-state actors.
Such a declaration would put Iran on notice and go a considerable way toward calming Saudi King Salman’s anxiety.
In return, the US could obtain concessions on domestic and regional fronts.
There is a long history of American interest in domestic Saudi matters.
US involvement was especially heavy during the administrations of Presidents John F. Kennedy and Gerald Ford and lasted until the 1990s.
The Kingdom has recently embarked on a major reform of its government and restructuring of its economy.
The US could insist that, as part of this effort, the Kingdom strengthen political accountability and the transparency of its allocation of oil revenues.
Carrying out these reforms would secure the monarchy’s longevity and ensure the country’s stability.
The US could also prevail upon the Saudi government to start negotiating with Iran, reducing tensions on a broad range of fronts, including Iraq, Lebanon, Bahrain, and Yemen.
The wars in Iraq and Syria will not end until Iran and Saudi Arabia come to an accommodation, which will require US mediation.
If the Middle East is allowed to continue on its present drift, without American leadership, US military intervention – most likely sooner rather than later – will become a near-certainty.
Saudi Arabia and Iran may one day find a way to share the Middle East, but only if the US is there to act as an umpire.
Battleground Budget
MILAN – The world’s developed economies, of which the United States is by far the largest and systemically most important, face a range of difficult political and social choices.
President Barack Obama’s proposed US budget acknowledges and addresses those choices and tradeoffs directly and fully for the first time in the post-crisis period.
Obama’s proposal is an important, honest, and politically courageous document.
The debate that follows will largely determine whether the US shifts toward a strong, inclusive, and sustainable pattern of growth and employment, and how the burden of moving to such a path will be shared by Americans of various ages, educational levels, incomes, and wealth.
We know that powerful technological and global market forces have reduced dramatically the number of routine professional and blue-collar jobs, shifted employment options for the middle class toward the non-tradable side of the economy, and channeled growth in national income toward capital and high-end employment, with stagnating income elsewhere.
Job creation remains weak, and employment continues to diverge from growth.
These trends cannot be blamed entirely on poor policy choices or shortsighted government.
They arise mainly from an increasingly integrated global economy’s shifting technological landscape; but they have been exacerbated by a systematic pattern of public-sector underinvestment.
The lesson from many developed and developing countries is that underinvestment in infrastructure, human capital, institutions, and the economy’s knowledge and technology base reduces long-term growth.
Short- and medium-term growth can be sustained for a while by substituting public and private debt for investment – that is, borrowing against future income and consumption.
But this approach establishes a self-limiting pattern, because balance sheets are damaged, demand falters, and expectations have to be adjusted downward.
This brings us to the choices that Obama’s budget embodies.
First there is the issue of how fast to reduce government deficits and the accumulation of public debt.
Sudden fiscal contraction would reduce domestic aggregate demand faster than the economy’s deleveraging and structural shifts could replace it, thereby killing off growth and hiring, with adverse feedback effects on budget deficits.
But delaying the debt reckoning for too long would undermine confidence in the US government’s capacity for fiscal discipline.
Deficits have to fall within a time horizon of 5-10 years.
The alternative is either a sovereign-debt crisis, followed by a destructive spike in borrowing costs, or a growing burden for subsequent generations of taxpayers.
In an ideal world, where compromise is unnecessary, US fiscal policy would maintain the commitments embedded in the social-welfare system, even as demographic and other forces drive up costs (especially for health care).
It would also maintain current consumptions levels and avoid tax increases, while redressing public-investment shortfalls in order to boost growth and expand employment options for today’s middle class and future generations.
Finally, future generations would not be asked to bear the entire burden of rebalancing.
Obviously, it is impossible to reconcile all of these objectives.
To be fair, some reforms – including tax, regulatory, and health-care measures – will help to restore balance without imposing large additional costs on the public sector.
But these are not sufficient to rebalance the economy and restore its growth momentum.
Simply put, one cannot sustain current levels of consumption and entitlements without crowding out public-sector investment, unless one believes that the state’s borrowing power is unlimited, and that the intergenerational burden shift is unimportant.
So choices have to be made.
Gridlock, too, implies a choice –&#160;one that ensures that some version of the status quo will be the outcome.
What would that look like?
Here some guess work is required.
Entitlement programs would likely be reduced, but not enough to offset a substantial intergenerational burden transfer.
Taxes might rise somewhat in the high-income ranges, with the proceeds going to fund entitlements and redistribution.
The desire to avoid substantial tax increases (and to sustain consumption levels) will almost surely be reflected in a continuing shortfall of public-sector investment, in turn undermining long-term growth.&#160;
Obama’s proposed budget recognizes that all objectives and expectations cannot be met, and that growth is partly a distributional issue now and an intergenerational issue (and potentially one of inclusiveness and social stability) in the longer term.
It is an invitation to the US Congress and the American public to acknowledge and address the choices and tradeoffs that are needed to establish a sustainable pattern of economic growth – and to ensure a fair distribution of the burden of getting there.
The choices are more extreme in countries where the imbalances are more severe and markets suffer more policy-induced impediments to the private-sector flexibility, mobility, and dynamism that continue to benefit the US.
In Italy and Spain, growth is negative, and youth unemployment is 35% and 55%, respectively.
To be sure, this is a moral issue, but it is also an issue of political and social stability.
Every country has its own version of a social contract that defines the rights and responsibilities of citizens, the role of the state, and the idea of inclusiveness.
The most successful public policies and fiscal choices are those that are not only guided by the enduring values embedded in the social contract, but that are also adapted to changing demographic, technological, and global circumstances.
That sometime means making hard choices of the type that the US and many other developed countries are facing now.
If we make these choices poorly, growth will suffer and future distributional choices will be far more painful.
Obama’s China Card?
MELBOURNE – According to the United States Federal Reserve, Americans’ net worth has fallen 40% since 2007, returning to its 1992 level.
Progress towards recovery will be slow and difficult, and the US economy will be weak throughout the run-up to November’s presidential and congressional elections.
Can any incumbent – and especially President Barack Obama – win re-election in such conditions?
To be sure, the blame for America’s malaise lies squarely with Obama’s predecessors: Bill Clinton, for encouraging the Fed to take its eye off financial-market supervision and regulation, and George W. Bush, for his costly wars, which added massively to US government debt.
But, come Election Day, many (if not most) Americans are likely to ignore recent history and vote against the incumbent.
Given this, it would not be surprising if Obama and others in his administration were seeking non-economic issues to energize his campaign.
Moreover, the US is increasing its troop presence in the Pacific at a time when it already has more military force in the region than all other countries combined.
Six aircraft carriers, with their accompanying support vessels – indeed, 60% of America’s entire navy – are now stationed in the Pacific.
In addition, Obama’s administration has been conducting talks with the Philippines to increase and enhance naval cooperation.
And Singapore has been persuaded to host four advanced naval ships.
Australia has established a base for marines in Darwin and another for unmanned spy planes on the Cocos Islands.
That is not all.
In a move that has received little or no publicity, congressional Republicans added a clause to the Defense Appropriation Bill for next year requiring the Obama administration to consult with countries in the Western Pacific about stationing even more forces – including tactical nuclear weapons – in the region.
Senator Richard Lugar has advised me that since there has been little or no objection to the amendment from the White House, he sees no reason why it will not pass the Senate.
At a recent security conference in Singapore, US Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta emphasized the American military build-up in the region.
Afterwards, he went to Vietnam, allegedly for discussions about the US Navy’s use of Cam Ranh Bay, a major American base during the Vietnam War.
The US, like Australia, denies that all of this adds up to a policy of containment aimed at China.
But few in the Western Pacific see it that way.
Panetta’s visit to Vietnam followed hard on US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s visit to Beijing for strategic and economic talks.
Those talks seemed to go well, but it is becoming increasingly clear that the US is pursuing a two-track policy: talks, yes, but a build-up and repositioning of US military power in the Pacific just in case.
All of this is happening at a time when China is preparing for a change of leadership.
I happen to believe that the political transition will occur smoothly.
Others suggest that it will be – and already is – a difficult period of turmoil and uncertainty.
The Obama administration may believe that toughness directed at China will generate electoral support in the US.
During major international incidents or crises, America has seldom voted against an incumbent president.
But has he properly reckoned with how provocative his policies are to China?&#160; &#160;&#160;&#160;
None of this is meant to suggest that the Pacific region does not need America.
But, while America obviously has a significant role to play in the region, the US should have learned by now that its political objectives are unlikely to be achieved by military means.
The Chinese themselves do not want the Americans to leave the Western Pacific, as that would make smaller countries on China’s periphery even more nervous about Chinese power.
China is mature enough to understand this; nonetheless, a major US military build-up throughout the region is another matter.
These are dangerous days, not only economically, but also strategically.
We really do need to ask whether Obama is trying to play a China card to shift the electoral scales in his favor.
If that is his intention, it is a move fraught with great danger.
Australia should be saying to the US that it will have none of this.
I would sooner abrogate the ANZUS Treaty with New Zealand and the US – that is, I would sooner end defense cooperation with the US – than allow nuclear missiles to be sited on Australian territory.
The current Australian government would not take such a step, and the opposition would be unlikely to do so as well.
But more and more Australians are beginning to question the closeness and wisdom of our strategic ties to the US.
Perhaps our best hope for stability and peace lies in China’s refusal to be provoked.
The Chinese understand the game being played.
I suspect that they will remain on the sidelines during the US election campaign.
Obama’s Chinese Balance Sheet
CAMBRIDGE, UK – US President Barack Obama’s first trip to China was like a splendid stage play.
The performance was long rehearsed in both Washington and Beijing, because both governments needed at least the appearance of a successful visit.
China’s ruling Communist Party needed Obama’s unequivocal endorsement of China’s increasingly important international role in order to buttress its domestic legitimacy.
The US needed China’s cooperation to demonstrate the effectiveness of Obama’s new strategy of collaborative global leadership.
Now that the play is over and the applause has died down, it is time to check the balance sheet and see how much Obama achieved and how much he conceded.
On the positive side of the ledger, Obama received ceremonial treatment not normally accorded to visiting foreign leaders, even other visiting US presidents, demonstrating the importance China’s government attached to the visit.
China’s President Hu Jintao sent his likely successor, Vice President Xi Jinping, to greet Obama at Beijing Airport, going well beyond the usual protocol.
And Hu himself dined with Obama twice during his two-day stay in Beijing – a gesture never made to any visiting foreign leader, including Obama’s predecessor, George W. Bush.
Obama also initially appeared to make some progress in giving voice to the universal values of human rights and democracy.
He met with students in Shanghai in his favorite “town-hall” format, which allowed for face-to-face discussions with young Chinese.
Moreover, China’s government allowed Nanfang Zhoumo , the country’s most liberal newspaper, to conduct a 12-minute exclusive interview with Obama.
But the Chinese public soon discounted the value of these political set pieces.
People quickly discovered that the “students” allowed to ask questions at Obama’s town-hall meeting in Shanghai were young Communist party activists.
Moreover, unlike with other US presidents, the event was not broadcast nationwide, and Nanfang Zhoumo’s full interview with Obama did not appear in the newspaper, despite the Communist Party propaganda departments’ advance approval of all the interview questions.
And the negative side of the ledger?
Obama gave up two things that have usually been at the top of the agenda when US presidents meet with Chinese leaders.
First, Obama did not openly criticize the Chinese government’s notorious human rights record, nor did he use his influence to persuade China to release any prisoner of conscience, as his US predecessors always did when visiting the country.
While Obama toasted President Hu, Liu Xiaobo, a famous Chinese dissident, remained shut away in an unknown location, having vanished last December because of his leading role in drafting a written appeal for constitutional rights.
Soon after Obama left China, two other writers, Huang Qi and Tan Tiandun, were sentenced to prison.
Their crime was to investigate cases of corruption by local government officials that were linked to the deaths of tens of thousands of students in the Sichuan earthquake of May 2008.
Second, Obama did not seriously seek to resolve existing US-China economic disagreements, particularly over trade.
With China running a seemingly perpetual external surplus, foreign-currency reserves have continued to mount even during the global economic crisis, with net growth reaching $140 billion in the third quarter of this year.
China’s main trade partners are deeply worried about the consequences of this continuing imbalance.
They urge China’s government to reduce its export subsidies and to allow the yuan to appreciate, expecting such measures to reduce their trade deficits, help their economies recover, and create more jobs.
On this front, however, China’s leaders made no compromise with Obama.
So, on balance, Obama’s first trip to China achieved relatively little.
Moreover, what he did achieve looks superficial, while what he gave up seems substantial.
Of course, this is partly because of the changes in the relative economic and political power of the US and China over the past decade, and especially during the current global economic crisis.
However, the sizable deficit on the balance sheet of Obama’s China trip could have been much lower if Obama had paid more attention to substance.
It seems that Hu Jintao is more skillful than the polished Obama at maximizing his gains at little cost.
Obama’s Promised Land
MADRID – Now that the dust has settled on President Barack Obama’s much-anticipated trip to Israel, it is possible to analyze the significance of the visit.
The trip – the first foreign visit of his second term – carries important implications for US foreign policy.
Rather than providing the breakthrough for which many had hoped, it demonstrated that Obama – unlike other second-term US presidents, who have staked their legacies on foreign policy – is interested primarily in securing a domestic legacy.
Obama’s ambitions are centered on reversing the arrangement that has dominated US politics since Richard Nixon’s election in 1968.
He hopes to ensure that a moderate Democratic Party forms the core of domestic politics and policymaking, with the Republican Party consigned to the periphery.
The centerpiece of Obama’s visit was his address in Jerusalem, in which – employing his characteristically compelling rhetoric – he won over the skeptical Israeli public by appealing to their sense of morality, asking them to imagine the conflict from a Palestinian perspective.
And yet, while the speech was widely considered a successful exercise in public diplomacy, it did not herald renewed US involvement in peace negotiations.
Rather, it portends a continuation of America’s hands-off approach to the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Obama’s decision to address the Israeli people instead of their leaders is telling.
He recognizes that the current political climate is not conducive to successful peace negotiations.
In Israel, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu has crafted a center-right coalition dominated by prominent pro-settlement leaders, including Housing Minister Uri Ariel of the Jewish Home Party and Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon of Netanyahu’s Likud.
The only notable exception, Justice Minister Tzipi Livni, seems to have been appointed merely to provide a veneer of official commitment to the peace process.
Finance Minister Yair Lapid, a moderate, is removed from the peace process (and has himself sent mixed signals about a two-state solution).
Moreover, despite Netanyahu’s 2009 declaration of support for a two-state solution, which he reaffirmed during Obama’s visit, Likud has embraced a pro-settlement position, exemplified by Israel’s planned construction in the E1 corridor, one of the West Bank’s most sensitive areas.
Meanwhile, the political situation in Palestine – characterized by the erosion of President Mahmoud Abbas’s legitimacy – and the region’s overall instability are contributing further to the decay of the peace process.
Rather than expending significant political capital trying to press an unreceptive Israeli government and a fractured Palestinian establishment to pursue peace, Obama used his visit to shift the discourse – and the responsibility for achieving a peace agreement – to the Israeli (and Palestinian) public.
Indeed, beneath Obama’s rhetoric about empathy and the morality of peace was a clear message about the future of the peace process: the push for negotiations must come from the streets of Israel and Palestine. It will not come from Washington.
This was a tactical move that allowed Obama to address the conflict without having to put any additional skin in the game, while advancing his visit’s underlying objective of reducing Israel’s ability to distract from his domestic goals.
The price of Obama’s approach is that it denies any potential for progress toward peace.
Furthermore, Obama’s embrace of Israel during his visit has undermined America’s role as an honest broker in future negotiations – and no credible candidate has surfaced to fill the position.
The trip also heralds a dramatic shift in Israel’s relationship with Obama, who has been criticized throughout his presidency for supposedly failing to provide sufficient support to America’s strongest ally in the Middle East.
The recent Senate hearings to confirm Chuck Hagel’s appointment as Secretary of Defense, which involved aggressive questioning about the former senator’s commitment to Israel, reflected that criticism.
Facing continuing battles with Congress, mid-term elections next year, and increasing instability in the Middle East (including the threat of unilateral Israeli action against Iran’s nuclear facilities), Obama clearly believes that now is not the time to push for a peace agreement, because it is unlikely to succeed.
Instead, he is working to make Israel a non-issue by quieting domestic critics and allaying Israel’s security fears.
To this end, Obama has withdrawn his support for preconditions to peace negotiations, &#160;indicating to Palestinians that they should not expect a freeze on Israeli settlement construction ahead of talks.
In his Jerusalem address, he reaffirmed America’s commitment to preserving Israel’s security while pledging to control Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile and to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
This strategy has already produced results.
Netanyahu’s apology to Turkey for the commando raid on a Gaza-bound Turkish ship in 2010 was a major diplomatic victory for Obama.
More important, the absence of a contentious Netanyahu-Obama relationship will deny Republicans an easy target in mid-term elections.
(Such low-hanging fruit has been increasingly scarce for the Republican Party, which is beleaguered by the perception that it has been hijacked by its most extreme elements.)
In the unlikely event that circumstances change, Obama could step in as an active peacemaker, giving his trip to Israel historic significance as a turning point in Israel-Palestine relations.
For example, Israeli public opinion could become galvanized in support of peace in the wake of the Jerusalem address, or US Secretary of State John Kerry could make headway in initiating talks.
Livni might find a strong voice in Israel’s government; the Labor Party could replace Jewish Home in a new governing coalition; or Netanyahu’s attitude could change as he seeks to secure his legacy.
Without a drastic change in Israeli politics and society, however, Obama will continue to play it safe, minimizing his vulnerabilities.
As he moves closer to solidifying the Democratic Party’s position in US politics, Israel will continue to construct settlements and become increasingly isolated.
We can only hope that the consequences of Obama’s foreign-policy sacrifice are not too high a price to pay for the establishment of his domestic legacy.
Obama’s Hardest Choices Lie Ahead
TEL AVIV – It was only natural that Barack Obama, a president whose election was one of the most revolutionary events in American history, should fill his first 100 days in office with a breathtaking, all-embracing agenda.
These are times of trial and upheaval that call for such daring.
Strikingly energetic and self-confident, Obama has set out on a titanic journey to remake America’s economy and redress a broken and dysfunctional international system.
It is perhaps especially in Obama’s domestic policy – the shift to a more social-democratic tax system and universal health care – that one can best see the new president’s ideological drive.
But emphasizing the reduction of social inequalities does not sit easily with America’s profoundly individualistic ethos, and the attempt to “Europeanize” the nature of the social contract between the state and its citizens might yet crash against the constitutive principles of the American system.
When it comes to salvaging America’s collapsing financial system, Obama has been far more interventionist than any European government.
For once, the faltering Czech presidency of the EU reflected a European consensus when it defined Obama’s astronomic financial stimulus as a “road to hell.”
The unprecedented explosion of America’s fiscal deficit raises the risk of high inflation in the future – exactly the kind of scenario that Europeans want to prevent at all cost.
Obama’s foreign policy agenda has been no less audacious than his domestic undertakings.
After eight years of American unilateralism that left behind a broken transatlantic alliance, resuscitated the specter of a cold war with Russia, and saw the Middle East decline into a doomsday politics, Obama’s injection of new thinking to endemic problems is extremely welcome.
The organizing principle in the new president’s foreign policy is one of not having principled, ideological guidelines.
Essentially, his approach to international issues is pragmatic, and, in departing from his predecessor’s penchant for machtpolitik , Obama has pledged always to exhaust diplomacy first.
But Obama might soon realize that most of his predecessors started as believers in international cooperation, until events forced them to fall back on a strategy of confrontation.
Not even George W. Bush seemed to be committed to any particular doctrine in foreign affairs before the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, drove him to unleash his ill-conceived “global war on terror.”
The real test of Obama’s strategy of dialogue and cooperation will come only when it fails, and tough choices will have to be made.
Repairing old alliances is vital not only for the exercise of American power, but also for Europe’s empowerment as a global player.
Yet America’s European allies administered Obama’s first setback.
They applauded him everywhere on his recent trip to Europe, but sent him home almost empty-handed, resisting the idea of a coordinated fiscal stimulus and, after years of preaching multilateralism, turning down his call for more European troops for Afghanistan.
For many in Europe, it was easier to live against Bush than to make sacrifices with Obama.
Obama also pushed the “reset button” with Russia, and suggested that he might freeze Bush’s plan to deploy a missile defense system in the Czech Republic and Poland.
The expectation was that Russia would join the United States in putting pressure on Iran to abandon its nuclear ambitions.
But this has not yet happened.
Nor was North Korea impressed by Obama’s warnings that America might shoot down its rocket if they went ahead with their launch in defiance of the United Nations.
Shielded behind a protective China, Kim Jong-il launched his rocket anyway, and the US refrained from action.
Iran is another front where Obama might be forced to recognize the limits of his conciliatory approach.
He has waived America’s long-standing demand that Iran stop uranium enrichment as a precondition for negotiations, and he has sworn off any idea of regime change.
But the Iranians are the subtlest negotiators to be found anywhere, and will make certain that their nuclear program outpaces the negotiations.
If that happens, then what?
Nor is it clear what Obama really means by saying that he recognizes Iran’s “rightful place in the community of nations.”
If this means a special status at the expense of other Middle East powers such as Egypt or the Gulf states, Obama might run into strong opposition from America’s traditional allies in the region.
It is right and refreshing that Obama has made clear that America’s aspiration is to lead, not dominate.
But even an exercise in modesty and realism requires strong alliances, with partners ready for sacrifices.
Nor would old enemies and competitors like Russia and China readily abandon the benefits of spoiling American plans.
It is when this becomes crystal clear, and also when some worn-out foreign-policy paradigms, such as the fetish of a two-state solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict fail once again, that real choices will have to be made.
Obama’s Israel Problem
NEW YORK – On a rare foray outside his native Texas, Governor Rick Perry accused US President Barack Obama of “appeasement” towards the Palestinians.
Former New York City Mayor Edward Koch supported a Catholic Republican congressional candidate against a Jewish Democrat in New York, because the Republican supports Israel through thick and thin – and because Obama had voiced reservations about Israel’s expansion of settlements on the West Bank.
In Koch’s words, Obama “threw Israel under the bus.”
The Republican won.
Meanwhile, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, who is rather sensitive about foreigners meddling in domestic Israeli politics, has been openly and consistently courting congressional Republicans by attacking Obama.
And Obama’s response?
A speech at the United Nations, reiterating his support for Israel, his understanding of Israel’s fears and vulnerability, with barely a mention of Palestinian fears and vulnerability.
What is it about Israel that reduces America’s president to Jell-O?
Why, for that matter, are all American politicians so afraid to be critical of Israeli policies?
Is it fear of being called an anti-Semite?
Or is it the “Jewish vote”?
On the face of it, Democrats don’t have that much to fear.
Polls suggest that a majority of Jewish Americans (a mere 1.7% of the US population) still vote for the Democratic Party.
When it comes to the so-called Israel lobby in Washington, which is well organized and very well funded, evangelical Christians play an important part as well.
But they vote overwhelmingly for Republicans, so Obama would not seem to have much to lose there.
True, certain pro-Israeli organizations, notably the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), can generate a great deal of money to make or break political candidates, who are judged solely on their attitudes towards Israel.
And money, given or withdrawn, as well as Jews refusing to vote for Obama out of pique, could make all the difference in crucial “swing states” such as Florida.
Cash, voters, and lobbies aside, something fundamental has changed in recent years, and this scares the Democrats: Israel’s conflict with Palestine is now being used by the American right as a cudgel to beat up liberals.
This was not true before.
In the first few decades of its modern existence, when it was largely run by socialists, Israel was mainly supported by the world’s liberal left.
In fact, the last US administration to be somewhat tough on the Israeli government was that of the Republican George H.W. Bush.
Jews, in both Europe and the US, traditionally tended to lean towards the left.
Right-wing politics, especially when based on ethnic nationalism, are rarely good for minorities, who fare better in a more open, cosmopolitan environment.
Jews were among the most ardent supporters of black Americans’ struggle for civil rights in the 1950’s and 1960’s.
As long as Israel was a liberal state, it was easy, even natural, for most American Jews to support it.
There was no conflict between the head and the heart, between an emotional attachment to Israel and a political commitment to liberal causes.
But things began to change when the Israeli Labor Party lost ground to the harder-line Likud.
More and more, Israel began to be infected by precisely the type of politics most Jews have traditionally feared, especially ethnic nationalism.
Provoked, in part, by Arab neighbors’ hostility and Palestinian leaders’ intransigence, Israel began to turn sharply to the right.
This was also the result of demographic changes: Middle Eastern Jews were more viscerally anti-Arab than their European brethren, and Jewish immigrants from Russia were viscerally anti-left.
Moreover, the number of Orthodox Jews continued to grow apace.