Meanwhile, positive role models like Nitish Kumar of Bihar, Narendra Modi of Gujarat, and Navin Patnaik of Orissa have all been returned to power as Chief Ministers at least once; all have delivered remarkable results while maintaining an unblemished record of personal integrity.
The Congress will inevitably be under acute pressure to perform, as the electorate now knows that better performance is not beyond its grasp.
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi’s assassination over two decades ago created a wave of sympathy for his widow, Sonia, on whose sari-tails the Congress won in 2004.
Today, no such tragedy is likely to help the Congress.
Sonia Gandhi is rumored to have cancer, but, rather than capitalizing on it, she has kept the details within the walls of the Gandhi family compound in New Delhi.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
But the real problem is that brand-name politics is increasingly at a discount in India, much as it is in the United States.
Like the Kennedy and Bush brands, the Nehru-Gandhi label has lost its luster in India.
That is partly a function of rapidly changing demographics.
Individuals born after 1975 now account for a very large proportion of the electorate.
For these voters, Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi are merely historical figures, and are a distant memory even for many voters born before 1975.
It is not surprising that Rahul Gandhi proved unable to bring the Congress a victory in a recent election in a constituency that historically had been a bastion of support for his family.
Indeed, the Nehru-Gandhi condominium that has dominated Indian politics has itself undermined the party’s survival prospects by making it immensely difficult for it to recruit and develop new leaders.
It is common knowledge that, for the last eight years, Sonia Gandhi has exercised virtually total control within the party.
As a result, no rival to Rahul Gandhi has emerged.
With Sonia Gandhi in ill health, Rahul unable to connect to the electorate even in his historically “safe” constituency, and the Nehru-Gandhi brand name having lost its appeal, the prospects for the Congress in 2014 look bleak.
Only the outcome will tell whether it can survive.
The Benefits of Chinese FDI
BERKELEY – In a rare act of bipartisanship, the United States Congress recently passed legislation to encourage more inward foreign direct investment.
Democrats and Republicans agree that FDI, or “insourcing,” is important to US jobs and competitiveness.
They are right.
But, even as they propose new measures to court foreign investors, many members of Congress in both parties harbor deep concerns about FDI from China, on both national-security and economic grounds.
These concerns are unwarranted, and discriminatory policies to restrict such investment are ill-advised.
The US government already has adequate controls in place to review and block FDI from all countries, including China, that pose anti-competitive and national-security risks.
Investments that clear these controls benefit the US economy in numerous ways and should be welcomed.
Foreign-owned firms in the US account for 5% of private-sector employment, 17% of manufacturing jobs, 21% of exports, 14% of research and development, and 17% of corporate-income taxes.
Recognizing FDI’s significant contributions to the US economy, President Barack Obama’s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness endorsed the administration’s new Select USA program to coordinate government-wide efforts to promote it.
To be sure, the US remains the world’s leading destination for FDI, accounting for 15% of global flows.
But its share is declining, while China, using both carrots (like tax holidays and special enterprise zones) and sticks (like explicit and implicit local-content requirements) to attract foreign companies, has become the second-largest destination.
China has remained a small source of FDI outflows, but that, too, is changing rapidly. Chinese outward FDI soared from an average of $3 billion per year before 2005 to $60 billion in 2010, catapulting China into the top five sources of FDI on a three-year moving-average basis.
Given the size of China’s economy, its growth rate, and the experience of other developing economies, FDI from China is likely to increase by $1-2 trillion by 2020.
An increase in FDI outflows is a priority in China for two reasons.
First, China has an understandable interest in diversifying its substantial holdings of foreign-exchange reserves away from low-yielding US Treasuries to real productive assets with higher returns.
That is why China established its sovereign-wealth fund, China Investment Corporation, and why CIC decision-makers are seeking more FDI opportunities.
Second, China’s businesses have been encouraged to “go global” and invest abroad to find new markets, secure access to energy and raw materials, and enhance their competitiveness by acquiring new technologies, brands, and management skills.
In a recent report, the People’s Bank of China urged Chinese companies to acquire foreign firms as the first stage of a ten-year plan to ease China’s capital-market restrictions – long a goal of US policymakers.
So far, China’s FDI outflows have been concentrated in developing countries and a handful of resource-rich developed countries, including Australia and Canada, and have been aimed at facilitating trade and acquiring access to natural resources.
But the patterns and destinations of China’s outward FDI will change as rising wages, an appreciating real exchange rate, and the entry of new suppliers from other emerging countries erode Chinese companies’ competitiveness, motivating them to invest abroad to upgrade their technology and management capabilities, find new growth opportunities, and move up the value chain.
Currently, the US receives only about 2-3% of FDI flows from China.
But China’s direct investments in the US have increased rapidly, from less than $1 billion annually in 2003-2008 to more than $5 billion per year in 2010-2011.
At least 38 US states now host FDI projects from China, and competition for Chinese investment has intensified as states’ budgets have contracted.
Of course, alongside the potential economic benefits of attracting a much larger share of Chinese FDI, legitimate competitive and national-security concerns do need to be addressed.
First, like all mergers and acquisitions involving both domestic and foreign investors, investments in or acquisitions of US companies by Chinese companies, whether state-owned or private, must be evaluated by the US Justice Department for their impact on market competition.
Investments with significant anti-competitive effects must be modified or blocked.
Second, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) must screen investments in or acquisitions of US companies by foreign companies, including Chinese companies, for national-security risks.
Such screening is a common and justifiable practice around the world.
In recent years, CFIUS has defined national security broadly to encompass not only defense activities and dual-use technologies, but also critical infrastructure, including telecommunications, energy, and transport – areas of particular interest to Chinese companies.
Many Chinese investors view the CFIUS screening process as protectionist and targeted at them, but there is no evidence of this.
The United Kingdom, Canada, France, and Israel accounted for more than half of all CFIUS cases reviewed in 2008-2010, while China accounted for only about 5%.
Only a small fraction of Chinese FDI in the US is subject to CFIUS review, and most of these projects, like most reviewed by CFIUS, are approved, sometimes with mitigation measures.
CFIUS does not review greenfield investments, which account for about 50% of Chinese FDI in the US.
But Chinese FDI, especially in sensitive sectors like energy, does often trigger Congressional hearings, ad hoc resolutions, and calls for tougher CFIUS action.
As a result of high-profile Congressional opposition, China’s state-owned energy company CNOOC withdrew its bid for Unocal, an American energy company, in 2005, before a CFIUS review that most likely would have cleared the deal on national-security grounds.
China still points to this episode as evidence that Chinese FDI is not welcome in the US.
Feeding this perception, some members of Congress are now exhorting CFIUS to block CNOOC’s proposed acquisition of Nexen, a Canadian energy company with holdings in the Gulf of Mexico, until China resolves ongoing disputes with the US over preferential government procurement policies and barriers to FDI by US companies in China.
Heeding these calls would be a costly mistake that would undermine the objective, non-discriminatory CFIUS process and encourage Chinese companies to look elsewhere at a time when Chinese FDI is poised to explode and the US economy sorely needs the jobs, capital, and trade benefits that it would bring.
Why Consolidate?
STANFORD – Around the world, raging debates about whether, when, how, and how much to reduce large budget deficits and high levels of sovereign debt are dividing policymakers and publics.
Diametrically opposed spending, tax, monetary, and regulatory policies and proposals are proliferating.
To consolidate (the budget), or not to consolidate, that is the question.
The political left clamors for more spending, higher taxes on high-income earners, and delayed fiscal consolidation.
For example, the economist and New York Times columnist Paul Krugman proposes waiting 10-15 years.
(Many of the same people argued for analogous reasons against the Federal Reserve’s successful disinflation policies in the early 1980’s.)
The political right calls for more rapid deficit reduction by cutting spending.
In Europe, policymakers, including the European Central Bank, demand consolidation for high-debt countries, but are flexible in negotiations; voters, however, reject it – most recently in Italy.
In the United States, Republicans propose to balance the budget within ten years by reforming entitlement spending and taxes (with fewer exemptions, deductions, and credits providing the revenue needed to reduce personal tax rates and a corporate rate that, at 35%, is the highest in the OECD).
America’s Senate Democrats propose $1.5 trillion in higher taxes over ten years (on top of the $600 billion agreed in early January), $100 billion (twice that, for House Democrats) in new stimulus spending, and modest longer-term expenditure cuts.
Their version of tax reform would mean reducing deductions for the wealthy and corporations, with no rate reductions.
What are the likely costs and benefits of stimulus versus consolidation?
And what is the best combination of spending cuts and tax hikes?
Economists agree that, at full employment, higher government spending crowds out private spending.
Keynesian models claiming a quick boost from higher government spending below full employment show that the effect soon turns negative.
So it needs to be repeated over and over, like a drug, to sustain the economic high.
That strategy saddled Japan with the world’s highest debt/GDP ratio, to little benefit.
To be sure, recent research suggests that increased government spending can be effective in temporarily raising output and employment during deep, long-lasting recessions when the central bank has reduced its short-term policy interest rate to zero.
But the same research suggests that the government spending multiplier is likely to be small or even negative in a variety of circumstances and, in any event, would quickly shrink.
Such circumstances include, first, a high debt/GDP ratio, with rising interest rates impeding growth.
Likewise, during expansions, higher government spending is more likely to crowd out private spending.
Spending on transfer payments and/or nonmilitary purchases – which can become entrenched or be procured more cheaply from abroad (for example, solar panels and wind turbines, respectively, in America’s 2009 fiscal stimulus) – is also likely to yield only a small multiplier.
And, when the economy has flexible exchange rates, if government spending raises interest rates, the currency will strengthen, leading to a decrease in investment and net exports.
Finally, the effects of additional government spending may be offset by people’s expectations of higher taxes once the central bank exits the zero lower bound on interest rates (causing them to spend less now).
These considerations apply to the US and some European countries today.
Together with poor design, they explain why America’s 2009 stimulus cost several hundred thousand dollars per temporary job created.
Recent research also reveals that in OECD countries since World War II, successful fiscal consolidation – defined as stabilizing the budget while avoiding recession – averaged $5-$6 of actual spending cuts per dollar of tax hikes.
Cuts in spending, especially on entitlements and transfers, were far less likely to cause recessions than tax increases were.
Unfortunately, tax hikes have predominated in many recent European consolidations, including last week’s proposed Cyprus bailout.
Of course, caution is appropriate in order to avoid claiming too much for the benefits of short-run consolidation.
After all, the current American and European economies differ in important ways from the other post-war cases – size, simultaneous consolidation in many countries, already-low interest rates, and the dollar’s status as the main global reserve currency.
But, other than in deep recessions, the validity of the Keynesian claim that delaying spending cuts is necessary to avoid undermining the economy is at best unclear, and would leave a long boom as the only time to control spending.
And large deficits and high debt levels decrease the prospects for a long boom.
Moreover, credibly phasing in spending reductions as the economy recovers is no easy task, given the political economy of the budget and the inability of one legislature to bind the next.
Worse yet, the cost of delay and increased deficits and debt is enormous.
For example, without major reform in the US entitlement programs – which are exploding in size as a result of rising real benefits per beneficiary and an aging population – the next generation can expect a 20% reduction in living standards.
The most credible reforms are structural – for example, higher retirement ages and changes to benefit formulas – and difficult to alter once they are implemented.
Merely setting a dollar (or pound or euro) target for budget cuts is far less effective, because the target can easily be revised – and cuts reversed – to avoid political pain.
If there were some short-term stimulus that was timely and likely to raise output and employment at a reasonable long-term cost, I would be all for it.
But the evidence is that highly effective fiscal policy, even at the zero lower bound on interest rates, remains at best a theoretical possibility, subject to severe political constraints.
While consolidation may imply some short-term costs, especially in a recession, the long-term costs of delay are large.
It would be best if a credible consolidation program could be phased in gradually; but consolidation needs to proceed nonetheless – and primarily by controlling spending.
Inflation Is Still the Lesser Evil
CAMBRIDGE – The world’s major central banks continue to express concern about inflationary spillover from their recession-fighting efforts.
That is a mistake.
Weighed against the political, social, and economic risks of continued slow growth after a once-in-a-century financial crisis, a sustained burst of moderate inflation is not something to worry about.
On the contrary, in most regions, it should be embraced.
Perhaps the case for moderate inflation (say, 4-6% annually) is not so compelling as it was at the outset of the crisis, when I first raised the issue.
Back then, against a backdrop of government reluctance to force debt write-downs, along with massively over-valued real housing prices and excessive real wages in some sectors, moderate inflation would have been extremely helpful.
The consensus at the time, of course, was that a robust “V-shaped” recovery was around the corner, and it was foolish to embrace inflation heterodoxy.
I thought otherwise, based on research underlying my 2009 book with Carmen M. Reinhart, This Time is Different.
Examining previous deep financial crises, there was every reason to be concerned that the employment decline would be catastrophically deep and the recovery extraordinarily slow.
A proper assessment of the medium-term risks would have helped to justify my conclusion in December 2008 that “It will take every tool in the box to fix today’s once-in-a-century financial crisis.”
Five years on, public, private, and external debt are at record levels in many countries.
There is still a need for huge relative wage adjustments between Europe’s periphery and its core.
But the world’s major central banks seem not to have noticed.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has sent bond markets into a tizzy by signaling that quantitative easing (QE) might be coming to an end.
The proposed exit seems to reflect a truce accord among the Fed’s hawks and doves.
The doves got massive liquidity, but, with the economy now strengthening, the hawks are insisting on bringing QE to an end.
This is a modern-day variant of the classic prescription to start tightening before inflation sets in too deeply, even if employment has not fully recovered.
As William McChesney Martin, who served as Fed Chairman in the 1950’s and 1960’s, once quipped, the central bank’s job is “to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets going.”
The trouble is that this is no ordinary recession, and a lot people have not had any punch yet, let alone too much.
Yes, there are legitimate technical concerns that QE is distorting asset prices, but bursting bubbles simply are not the main risk now.
Right now is the US’s best chance yet for a real, sustained recovery from the financial crisis.
And it would be a catastrophe if the recovery were derailed by excessive devotion to anti-inflation shibboleths, much as some central banks were excessively devoted to the gold standard during the 1920’s and 1930’s.
Japan faces a different conundrum.
Haruhiko Kuroda, the Bank of Japan’s new governor, has sent a clear signal to markets that the BOJ is targeting 2% annual inflation, after years of near-zero price growth.
But, with longer-term interest rates now creeping up slightly, the BOJ seems to be pausing.
What did Kuroda and his colleagues expect?
If the BOJ were to succeed in raising inflation expectations, long-term interest rates would necessarily have to reflect a correspondingly higher inflation premium.
As long as nominal interest rates are rising because of inflation expectations, the increase is part of the solution, not part of the problem.
The BOJ would be right to worry, of course, if interest rates were rising because of a growing risk premium, rather than because of higher inflation expectations.
The risk premium could rise, for example, if investors became uncertain about whether Kuroda would adhere to his commitment.
The solution, as always with monetary policy, is a clear, consistent, and unambiguous communication strategy.
The European Central Bank is in a different place entirely.
Because the ECB has already been using its balance sheet to help bring down borrowing costs in the eurozone’s periphery, it has been cautious in its approach to monetary easing.
But higher inflation would help to accelerate desperately needed adjustment in Europe’s commercial banks, where many loans remain on the books at far above market value.
It would also provide a backdrop against which wages in Germany could rise without necessarily having to fall in the periphery.
Each of the world’s major central banks can make plausible arguments for caution.
And central bankers are right to insist on structural reforms and credible plans for balancing budgets in the long term.
But, unfortunately, we are nowhere near the point at which policymakers should be getting cold feet about inflation risks.
They should be spiking the punch bowl more, not taking it away.
Cartography’s New Golden Age
MOUNTAIN VIEW, CALIFORNIA – Noé Diakubama, an emigrant from the Democratic Republic of Congo who now lives in Paris, is one of this century’s intrepid pioneers.
Using online mapmaking tools, he created the first map of his village, Mbandaka, which he and his wife have modified more than 100,000 times since 2009.
Noé literally put Mbandaka – and the people who live there – on the map.
Noé is not the only such pioneer.
There is a vast and growing community of online mapmakers creating useful, accessible maps of lesser-known areas – and transforming people’s lives in the process.
During the Age of Exploration, which extended from the fifteenth to the seventeenth century, adventurers like Christopher Columbus, Ferdinand Magellan, and James Cook embarked on dangerous journeys to distant lands, from New Zealand to Newfoundland, drawing detailed charts of their voyages.
By advancing geographic knowledge, they broadened people’s worldview, enhanced trade, and helped to usher in the Industrial Revolution.
Today, people like Noé are spearheading a second golden age of cartography, which promises to bring equally significant economic and social benefits.
Indeed, accurate maps break down geographic barriers, empowering individuals to reach their desired destinations, enabling businesses to reach consumers anywhere, and enriching people’s outlooks.
The Internet is transforming the way maps are made, enabling ordinary people – dubbed “citizen cartographers” – to work alongside intrepid adventurers and professional geographers.
These cartographers – whose only common characteristic is Internet access – are embracing the opportunity to depict the places that they know and love, whether to help their neighbors get around or to give faraway people a glimpse of their local environments.
Using online tools like Google Map Maker, they are contributing to the shared goal of building a digital map of the world.
Some even host “mapping parties,” at which communities gather around computers, in schoolyards or church halls, to add layers of detail that extend beyond topography.
By including human elements, such as popular cafés or local walking trails, they create comprehensive, useful tools for others, and enhance their understanding of their own community.
Digital maps can be as dynamic as the communities that they depict.
While paper maps can accurately portray static features like rivers and mountains, they cannot easily be updated when new buildings are constructed, roads are rerouted, or new restaurants open.
By contrast, digital maps can be modified instantly, keeping locals apprised of developments in their area and helping visitors to feel like natives in unfamiliar places.
Similarly, a digital map can be tailored to an individual’s interests or needs.
A keen cyclist might want a map showing bicycle paths, including information about the terrain.
But a tourist might prefer a map that highlights specific attractions or indicates public-transport links.
Such customization leads to many millions of versions of the world – all of them accurate.
Digital mapping technology is having the most profound impact on the world’s most remote and undeveloped regions.
In Africa, for example, road coverage on Google Maps increased from 20% in 2008 to 75% last year, while the number of towns and villages for which detailed maps are available grew by more than 1,000%.
This has not only facilitated trade and transport, but also translates into faster response times for emergency services, saving thousands of lives each year.
In fact, modern tools like maps and satellite navigation contribute to annual savings of up to 3.5 billion liters of gasoline and more than one billion hours of travel time.
As a result, farmers are better able to get their goods to market before they perish, and to build more efficient irrigation systems, which save the global agricultural industry $8-22 billion annually.
The mapping movement’s growing momentum promises to result in the accurate and comprehensive representation of almost every inch of the world, including road data, photos, and business listings.
This will create even more opportunities for economic growth, improve access to health care and other services, contribute to social development, and broaden – both figuratively and literally – people’s worldview.
To advance the world’s geographic knowledge, explorers used to have to head out to sea, enduring inclement weather and debilitating disease, unsure of where they were going – or whether they would ever return home.
While today’s online cartographers do not face the same risks, they, too, are embarking on a journey into the unknown in search of knowledge, excitement, and better lives.
A New World’s New Development Bank
NEW YORK – At the conclusion of their summit in Durban in March, the leaders of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced their intention to establish a New Development Bank aimed at “mobilizing resources for infrastructure and sustainable development projects in BRICS and other emerging economies and developing countries.”
The significance of this decision cannot be overemphasized.
For starters, it reflects the enormous successes in economic development during the last four decades (the BRICS’ aggregate GDP is now greater than that of the advanced countries when the Bretton Woods institutions were founded) and the rebalancing of global economic power that this implies.
Indeed, the decision demonstrates the BRICS’ ability and willingness to work together, for their own benefit and for that of the entire world.
Emerging markets and developing countries are taking the future into their own hands – at a time when rich countries are muddling through their own self-inflicted problems.
A new development bank is clearly needed.
The infrastructure requirements alone in emerging-market economies and low-income countries are huge – 1.4 billion people still have no reliable electricity, 900 million lack access to clean water, and 2.6 billion do not have adequate sanitation.
At the same time, an estimated two billion people will move to cities in the next quarter-century.
And policymakers must ensure that the investments are environmentally sustainable.
To meet these and the other challenges confronting the developing world, infrastructure spending will have to rise from around $800 billion to at least $2 trillion annually in the coming decades.
Otherwise, it will be impossible to achieve long-term poverty reduction and inclusive growth.
While the private sector can meet some of these needs, it can go only so far, especially given the nature of infrastructure projects’ risks, the huge upfront costs, and the high cyclical sensitivity of global financial markets.
The funding gap is beyond what existing international financial institutions can meet – and the advanced countries’ malaise means that significant recapitalization is not in the cards.
Annual infrastructure financing from multilateral development banks and overseas development assistance is likely to amount to no more than $40-60 billion, or 2-3% of projected needs.
A development bank anchored in emerging markets and developing countries can help to address this gap and become a powerful catalyst for change, both in the developing world and – through collaboration and example – in existing institutions.
The world today is markedly different from the world at the time of the founding of the World Bank and many of the regional development banks.
The BRICS’ proposed New Development Bank presents an important opportunity to reflect these changes, with modern financial instruments, strong governance, and a broad-based mandate.
For example, changes in financial markets (including the large amounts of money in sovereign wealth funds and public pension funds) provide opportunities for new development partnerships, which the New Development Bank can help to catalyze and orchestrate.
So, too, should its deployment of a wide range of modern instruments enable it to meet the diverse range of project needs while ensuring adequate risk management.
The new bank should maximize its multiplier effects by sharing and reducing risk through collective action and “crowding in” other financing; by setting a powerful example in adopting innovative and cost-effective approaches; and through its policy and institutional impact beyond projects that it finances.
While the older institutions have attempted to adapt, their governance remains out of sync with today’s economic and political realities.
The new bank’s governance structure has yet to be worked out, but it promises to be more consistent with contemporary best practices.
Most important, the New Development Bank will give greater voice to the perspectives and interests of those in developing countries and emerging markets.
As with the outdated governance arrangements, conceptions of development that informed the existing multilateral institutions’ mandates are markedly different from modern development thinking.
For example, there was no awareness of the challenge posed by climate change, and that all countries (including those in the developing world) must reduce their greenhouse-gas emissions and adapt to changes that will be particularly adverse to poor countries.
Likewise, there was no comprehension of the innovation and opportunities entailed in pursuing more sustainable paths of inclusive economic growth.
Of course, the World Bank and the regional development banks now recognize such imperatives, and the New Development Bank should not relieve the developed countries of their responsibilities.
But, with the shortfall of assistance from developed to developing countries, the new bank can provide essential help to developing countries and emerging markets as they undertake smarter and more sustainable infrastructure investment for growth and poverty reduction.
Given the need to act quickly – and given the slowness with which the developed world has been responding – this new institution is all the more welcome.
The new bank can make a major contribution to the global economy’s health by facilitating the transition to new poles of growth and demand, helping to rebalance global savings and investments, and channeling excess liquidity to productive use.
It will not only be a driver for sustainable growth in the developing and emerging world, but will also foster reform in the existing multilateral financial institutions – changes from which all of us, in the developed and developing world alike, will benefit.
The Benefits of US-China Strategic Economic Dialogue
In recognition of the importance and complexity of the US-China economic relationship, in September 2006 President George W. Bush and President Hu Jintao created the “Strategic Economic Dialogue” between our countries.
Their intent was not to replace the many economic dialogues already taking place, but to create a senior-level forum that was both comprehensive and strategic.
A forum that would also build trust on both sides by demonstrating progress on the immediate issues we face.
The SED has made substantial progress in achieving these goals.
The US and China have built stronger relationships and established constructive channels of communication that didn’t previously exist.
These innovations have helped keep the US-China economic relationship on an even keel, even in times of tension.
Because we have a framework for high-level discussions, we can – and do – pick up the phone and talk.
The SED meeting next week in Beijing will focus on five areas: integrity of trade and product safety; balanced economic development, including financial sector reform; energy efficiency and security; environmental sustainability; and bilateral investment.
The meeting comes at a delicate time, as a new group of leaders moves into China’s senior positions, and as the agenda has been broadened to include food and product safety, energy efficiency and security, and environmental sustainability.
These issues carry deep implications for economic ties.
Consumers need to have confidence in the safety of the products they purchase, whether produced at home or abroad.
China’s management of food and product safety issues will have a long-term impact on trade relations, the sustainability of China’s growth strategy, and its further integration into the global trading system.
US and Chinese government agencies are working together to address these issues.  
Likewise, for both our countries, greater energy efficiency and security requires reliance upon market price signals, technology, innovation, and diversified energy sources.
The Global Nuclear Energy Partnership, clean coal development through FutureGen, and industrial efficiency audits represent some of the most productive areas of ongoing cooperation.
We also encourage China’s active participation in the Major Economies Meeting efforts to develop a post-2012 framework for greenhouse-gas reduction.
I was pleased to see that a large Chinese energy company, Shanghai Electric, recently indicated public support for substantial reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions.
One pressing issue – for the US, China, and the global economy – is China’s move to a more flexible exchange-rate policy.
China is reforming its policy, as a part of a move to a more market-determined exchange rate.
In the past year, the RMB has appreciated by 6%, but the pace is not fast enough to reduce China’s global trade surplus, its internal imbalances, or foreign-exchange-market pressures.   
A more flexible currency is especially important now, when inflation risks are rising in China.
Increased currency flexibility would allow China’s central bank to use monetary policy to enhance China’s financial and price stability.
As Premier Wen Jiabao recently emphasized, China must now undertake comprehensive measures to control mounting inflation, growing asset bubbles, and an overheating economy.
We share these concerns.
In the US-China relationship, the RMB exchange rate has become a touchstone for broader anxieties about competition from China.
As globalization advances and economies become more tightly integrated, worries about the effects of foreign competition – through trade or through foreign investment – have fueled economic nationalism and protectionist sentiments.
Americans have been through this type of debate before.
Twenty years ago, we were gripped by fear that Japan would overtake our economic leadership – a concern that was unfounded then and, in hindsight, looks profoundly mistaken.
America continues to lead the world in standard of living, productivity, and innovation.
China’s continued economic growth and integration into the global economy gives America even greater opportunities to grow and succeed.
The biggest risk to both US and Chinese prosperity is that China’s growth stalls, or that it pulls back from further global integration and reforms too slowly.
Indeed, economic nationalism is growing in China, too.
Some Chinese are suspicious that the US push for RMB appreciation and financial-market liberalization is really an attempt to gain trade advantages and generate profits for American companies while slowing China’s economic expansion.
They mistakenly believe that yen appreciation during the mid-1980’s caused Japan’s weak economic performance in the 1990’s.
Rather, we now know that Japan’s economic difficulties were caused by the growth, and then collapse, of a huge asset bubble, and the failure to use monetary policy to prevent deflation after the bubble burst.
Financial liberalization is not about foreign firms drilling holes in China’s economy.
Foreign participation in the financial sector brings expertise needed to provide more efficient savings instruments, risk management, and allocation of capital.
But to use that expertise – the most valuable asset a globally competitive financial institution has – investors need to control the operations of firms in which they have a stake.
This is why China’s equity limits for foreign investment in Chinese financial institutions are costly to the Chinese economy, and why raising these limits is important.
There are also those in China who argue that the US focus on food and product safety is part of a strategy to restrict Chinese imports and reduce the bilateral trade deficit.  This argument has no basis in fact.
Numerous other countries, notably European Union members, share our concerns. 
Finally, after welcoming foreign investment, which contributed greatly to Chinese manufacturing growth and export competitiveness, some in China would now tighten restrictions on foreign investment to protect China’s domestic industries.
The US faces similar pressures, even though we are one of the world’s most open economies.
But neither country can protect its way to prosperity: protectionism harms China’s industrial development and our efforts to build stronger trading relationships.
I am committed to working to maintain economic openness, because it is good for America and for our workers.
But, frankly, it will be easier to do this if the American public and the US Congress see that China is serious about reform and expanding access to its markets.
The SED is one valuable tool in combating protectionist sentiments.
In this and other bilateral dialogues, the US has demonstrated that we welcome and encourage the rise of a prosperous and stable China.
We supported China’s membership in the World Trade Organization, the Inter-American Development Bank and the Financial Action Task Force.
We supported a greater voting share for China, and other rapidly growing emerging markets, in the IMF and the World Bank.
But China’s government must recognize that, while increased participation allows China to advance its interests, it also brings greater responsibilities.
The agreements we have achieved thus far are like signposts showing progress along the road to mutual economic prosperity.
While progress has not been as rapid as we would like, these signposts point the way to further benefits for Americans and Chinese alike.
To turn back would jeopardize the long-term strategic interests of both countries for short-term political expediency. 
The Black Hole in America’s GDP
CAMBRIDGE – The massive downturn in American’s economy will last longer and be more damaging than previous recessions, because it is driven by an unprecedented loss of household wealth.
Although the fiscal stimulus package that President Obama recently signed will give a temporary boost to activity sometime this summer, the common forecast that a sustained recovery will begin in the second half of 2009 will almost certainly prove to be overly optimistic.
Previous recessions were often characterized by excess inventory accumulation and overinvestment in business equipment.
The economy could bounce back as those excesses were absorbed over time, making room for new investment.
Those recoveries were also helped by interest rate reductions by the central bank.
This time, however, the fall in share prices and in home values has destroyed more than $12 trillion of household wealth in the United States, an amount equal to more than 75% of GDP.
Previous reactions to declines in household wealth indicate that such a fall will cut consumer spending by about $500 billion every year until wealth is restored.
While a higher household saving rate will help to rebuild wealth, it would take more than a decade of relatively high saving rates to restore what was lost.
The decline in housing construction has added to the current shortfall in aggregate demand.
The annual number of housing starts has fallen by 1.2 million units, cutting annual GDP by an additional $250 billion.
While this will eventually turn around as the inventory of unsold homes shrinks, the recovery will be slow.
So the US economy faces a $750 billion shortfall of demand. Moreover, the usual automatic stabilizers of unemployment benefits and reduced income tax collections will do nothing to offset this fall in demand, because it is not caused by lower earnings or increased unemployment.
Although the recently enacted two-year stimulus package includes a total of $800 billion of tax reductions and increased government spending, it would be wrong to think that this will add anything close to $400 billion a year to GDP in each of the next two years.
Most of the tax reductions will be saved by households rather than used to finance additional spending.
Moreover, a substantial part of the spending will be spread over the following decade. And some of the government spending in the stimulus package will replace other outlays that would have occurred anyway.
An optimistic estimate of the direct increase in annual demand from the stimulus package is about $300 billion in each of the next two years.
The stimulus package would thus fill less than half of the hole in GDP caused by the decline in household wealth and housing construction, with the remaining demand shortfall of $450 billion in each of the next two years causing serious second-round effects. As demand falls, businesses will reduce production, leading to lower employment and incomes, which in turn will lead to further cuts in consumer spending.
To be sure, an improvement in the currently dysfunctional financial system will allow banks and other financial institutions to start lending to borrowers who want to spend but cannot get credit today. This will help, but it is unlikely to be enough to achieve positive GDP growth.
A second fiscal stimulus package is therefore likely.
However, it will need to be much better targeted at increasing demand in order to avoid adding more to the national debt than the rise in domestic spending.
Similarly, the tax changes in such a stimulus package should provide incentives to increase spending by households and businesses.
Although long-term government interest rates are now very low, they are beginning to rise in response to the outlook for a sharply rising national debt.
The national debt held by US and foreign investors totaled about 40% of GDP at the end of 2008. It is likely to rise to more than 60% of GDP by the end of 2010, with the debt-to-GDP ratio continuing to increase.
The resulting increase in real long-term interest rates will reduce all forms of interest-sensitive spending, adding further to the economy’s weakness.
So it is not clear what will occur to reverse the decline in GDP and end the economic downturn.
Will a sharp dollar depreciation cause exports to rise and imports to fall?
Will a rapid rise in the inflation rate reduce the real value of government, household, and commercial debt, leading to lower saving and more spending?
Or will something else come along to turn the economy around.
Only time will tell.
The Blinders of History
A distorted view of the present is the worst way to prepare for the challenges of the future.
To describe the struggle against international terrorism as “World War IV,” as the leading American neo-conservative Norman Podhoretz does in his new book, is wrongheaded in any number of ways.
First of all, when and where was World War III?
The Cold War, precisely because it never became “hot,” was never the equivalent of World War I or II.
Of course, the “World War” reference may be intended to create an “us” versus “them” logic, but this does not correspond to the nature of the challenge posed by radical Islam, given the complexity and the many divisions that exist within the Muslim world.
Indeed, by militarizing our thinking, it renders us incapable of finding the right answers, which must be as much political as security-oriented.
As always, words are important, because they can easily be turned into weapons that boomerang on those who use them inappropriately.
Wrong analogies have already led America to disaster in Iraq, which had nothing in common with Germany or Japan after World War II – the parallel that some in the Bush administration used in arguing that democracy could be made to sprout in former dictatorships through occupation.
Obviously, the terrorist threat is real and endures, as the recent foiled plot in Germany attests.
That plot, which included a young German convert to Islam, showed once again that terrorists can threaten us from both without and within.
The nihilistic and destructive instincts that some young Germans of the Baader/Meinhof generation acquired from extreme leftist ideology in the 1970’s, it seems, can be transformed into a “romanticization” of al-Qaeda.
We must of course protect ourselves in the most serious and determined manner from the threat that terrorism may pose should, say, extremists acquire nuclear or biological weapons.
Intelligence, diplomacy, security forces, and educating people to the requirements of life lived under the shadow of an invisible menace must all be brought to bear.
A certain “Israelization” of our daily lives has unfortunately become inevitable.
But that does not mean that we must become literally obsessed with terrorism at the expense of losing sight of broader historical challenges.
The assassination of the heir of the Austro-Hungarian Empire at Sarajevo in July 1914 was not the cause of World War I, but its pretext.
The big picture then was not the “anarchist plot” to destabilize empires, but the rise of exasperated nationalisms, coupled with the suicidal instinct of a decaying order and the fatal mechanism of the logic of “secret alliances.”
The big picture then was that, with the transportation revolution and the deployment of mass armies, war could no longer be seen as the continuation of politics through other means.
The industrialization of war had made it “obsolete” in rational terms.
Less than the defeat of Germany, Austria, and the Ottoman Empire, World War I meant the suicide of Europe.
The big picture today is the possible passage of global leadership from the West to Asia.
The paranoid reaction of neoconservatives in America to the terrorist threat can only accelerate that process, if not render it inevitable, by endangering our democratic values and thereby weakening the “soft power” of the United States, while giving fuel to the terrorist cause.
Terrorism is the product of a fusion within a part of Islam of religious extremism, thwarted nationalism, and what Dostoyevsky called “nihilism.”
Our challenge is to understand the root causes of these forces and to make distinctions among them.
In other words, we are faced with the challenge of complexity, which requires us to ensure that a small minority is not joined by greater forces.
Greater stability in the Middle East, which implies a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, together with more effective integration of Muslims in our societies based on social justice and a stronger humanistic message, are the key elements of a cohesive Western strategy.
If we lose sight of that in our struggle against terrorism and its causes, we will be left unable to face successfully the long-term challenge of “Chindia.”
The Bogey of Fiscal Stimulus
NEW YORK – After the economic disaster of 2008-2009, people are understandably wary of the devastation that yet another financial crisis can wreak.
But the likelihood of another crisis is quite small, and its adverse impact would be far less devastating this time around, as there are no more massive credit or asset bubbles to burst.
That has not stopped pundits and the media from exaggerating such fears, distracting from greater efforts to overcome protracted stagnation for much of the developed world, which will inevitably drag down economic recovery elsewhere, especially in developing countries.
The current favorite bogeyman is public debt.
Much is being made of high levels of sovereign debt on both sides of the Atlantic, and in Japan.
As the economics commentator Martin Wolf has noted, “The fiscal challenge is long term, not immediate.”
Likewise, while Japan has the highest debt-to-GDP ratio among rich countries, this is not a serious problem because the debt is domestically held.
And Europe’s debt problems are now widely acknowledged to be due to ill-conceived aspects of European integration.
The international community has, so far, failed to develop effective and equitable arrangements for restructuring sovereign debt, despite the clearly dysfunctional and problematic consequences of past international public-debt crises. This prevents timely debt workouts when needed, effectively impeding recovery.
High public debt is also being invoked in support of fiscal austerity in many developed countries.
But, rather than helping, the rush to budget cutting is reversing earlier recovery efforts.
With private-sector demand still weak, austerity is slowing, not accelerating, recovery.
It has already reduced growth and employment.
And, while financial markets insist on deficit reduction, the recent decline in equity and bond prices – and the loss of confidence that this reflects – suggests that they also recognize the adverse implications of fiscal consolidation at a time of weak private demand.
Opponents of fiscal stimulus cynically claim that all such efforts are bound to fail, citing as evidence US President George W. Bush’s tax cuts!
Others point out that the US Fed’s “quantitative easing” efforts have been modestly successful, at best.
While undoubtedly mitigating the impact of the crisis, Europe’s “automatic stabilizers” are now said to be enough to ensure recovery, despite strong evidence to the contrary.
Slower growth means less revenue, and a faster downward spiral.
Most major countries’ fiscal deficits nowadays reflect the recent collapse of tax revenues that followed the growth downturn, as well as very costly financial-sector bailouts.
And yet many policymakers are insisting on immediate action to rectify not only fiscal deficits, but also trade imbalances and banks’ balance-sheet weaknesses.
While these undoubtedly need to be addressed in the longer term, prioritizing them now effectively stymies stronger, sustained recovery efforts.
The wrong public policies can induce recessions.
This happened in 1980-1981, when the US Federal Reserve raised real interest rates, ostensibly to kill inflation, inducing a global economic downturn as well.
This contributed not only to sovereign-debt and fiscal crises, but also to protracted stagnation outside East Asia, including Latin America’s “lost decade” and Africa’s “quarter-century retreat.”
Another distraction is exaggerating the threat of inflation.
Recent inflation in many countries has been the result of higher commodity prices, especially fuel and food prices.
In these circumstances, domestic deflationary policies will only further slow growth – and are helpless to stem imported inflation.
Unfortunately, today’s top policy priority is to address remote possibilities, whereas the urgent task at hand – coordinating and implementing efforts to raise and sustain growth and job creation – is being ignored.
Meanwhile, cuts in social and welfare spending are only making things worse, as employment and consumer demand fall further.
The pressure on employment and household budgets is likely to persist.
Strident calls for structural reforms mainly target labor markets, rather than product markets.
Growing worker insecurity is seen as the basis for a healthy economy.
Labor-market liberalization in such circumstances not only undermines remaining social protection, but is also likely to diminish real incomes, aggregate demand, and, hence, recovery prospects.
Moreover, in recent decades, profits have risen not only at the expense of wages, but also with much more accruing to finance, insurance, and real estate compared to other sectors.
The outrageous increases in financial executives’ remuneration in recent years, which cannot be attributed to increased productivity, have exacerbated the financial sector’s focus on the short term, while worsening its risk exposure in the longer term, thereby exacerbating systemic vulnerability.
Growing income inequality in most countries before the Great Recession only made matters worse, by reducing household savings and increasing credit for consumption and asset purchases, rather than augmenting investment in new economic capacity.
What the world needs now are leaders who look to the long-term future.
The international financial institutions created after World War II were set up to ensure not only international monetary and financial stability, but also the conditions for sustained growth, employment generation, post-war reconstruction, and post-colonial development.
Unfortunately, current policy is justified in terms of “pro-market” – effectively pro-cyclical – choices.
But it is counter-cyclical efforts, institutions, and instruments that are sorely needed instead.
Global leadership today seems to be held hostage by financial interests and associated media, ideologists, and oligarchs whose political influence enables them to secure more rents and pay lower taxes in what must truly be the most vicious of circles.
Indeed, the menace that now confronts us is not public debt or inflation, but a downward economic spiral that will be increasingly difficult to reverse.
The Borders of Liberalism
When it comes to whether and how to regulate the economy, Western societies have a history of liberal theory upon which to rely.
But when it comes to immigration, there is not much in the liberal tradition to which they can turn.
As a result, in both Europe and the United States, much of the debate over immigration is dominated by illiberal voices, the most insistent belonging to politicians who promise to protect the cultural integrity of the homeland against the presumed degeneracy of the alien.
Xenophobia is an illiberal response to immigration from the right, but multiculturalism represents much the same thing from the left.
Many multicultural theorists, although committed to openness toward immigrants, are not committed to the openness of immigrants to their new home.
For them, newcomers, living in an environment hostile to their way of life, need to preserve the cultural practices they bring with them, even if some of those practices – for example, arranged marriages, gender segregation, religious indoctrination – conflict with liberal principles.
Group survival counts more than individual rights in the moral accounting of many multiculturalists.
One way to maintain a commitment to openness when addressing the vexing question of national borders is to recognize that cosmopolitanism is a two-way street.
Immanuel Kant teaches us that the circumstances in which we find ourselves must always be judged against the circumstances in which, but for chance, we might have found ourselves.
From this perspective, it is unfair that someone who happens to be born in the US is likely to live longer and better than someone born in Kenya.
This does not mean that the US must open its borders to everyone from Kenya.
But it does mean that a New Yorker should recognize that any advantages he may have over a Nairobian are due to an accident of birth rather than merit.
From the perspective of Kantian cosmopolitanism, the least an American can do is to welcome a certain amount of immigration from Africa.
But embracing cosmopolitanism also means that once a society admits new members, those members are obliged to open themselves to their new society.
Multiculturalists are reluctant to endorse this part of the cosmopolitan bargain, but liberals must.
One can understand why, living in a foreign country they may perceive as hostile, immigrants opt to close themselves off, and some host countries – France, for example –may be too hasty in demanding that immigrants accept new ways of life.
But attempting to live a closed life in an open society is bound to be self-defeating and not something a liberal society should encourage.
An instructive example of the cosmopolitanism bargain came in 2006, when Great Britain’s former foreign minister, Jack Straw, raised concerns about the nijab, the full-head covering worn by some Muslim women.
Straw defended women’s right to wear less intrusive headscarves; yet he also argued that something is seriously wrong when, in conversation with another person, one cannot engage in face-to-face interaction.
Straw was saying that to wear the nijab is a decision to close yourself off from everyone around you.
He was not making a xenophobic argument that Muslims do not belong in Great Britain, or a multiculturalist argument that Muslims should be allowed to wear whatever traditional garb they believe best expresses their cultural and religious sensibilities.
Nor was he asking for the full assimilation of immigrants to British customs.
Instead, through a carefully chosen example, Straw was illustrating what it means to be open to others while expecting openness in return.
Some argued that, in suggesting to Muslim women what they should wear, Straw was interfering with religious freedom.
In fact, liberal values sometimes contradict each other.
Islam, for example, has historically permitted certain forms of polygamy, but no liberal society is obliged to extend religious freedom in ways that undermine its commitment to gender equality.
Fortunately, Straw’s example does not pose such a sharp dilemma.
As he pointed out, wearing the nijab is not commanded by the Koran and represents a cultural choice, not a religious duty.
So long as other ways are available for Muslim women to cover their heads, agreeing not to wear the nijab is a way of signifying one’s membership in a liberal society at minimal cost to one’s religious commitments.
For liberals, the question is never whether borders should be completely open or closed; a society open to all would have no rights worth protecting, while a society closed to all would have no rights worth emulating.
If one is looking for an abstract principle to follow on questions of immigration, liberalism cannot provide it.
But a liberal society will allow people in and make exceptions for conditions under which they must be kept out, rather than keeping people out and making exceptions for when they should be allowed in.
A liberal society will also view the world as teeming with potential that, however threatening to ways of life that are taken for granted, forces people to adapt to new challenges rather than trying to protect themselves against the foreign and unknown.
Finally, a liberal society will not focus on what we can offer immigrants, but on what they can offer us.
The goal of openness implied by immigration is worth preserving, especially if both its demands and its promise apply across the board.
The Borgia Candidate for Russia’s Presidency
In the latest interview given by Andrei Lugovoi, the man Great Britain wants Russia to extradite for poisoning the dissident Alexander Litvinenko with radioactive polonium, there was a remarkable moment that has not been fully appreciated. Lugovoi, still rather diffident but with unmistakable pride, mentioned that when he is seen in public, he usually finds himself surrounded by people who want to shake his hand, congratulate him on his valor, and ask for his autograph.
“Well, have you thought about a career in politics?” the interviewer asked.
Unfortunately, the interviewer did not pursue the matter any further.
This is a pity, because Lugovoi’s status in Russia tells us much about my country in the seventh year of President Vladmir Putin’s rule.
Perhaps surprisingly, Lugovoi seems not to have wondered why he is enjoying such an enthusiastic reception from his compatriots.
Are ordinary Russians showing solidarity with a victim unjustly hounded by the British Crown Prosecution Service?
That seems unlikely.
When did Russians ever ask a victim for an autograph?
I myself have been attracting the interest of the Russian Public Prosecutor’s Office for several months now, and I have yet to encounter any public support in the street, let alone a single autograph hunter.
In Russia, you get asked for your autograph if you are a proper hero: an ice-hockey player, a cosmonaut, a high-society prostitute, or, like Lugovoi, an executioner.
Part of Lugovoi’s acclaim is derived from the fact that the list of unspeakable crimes committed by the late Alexander Litvinenko in the course of his brief life is growing longer in Russian media reports with every passing day.
These are crimes so treacherous that any right-minded Russian patriot can only thirst to see such a person subjected to the supreme measure of national retribution.
But only one such “patriot” was granted the honor of being allowed to perform this act.
That is why Lugovoi is being asked for his autograph.
Wouldn’t Lugovoi’s entrance into politics bring about the ideal solution to the problem of finding an heir for Putin?
That search, after all, is threatening to divide the nation’s elite.
So why not choose a man like Lugovoi who truly represents what that elite stands for?
Let us compare two potential presidential candidates, Putin in 1999 and Lugovoi in 2007.
The similarities are striking: the modest social background, the KGB milieu, the criminal vocabulary, the mentality and physique, the mercilessness towards “enemies of the people.”
The underworld manners of both go hand in hand with that lively interest in business which is so essential if “liberal reforms” in Russia are to be continued.
Finally, there is the additional, highly significant coincidence that both men, at the start of their political careers, were largely dependent on the oligarch Boris Berezovsky, but subsequently fell out with him.
Regarding their professional attainments, Lugovoi in 2007 seems to have the edge.
Successfully carrying out a large-scale operation in the middle of London beats a desk job in the GDR-USSR House of Friendship in Dresden in the years of perestroika and communist collapse.
So perhaps the Russian people might take to their hearts this executioner with the rank of lieutenant colonel, just as eight years ago they took to their hearts another KGB lieutenant colonel, Vladimir Putin?
Would the sybaritic, globe-trotting Lugovoi agree to wear the crown?
Running the Kremlin is, after all, a testing job.
We have all seen Putin’s face age dramatically over the last eight years.
But Lugovoi’s face, too, has also changed markedly over the last eight months of press conferences.
Once a wary non-entity, he has grown bolder.
His is the face of Putin’s new Russia, of a smug Russia that is “getting off its knees” and reaching for its gun.
The Message from Boston
PRINCETON – America has grown up.
Public reaction to the Boston Marathon bombings and the identity of the perpetrators reveals a very different nation from the one reflected in the traumatized and occasionally hysterical responses to the terror attacks of September 11, 2001.
The magnitude of the two attacks was, of course, very different – thousands were killed and major national landmarks destroyed in 2001, whereas the Boston bombing killed three people and injured roughly 260.
Still, it was the first major attack on the United States since 2001, and the contrast between now and then is instructive.
Consider the social-media buzz within minutes of the bombing.
The New York Post, a tabloid, emitted a stream of sensational reportage claiming that 12 people had been killed and that a Saudi national was “under guard” at a Boston hospital.
Veteran reporters and columnists immediately countered with questions about the Post’s sources and the lack of confirmation for what it was reporting.
Kerri Miller of Minnesota Public Radio tweeted that she had covered the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, which was first reported as a gas explosion, then as an attack by foreign terrorists, and finally as the work of domestic extremists.
This caution and restraint stemmed directly from a collective awareness of the many innocent Muslim-Americans who suffered from Americans’ ignorance and wrath following the 2001 attacks.
Indeed, equally striking was the number of pundits who suggested that the Boston bombing was homegrown, more similar to the Oklahoma City attack or the mass shooting last December of first graders in Newtown, Connecticut, than to the 2001 plot.
The America of 2013, unlike the America of 2001, is willing to recognize its own pathologies before looking for enemies abroad.
Moreover, even amid the shock and grief fueled by images of the bombing and the many victims with shattered, shredded limbs, Americans found at least a little bandwidth to comprehend that bombs are still a feature of daily life in Iraq and Syria.
Today’s America is one that recognizes that it is not the world’s only country, and by no means the worst off.
Many commentators remarked on Americans’ resilience, and that of Bostonians in particular.
Much like Londoners after the attacks on their public-transport system in July 2005, Boston’s citizens were determined to prove that life goes on.
American flags flew at half-mast; President Barack Obama addressed the nation; the country mourned with the families of the victims and with the young athletes who will never run again.
But even amid a massive police manhunt and a citywide lockdown, planners were already focusing on ensuring that next year’s marathon will redeem the tragedy of this one.
Likewise, when it became clear that the bombing suspects, Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, were Chechens who had emigrated from the Russian province of Dagestan, the reaction – at least among regular participants in public debate – was far more nuanced than a decade ago.
Back then, Fareed Zakaria’s cover story for Newsweek – entitled “The Politics of Rage: Why Do They Hate Us?” – painted a broad-brush portrait of Muslim youth in the Middle East raging against brutal and oppressive dictatorships funded and supported by the US government.
Zakaria was right in many ways, but he had to bring his readers up to speed on six decades of history in a few short pages.
By contrast, David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker, weighed in with a piece on the Tsarnaev brothers that opened with Stalin’s banishment of the Chechen people “from their homeland in the northern Caucasus to Central Asia and the Siberian wastes.”
Remnick’s lead-in was intended not to introduce a summary account of the brutal and violent history of the Chechen people, but to frame a detailed account of the specific history of the Tsarnaev family.
Remnick included a series of tweets from the younger brother, Dzhokhar, only 19, beginning with a message from March 12, 2012 (“a decade in America already –&#160;I want out”).&#160;In Remnick’s words, the tweets show “a young man’s thoughts: his jokes, his resentments, his prejudices, his faith, his desires.”
Even amid Americans’ anger and grief at the senselessness of what the Tsarnaev brothers did, we can see them not as faceless embodiments of Islamic rage, but as individuals, as human – even as sad.
The ability to distinguish individual features from the mass, to reach nuanced judgments, and to control initial impulses of rage and revenge are hallmarks of maturity in societies and people alike.
But America has also grown up in another way, learning to choose transparency over secrecy, and to rely on the power of its citizens.
After September 11, 2001, the security expert Stephen E. Flynn called on the government to “engage the American people in the enterprise of managing threats to the nation.”
A decade later, the FBI immediately called on all who attended the Boston Marathon to send photos and videos of the area around the finish line – anything that could help investigators identify the bombers.
The resulting flood of information enabled the authorities to identify the two suspects far sooner than would have been possible had they relied on traditional police methods.
The US of 2013 is both more reflective than it was a decade ago and more consciously connected to the world. The result is a citizenry that is less likely to interpret events, even attacks, in simplistic and often counter-productive us-versus-them terms.
The cancer of violence is all too often found within the US, fed in part by the same inequality, alienation, lack of opportunity, and fervent search for absolute truth that we discern abroad.
The brutal repression of Chechnya, violent Islamic extremism, an American cult of violence, immigrants’ dashed dreams, and plenty of other factors still to be uncovered create a complex pattern of risk that is difficult to unravel and even harder to minimize.
But seeing it clearly is an important first step.
The Bourbons of Global Finance
ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN – Today’s International Monetary Fund (and, to a lesser degree, the World Bank) recall Talleyrand’s description of France’s Bourbon kings: it has learned nothing and forgotten nothing.
At a time when rich countries like the United States are running deficits of 12% of GDP because of the global financial meltdown, the IMF has been telling countries like Latvia and Ukraine, which did not start the crisis but have turned to the Fund to help combat it, that they must balance their budgets if they want aid.
Such hypocrisy would be laughable if global economic conditions weren’t so dire that even countries that once swore never again to deal with the IMF have returned to its door, cap in hand.
Some leading economists in Argentina justify this reversal by arguing that the world now has an “Obama IMF,” one presumably friendlier and more attuned to local problems than the “Bush Fund.”
But, as the IMF programs for Latvia and Ukraine suggest, the main difference may only be a smile.
To be sure, IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn recently called for a global fiscal response to the worsening recession. But will the Fund now abandon its long-held emphasis on government cutbacks, monetary contraction, and overall austerity, policies that – in the opinion of many development economists – do considerably more harm than good?
Are the IMF and the World Bank actually willing to reconsider their failed policies?
In recent years, lending by both institutions contracted dramatically, even though they have increasingly become the exclusive lenders to the world’s poorest countries.
In 2005, Argentina and Brazil were the first of the countries that previously denounced the IMF’s neo-liberal agenda to begin repaying their loans.
Repayments followed from other large debtors, including Indonesia, the Philippines, Serbia, and Turkey.
Indeed, the IMF’s outstanding general resource account (GRA) credits to middle-income developing countries fell by an unprecedented 91% from 2002 to 2007, as richer developing countries gained access to sources of financing that were free of the Fund’s conditionality.
But poorer countries, for which international capital markets remain off limits, have no alternative but to rely on the World Bank and IMF.
In September 2007, a year before warning signs gave way to a full-blown financial meltdown, Strauss-Kahn himself suggested that the IMF was in a “crisis of identity.”
Indeed, the unprecedented decline in GRA lending, the IMF’s main source of income, forced the Fund to announce a $100 million cost-cutting plan in April 2008.
Similar financial pressures affected the World Bank, with its main source of income, IBRD lending, down 40% in 2007 from its late-1990’s levels.
But the world’s pain has been these institutions’ gain.
Since the crisis went global last autumn, the IMF has had countries parading to its door.
Between November 5, 2008 and January 12, 2009, the Fund committed nearly $50 billion to seven countries (Hungary, Ukraine, Iceland, Pakistan, Latvia, Serbia, and Belarus).
The World Bank, too, has recently been resurrected in places like Ecuador, Bolivia, and Peru, with loans to that region of Latin America up four-fold year on year since last September, reaching nearly $3 billion.
Unfortunately, for both institutions, such countries’ growing demand for financing merely means business as usual.
Consider the recent standby arrangement with Latvia, whose conditions include a massive 25% cut in public-sector wages, a similar reduction in government expenditures, and a huge tax increase.
Ukraine’s government, moreover, was told to balance its budget by massively slashing state pensions.
Only when conditions in the country deteriorated even more in the wake of the Fund holding back on the second tranche of its loan did the IMF agree to loosen its conditions.  However in Latvia, the IMF has continued to demand austerity even in the wake of plummeting growth and rising unemployment which have lead to riots and political instability.
Recent World Bank loans are similarly conditioned, in part, on “fiscal discipline.”
Insistence on such policies at a time when the US and most of the rest of the rich world are following virtually the opposite economic strategy indicates the need for fundamental rethinking of what actually generates growth and development.
There is a growing body of alternative ideas in this area –including work by the Nobel laureates Joseph Stiglitz and Paul Krugman – which the IMF and the World Bank should consider.
More importantly, American control has meant that throughout their history these institutions have been used as an adjunct of US foreign policy.
Given the centrality of orthodox stalwarts like Larry Summers and Timothy Geithner in the Obama administration, the prospect of serious reform appears dim.
Summers was a key architect of neo-liberal policies while at the World Bank and the US Treasury during the Clinton administration, and Geithner is a former senior IMF official.
Both men are likely to support the prevailing global double standard, which allows rich countries to use fiscal expansion in the face of recession, while forcing poor countries into greater austerity.
But the Obama administration can still help – for example, by asking the Federal Reserve to expand the currency swap arrangements that it recently offered to Singapore, South Korea, and Brazil to other developing countries.
That way, the world’s poor could at least avoid the heavy-handed conditionality imposed by the IMF and World Bank.
The Brain-Drain Panic Returns
NEW YORK – While developed countries are angst-ridden over mostly illegal immigration by unskilled workers from developing countries, a different set of concerns has surfaced in Africa, in particular, over the legal outflow of skilled, and even more importantly, highly skilled, people to developed countries.
This outflow is supposedly a new and damaging “brain drain,” with rich countries actively luring away needed skills from poor countries.
This fear is misplaced.
At the outset, we have to distinguish between “need” and “demand.”
Yes, many African countries need skills.
But they are unable to absorb them, owing to several factors associated with economic backwardness.
In India in the 1950’s and 1960’s –&nbsp;a time when many professionals were emigrating – working conditions were deplorable.
Bureaucrats decided whether we could go abroad for conferences.