·         Give yourself a small reward each time you achieve one of the steps towards your goal;
·         Keep track of your progress towards your goal, for example by keeping a journal or putting a chart on the fridge door.
Individually, each of these factors seems trivial.
Collectively, they are ways of exerting our self-control not only now, but in the future as well.
If we succeed, the behavior we judge to be better will become habitual – and thus no longer require a conscious act of will to keep acting in that way.
These tools for keeping a New Year’s resolution can help us to make progress, not only in losing weight or staying out of debt, but also in living more ethically.
We may even find that that is the best resolution to make, for our own benefit and that of others.
How to Make EU Integration Popular
Across the European Union, fears about globalization and antipathy to integration and immigration have produced massive political fallout, including the failed French and Dutch referenda on the Union’s draft constitutional treaty and a de facto moratorium on accession talks with Turkey.
The European Council and the Commission have watched helplessly, as if the matter was not in their hands.
Conventional wisdom suggests that the EU’s inability to meet the challenges of integration is due to rigid economic structures and inadequate human capital – weaknesses that can only be tackled effectively by national policies, where the Union has little role to play.
But substantial policy spillover across the EU justifies strengthened policy coordination for labor-market and welfare reform.
Outdated labor-market rules are the key reason why the full benefits of the internal market and monetary union have failed to materialize.
Labor-market rigidities – above all in France, Germany, and Italy – impede adjustment to the increased competition of integrating markets.
Those who lose their jobs cannot find new ones because of barriers to entry, while high long-term unemployment makes those who do have jobs feel threatened.
Viewing immigrants and internal market integration with alarm, both groups thus have increasingly turned against Europe.
If they cannot reform, France or Italy eventually may be tempted to renege on free movement of goods, services and labor – and perhaps even abandon the euro – with disruptive consequences for all members.
Therefore, there is a common interest in fostering national policies that are consistent with integration in the internal market.
The benefits of coordination are likely to be reinforced by policy “learning,” as confirmed by evidence that reforms tend to spread in waves.
Structural reforms are usually resisted because of uncertainty about the costs and their distribution.
One way to weaken this resistance is to involve not only ministers and heads of government in exchanging information on policy design, but also those who resist change, notably trade unions.
After all, a clear message by the European Council would have a much stronger effect if it expressed not only the wishes of heads of governments, but also broad acceptance at all levels of society.
Only then can one hope for full implementation of reforms and the virtuous circle of improved expectations and economic performance that should have been set in motion by the European Council’s Lisbon summit seven years ago.
The experience of successful reform in the Anglo-Saxon and Nordic countries shows that Europe need not be condemned to stagnation, provided that it renounces rigid employment protection.
The key to overcoming resistance is to give affected workers grounds to hope that they can find a new job.
The European Council might also recommend that any relaxation of employment protection be accompanied by the establishment of a minimum wage – determined as an agreed proportion of the statutory wage for regular long-term employment.
With such a comprehensive policy package, resistance to change would likely diminish.
Immigration poses even greater policy challenges, since newcomers are widely perceived as threatening jobs and crowding out natives from social services.
There is ample evidence that restrictions on immigration in one country divert migrant flows to other EU countries, and that migration is attracted by generous welfare entitlements.
Moreover, well-functioning labor markets attract migrants with higher qualifications, while countries with rigid employment protection are targeted by the low-skilled and those willing to work illegally.
Labor migration also presents challenges for source countries, for it diminishes their pool of young and educated workers.
Policy coordination can provide effective remedies to these negative spillovers.
Two measures would be particularly useful.
First, the old member states should immediately lift remaining restrictions on the freedom of movement for workers from new member countries.
Any minimum wage would automatically also apply to immigrant workers, mitigating “unfair” competition for low-skilled jobs. 
Second, the EU should enact a common scheme for admission of immigrant workers from outside the Union.
These labor-market and immigration policies should become the focus of policy coordination within the EU.
By concentrating on policies to sustain integration while at the same preserving the European social model, the European Council would again become a relevant policy forum where the real needs and hopes of citizens could find effective responses.
New Model Europe
ROME – It is becoming increasingly clear that if Europe is to overcome its crisis, business as usual will not suffice.
We need a Europe that is more concrete, less rhetorical, and better suited to the current global economy.
We need to focus not only on the European Union’s specific policies, but also on how to change its “politics” – a change that must place economic growth at the top of the agenda.
Europe does not need a debate between austerity and growth; it needs to be pragmatic.
A good example of this was the most recent European Council, which addressed two of Europe’s most pressing problems: malfunctioning labor markets, reflected in record-high youth unemployment, and malfunctioning credit markets, in which access to financing is difficult and lending rates vary considerably among different parts of the single market.
The outcome of the Council’s June meeting was encouraging, and we must continue on that path in the coming months to make progress on two equally important issues: how to foster innovation and the digital economy, and how to ensure Europe’s manufacturing competitiveness.
We need to assess what can be achieved at the national level and what EU institutions should do.
Fiscal consolidation and national reforms are essential and should continue.
But we can better achieve our objectives under an EU framework that supports, rather than impedes, national action to boost growth and employment.
The European Commission’s recent decision to grant member states some flexibility for productive public investment linked to EU structural funds is a welcome step in this direction.
The second issue is the need to take further steps toward closer integration within the eurozone.
A banking union is an important start, which should prevent financial markets from fragmenting along national lines and reduce private-sector borrowing costs.
Lending rates are still too high for small and medium-size enterprises and too dependent on where in the EU a company is located.
We have achieved important results on the way to a banking union, notably on supervision.
Now we need to work on the second pillar, resolution of the banking crisis.
The proposal presented by Michel Barnier, European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services, is bold, but Europe does indeed need a strong, efficient resolution mechanism that ensures timely action to address banking crises.
We also need to consider how to enhance coordination of economic policies to promote productivity convergence.
We already have a good mechanism for multilateral surveillance in place, but we should aim to focus it on the areas that really matter for economic union.
This must go hand in hand with a discussion of how the EU can provide incentives to member states that are committed to difficult structural reforms at a time of retrenchment, which could lead to talks about possible forms of fiscal coordination.
Though it is premature to enter into such discussions now, the issue should not be taken off the table.
All of these changes concern the eurozone’s members first, of course, but they are clearly relevant for the wider EU.
At the same time, setting eurozone members apart from the wider EU would be inadvisable.
Ensuring a stable and effective eurozone is essential to the smooth operation of the entire single market.
And, without an efficient EU, the eurozone could not prosper.
We have only one Europe, and we all need to work together to reform it and drive it forward.
Indeed, with its 500 million consumers, the EU single market remains the largest destination for goods and services worldwide and is the best engine to restore growth.
Key economic sectors, such as financial services, benefit greatly from the single market’s common rules.
Without the single market, all member states would be less attractive to foreign investors, who, once established in one member state, can move freely around the EU.
The single market also provides a platform and leverage to export goods and services to international markets.
So we must make the single market more open, internally and externally.
But, to do so, we will need to make EU institutions more efficient, with better regulation and a lower administrative burden.
Common institutions are needed to ensure that all EU countries’ interests are protected, and to act as a bridge between eurozone and non-eurozone member states.
Frankly, the functioning of the EU and its institutions during the crisis has been a part of the problem.
For many people, EU decision-making is opaque, inefficient, and removed from democratic control.
Most worrying, the crisis has challenged the very idea of European integration.
Thus, we will be able to advance a reformist agenda only if we have a convincing narrative that explains why we need Europe and why it serves the interests of current and future generations.
I am a committed pro-European.
I have in mind the extraordinary image of Helmut Kohl and François Mitterrand at Verdun in 1984, two old leaders, standing hand in hand, remembering the victims of World War I.
Next year will mark the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of that war.
The experience of two world wars was foundational for European integration.
But these memories no longer provide a sufficient catalyst for action.
We need to find a forward-looking rationale that, after 50 years of integration, shows how acting together can help Europe achieve its goals in a changed global environment.
There is nothing worse than letting people believe that European integration is something that proceeds by stealth, a journey driven by invisible and uncontrollable forces.
The EU cannot last unless it is built on its citizens’ explicit commitment.
Today, we have a chance to remodel Europe.
Next year’s European parliamentary elections will provide an opportunity for a fundamental debate about the EU’s future.
Unless we make a successful case for Europe (and for a different Europe), Euro-skeptic forces will gain ground and Europe’s decision-making processes will be blocked.
The choice is clear, and it will have to be made sooner rather than later.
Escape from Mecca
LOS ANGELES – The recent stampede in Mecca, in which more than a thousand pilgrims making the hajj were trampled to death, is a tragic but powerful reminder of the city’s prominence in the Muslim world.
According to theological tradition, every Muslim is required to make a trip to the city once in their lifetime, if they are able to do so.
In practice, however, it is only in recent times that making a pilgrimage to Mecca has come to play such an important role in Islam.
The city has always had symbolic significance, but its importance to millions of Muslims worldwide is largely a modern phenomenon, one that has grown in recent decades as Saudi officials and fundamentalist Wahhabi clerics promoted religious tourism as a means of spreading their influence.
For most of Islamic history, the overwhelmingly majority of Muslims did not travel to Mecca.
Instead, they made local pilgrimages to the major shrines that still garland the Muslim world.
Some are to Koranic prophets even older than Muhammad; others are to Shia imams or Sufi saints; and still others are to hallowed Muslim women.
The name of one holy place, the necropolis of Makli in Pakistan, hints at its medieval ambition to become an alternative destination for pilgrims: Makli means the “little Mecca.”
The modern hajj has its origins in the rise of religious tourism to Mecca in the nineteenth century, when steamships began transporting large numbers of pilgrims to the Arabian Peninsula.
Then, as now, there was little local effort to limit the number of pilgrims to safe levels or to provide adequate infrastructure and security to handle the masses of visitors.
Annual influxes of hundreds of thousands of pilgrims closely packed into steamships were blamed for spreading cholera through port cities from Bombay to Hamburg, making the hajj a major cause of death around the world.
For the most part, the pilgrimage’s religious nature has muted criticism of the way it was handled.
But contemporary accounts make clear that not all were pleased with Mecca’s management of the event.
In the 1860s, the female Indian Muslim ruler of Bhopal, Sikandar Begum, wrote a warts-and-all account of Mecca as a “wild and melancholy-looking” city whose “dirty and ill-drained” streets were filled with disease and disorder.
A half-century later, the Central Asian pilgrim ‘Abd al-Rashid Ibrahim described the holy city’s filth and squalor, recounting stories of pilgrims walking through streets ankle deep in excrement.
Religious tourism played a central role in the region’s nineteenth-century economy (until the arrival of Texas oilmen in the 1930s, Mecca was almost entirely dependent on visiting pilgrims).
But the numbers of visitors began to rise sharply after the city fell under the control of the Saudi royal family in 1924.
Until then, the only way to reach Mecca was by pack animal.
The Ottoman Empire raised funds from pious Muslims (and brought in German technicians) to lay a railway from Damascus to Medina.
But the last leg of the journey – to Mecca itself – remained a monopoly of the camel-owning Bedouin.
When the Saudi government introduced Fords to the area in around 1930, it needed all of its military resources to prevent the Bedouin from destroying them.
To be sure, the Saudi government faces massive demand from Muslims to be allowed to make the hajj, and it has introduced a quota system to limit their numbers.
Even so, it maintains strenuous efforts to attract pilgrims – particularly wealthy ones – by building attractions, including vast shopping malls and a colossal copy of London’s Big Ben that now looms incongruously over the Ka‘ba.
And the authorities’ admission of more pilgrims than the city’s infrastructure can safely handle is indisputable; the proof is repeated disasters like the one in September.
Indeed, since taking control of Mecca, the Saudi government has used the city and the hajj as centerpieces in its efforts to place the kingdom at the center of the Muslim world and spread Wahhabi Islam.
As soon as the Saudi royal family seized the city, the new rulers destroyed the Shia and Sufi shrines that might have undermined their sought-after monopoly over the ritual aspects of the pilgrimage.
And their approach seems to have worked.
It is not uncommon for pilgrims from, say, India or Indonesia to adopt strict, conservative tenets after their return from Mecca.
As influence is ultimately a matter of numbers, it should come as no surprise that the Saudis seek to maximize the inflows of Muslim pilgrims each year.
Even when faced with calamitous death tolls, the Saudi establishment is unlikely to change its approach.
It is up to the rest of the Muslim world to provide alternatives to the modern idea, championed by Saudi Wahhabis and other arch-conservatives, that Mecca is the inexorable and inevitable center of the Muslim world.
There is nothing stopping Muslim governments from taking a page out of the Saudi handbook and promoting the neglected shrines in their own territories.
Doing so would not only reduce the number of pilgrims traveling to Mecca, making the visits safer; it would also force Saudi Arabia to share the enormous profits of religious tourism.
Even more important, moving beyond the modern hajj to a more plural pattern of pilgrimage could help stem the Wahhabi takeover of the faith.
How to Make Trade Easier
WASHINGTON, DC – The world is now in the fourth year of the Great Recession.
So far, the economies belonging to the World Trade Organization have resisted the kind of widespread protectionism that would make a bad situation much worse.
But protectionist pressures are building as weary politicians hear more and more calls for economic nationalism.
The WTO’s best defense of open trade is a good offense.
A new WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement would benefit all by increasing developing countries’ capacity to trade, strengthening the WTO’s development mandate, and boosting global economic growth.
More than a decade after the launch of the Doha Round of global free-trade talks, this agreement could be a down payment on the commitment that WTO members have made to linking trade and development.
Developing countries stand to gain the most from improving trade facilitation.
The right support would help traders in poorer countries to compete and integrate into global supply chains.
There are rich opportunities for gains.
Inefficiencies in processing and clearing goods put traders in developing countries at a competitive disadvantage.&nbsp;Outdated and inefficient border procedures and inadequate infrastructure often mean high transaction costs, long delays, opportunities for corruption, and an additional 10-15% in the cost of getting goods to market – even more in landlocked countries.
Research by the World Bank suggests that every dollar of assistance provided to support trade-facilitation reform in developing countries yields a return of up to $70 in economic benefits.
When funds are directed at improving border-management systems and procedures – the very issues covered by the trade-facilitation negotiations – the impact is particularly significant.
Projects aimed at boosting efficiency and transparency, supported by development banks and bilateral donors, have made a dramatic difference.&nbsp;In East Africa, procedural improvements have reduced the average clearance time for cargo crossing the Kenya-Uganda border from almost two days to only seven hours.
In Cameroon, some of our organizations have worked with the World Customs Organization to help the customs authority reduce corruption and increase collection of revenues – estimated to be more than $25 million a year.
On the Laos-Vietnam border, a sub-regional cross-border transport agreement has cut cargo transit times from four hours to just over one hour.
A new customs component to a highway project between Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh City helped increase the total value of trade through the Moc Bai-Bavet border by 40% over three years.
In Peru, some of our banks have worked with international freight forwarders to connect remote villages and small businesses to export markets through national postal services, turning more than 300 small firms into exporters, most for the first time.
The outlines of a new WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement are already clear, but some technical differences remain on specific provisions.
Developing countries want a credible commitment to support implementation, such as technical assistance and capacity-building.&nbsp;A World Bank study estimates that the costs of implementing the measures likely to be covered by a Trade Facilitation agreement would be relatively modest – $7-11 million in the countries studied, spread out over a number of years – especially when compared to the expected benefits.
Capacity-building and financing programs for governments that want to improve their trade facilitation are available already.
Major donor countries and international development organizations have put a priority on, and increased investment in, trade facilitation.&nbsp;According to the OECD, from 2002 to 2010, trade facilitation-related assistance increased ten-fold in real terms, from almost $40 million to nearly $400 million.
The African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, and the World Bank stand ready – alongside the WTO – to assist developing countries through the process of full and effective implementation of the agreement.
That means helping countries to assess their trade-facilitation needs on a case-by-case basis, match those needs with the resources required, and broker partnerships between recipient countries and development allies to ensure that support is provided quickly and efficiently.
In international negotiations, there is always a way forward if the benefits of an agreement are shared by all.
Trade facilitation offers a development dividend for all countries.
It is time for WTO members to make progress on issues where there is room to do so.
It will be a down payment on a solid investment.
How to Prevent a Depression
AMSTERDAM – The latest economic data suggests that recession is returning to most advanced economies, with financial markets now reaching levels of stress unseen since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008.
The risks of an economic and financial crisis even worse than the previous one – now involving not just the private sector, but also near-insolvent sovereigns – are significant.
So, what can be done to minimize the fallout of another economic contraction and prevent a deeper depression and financial meltdown?
First, we must accept that austerity measures, necessary to avoid a fiscal train wreck, have recessionary effects on output.
So, if countries in the eurozone’s periphery are forced to undertake fiscal austerity, countries able to provide short-term stimulus should do so and postpone their own austerity efforts.
These countries include the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, the core of the eurozone, and Japan.
Infrastructure banks that finance needed public infrastructure should be created as well.
Second, while monetary policy has limited impact when the problems are excessive debt and insolvency rather than illiquidity, credit easing, rather than just quantitative easing, can be helpful.
The European Central Bank should reverse its mistaken decision to hike interest rates.
More monetary and credit easing is also required for the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank.
Inflation will soon be the last problem that central banks will fear, as renewed slack in goods, labor, real estate, and commodity markets feeds disinflationary pressures.
Third, to restore credit growth, eurozone banks and banking systems that are under-capitalized should be strengthened with public financing in a European Union-wide program.
To avoid an additional credit crunch as banks deleverage, banks should be given some short-term forbearance on capital and liquidity requirements.
Also, since the US and EU financial systems remain unlikely to provide credit to small and medium-size enterprises, direct government provision of credit to solvent but illiquid SMEs is essential.
Fourth, large-scale liquidity provision for solvent governments is necessary to avoid a spike in spreads and loss of market access that would turn illiquidity into insolvency.
Even with policy changes, it takes time for governments to restore their credibility.
Until then, markets will keep pressure on sovereign spreads, making a self-fulfilling crisis likely.
Today, Spain and Italy are at risk of losing market access.
Official resources need to be tripled – through a larger European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), Eurobonds, or massive ECB action – to avoid a disastrous run on these sovereigns.
Fifth, debt burdens that cannot be eased by growth, savings, or inflation must be rendered sustainable through orderly debt restructuring, debt reduction, and conversion of debt into equity.
This needs to be carried out for insolvent governments, households, and financial institutions alike.
Sixth, even if Greece and other peripheral eurozone countries are given significant debt relief, economic growth will not resume until competitiveness is restored.
And, without a rapid return to growth, more defaults – and social turmoil – cannot be avoided.
There are three options for restoring competitiveness within the eurozone, all requiring a real depreciation – and none of which is viable:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; A sharp weakening of the euro towards parity with the US dollar, which is unlikely, as the US is weak, too.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; A rapid reduction in unit labor costs, via acceleration of structural reform and productivity growth relative to wage growth, is also unlikely, as that process took 15 years to restore competitiveness to Germany.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; A five-year cumulative 30% deflation in prices and wages – in Greece, for example – which would mean five years of deepening and socially unacceptable depression; even if feasible, this amount of deflation would exacerbate insolvency, given a 30% increase in the real value of debt.
Because these options cannot work, the sole alternative is an exit from the eurozone by Greece and some other current members.
Only a return to a national currency – and a sharp depreciation of that currency – can restore competitiveness and growth.
Leaving the common currency would, of course, threaten collateral damage for the exiting country and raise the risk of contagion for other weak eurozone members.
The balance-sheet effects on euro debts caused by the depreciation of the new national currency would thus have to be handled through an orderly and negotiated conversion of euro liabilities into the new national currencies.
Appropriate use of official resources, including for recapitalization of eurozone banks, would be needed to limit collateral damage and contagion.
Seventh, the reasons for advanced economies’ high unemployment and anemic growth are structural, including the rise of competitive emerging markets.
The appropriate response to such massive changes is not protectionism.
Instead, the advanced economies need a medium-term plan to restore competitiveness and jobs via massive new investments in high-quality education, job training and human-capital improvements, infrastructure, and alternative/renewable energy.
Only such a program can provide workers in advanced economies with the tools needed to compete globally.
Eighth, emerging-market economies have more policy tools left than advanced economies do, and they should ease monetary and fiscal policy.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank can serve as lender of last resort to emerging markets at risk of losing market access, conditional on appropriate policy reforms.
And countries, like China, that rely excessively on net exports for growth should accelerate reforms, including more rapid currency appreciation, in order to boost domestic demand and consumption.
The risks ahead are not just of a mild double-dip recession, but of a severe contraction that could turn into Great Depression II, especially if the eurozone crisis becomes disorderly and leads to a global financial meltdown.
Wrong-headed policies during the first Great Depression led to trade and currency wars, disorderly debt defaults, deflation, rising income and wealth inequality, poverty, desperation, and social and political instability that eventually led to the rise of authoritarian regimes and World War II.
The best way to avoid the risk of repeating such a sequence is bold and aggressive global policy action now.
The Egypt-Israel Peace Test
WASHINGTON, DC – The rocket strikes that a militant Islamist group recently fired from the Egyptian Sinai into the Israeli city of Eilat served as yet another reminder of how delicate bilateral relations remain two years after Egypt’s revolution.
Terrorist activity could easily cause a crisis on the border, with the potential to trigger an unwanted confrontation that would threaten the peace treaty that normalized bilateral relations in 1979.
To avoid such an outcome, Israel and Egypt must take convincing action now to uphold the treaty.
Last November, when hostilities erupted in Gaza, Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi mediated a swift resolution, even providing a guarantee for the cease-fire with Gaza’s ruling Hamas.
Morsi thus implicitly recommitted Egypt to upholding peace on the border and to playing a constructive role in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
This boosted confidence in Israel that the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt’s ruling party, would uphold the 1979 peace treaty.
But Morsi has not explicitly endorsed peace with Israel and has avoided direct engagement with Israeli leaders.
Preserving peace is in both countries’ interests.
The attack on an Egyptian army outpost in the Sinai last summer, in which armed militants killed 16 soldiers, demonstrated that terrorism threatens Egypt just as it does Israel.
In this volatile environment, reverting to a confrontational relationship with Israel would be extremely dangerous, inviting the risk of another disastrous war.
Upholding the peace treaty with Israel would have the opposite effect, enabling Egypt to pursue its goals of consolidating the military’s authority at home and enhancing its influence throughout the Middle East.
Egyptian and Israeli leaders must recognize that the ongoing struggle to secure the Sinai Peninsula – which the treaty established as a demilitarized zone – is testing peace daily.
Israel has so far tolerated Egyptian military activity and force deployments that technically violate the bilateral treaty, approving them retroactively in the hope that Egypt will do more to secure the border and crack down on weapons smuggling into Gaza.
But Israel has little confidence that the deployments will enhance its security, and Israeli leaders are becoming increasingly anxious about the Egyptian military’s mobilization of forces without notice.
In Egypt, the treaty is even more clearly under threat.
The Muslim Brotherhood has long called for a referendum on the treaty, viewing the restrictions on Egyptian forces in the Sinai as an affront to national sovereignty.
The Brothers condemned Morsi’s involvement in resolving the Gaza crisis last year, portraying it as kowtowing to Israel.
In fact, Morsi is under fire from both the left and the right for upholding former President Hosni Mubarak’s obliging approach to Israel, as well as for reasserting Mubarak’s authoritarian bargain – diplomatic and financial support in exchange for “stability” – with the United States.
Faced with a collapsing economy and approaching elections, the temptation for Morsi to stoke nationalist, anti-Israel sentiment will become stronger.
A major incident on the border could be enough to push him over the edge.
In order to sustain the peace treaty, Egypt and Israel should renegotiate its military annex to allow Egypt to deploy forces in previously restricted zones and re-establish full sovereignty over the Sinai.
Such a move would strengthen bilateral relations, generate goodwill in Egypt, and increase Israel’s confidence in the Muslim Brotherhood’s commitment to peace.
During such a renegotiation, the two countries would discuss in detail the most effective approach to tackling their shared challenges related to terrorism and transnational crime, in order to ensure that Egypt’s increased military presence in the Sinai also enhances Israel’s security.
Egypt’s newly democratic government would be more strictly accountable for fulfilling the treaty’s terms if it played an active role in establishing them.
At the same time, the agreement would boost domestic support for Egypt’s government and enhance its regional standing.
Likewise, US involvement in the negotiations would benefit all parties.
The process would provide an opportunity for the Egyptian military to engage with the US, helping to bolster its case for aid in a difficult environment.
Moreover, the US could set clear, narrow terms for the talks and provide a guarantee that the outcome would not impinge on Israel’s core interests, thereby mitigating Israeli officials’ fears that opening the treaty’s military annex for revision would call into question its other terms.
Finally, playing a successful role in bolstering Israel-Egypt relations could advance US Secretary of State John Kerry’s diplomatic initiatives in the Middle East.
In a region as volatile as the Middle East, no country can afford to take peace for granted.
But, by renewing their bilateral treaty now, Egypt and Israel would maximize their chances of prolonging an arrangement that has kept them from fighting for more than three decades.
How to Resolve the Euro Crisis
NEW YORK – A comprehensive solution of the euro crisis must have three major components: reform and recapitalization of the banking system, a eurobond regime, and an exit mechanism.
First, the banking system.
The European Union’s Maastricht Treaty was designed to deal only with imbalances in the public sector; but, as it happened, the excesses in the banking sector were far worse.
The euro’s introduction led to housing booms in countries like Spain and Ireland.
Eurozone banks became among the world’s most over-leveraged – and the worst-affected by the crash of 2008.
They remain badly in need of protection from the threat of insolvency.
The first step was taken recently when the European Financial Stability Facility was authorized to rescue banks as well as governments.
This needs to be followed by other steps.
The equity capital of banks urgently needs to be substantially increased.
And if a European agency is to guarantee banks’ solvency, that agency must also oversee them.
A European banking agency would break up the incestuous relationship between banks and regulators that was at the root of the excesses that fueled the current crisis.
And it would interfere much less with national sovereignty than would the subordination of fiscal policies to an EU or eurozone-wide authority.
Second, Europe needs eurobonds.
The introduction of the euro was supposed to reinforce convergence; in fact, it created divergences, with widely different levels of indebtedness and competitiveness separating the member countries.
If heavily indebted countries have to pay heavy risk premiums, their debt becomes unsustainable.
And that is now happening.
The solution is obvious: deficit countries must be allowed to refinance the bulk of their debt on the same terms as surplus countries.
This is best accomplished by authorizing the issuance of eurobonds, which would be jointly guaranteed by all of the member countries.
While the principle is clear, the details will require a lot of work.
Which supranational agency will be in charge of issuing eurobonds?
What rules will it follow in authorizing issuance?
How will it enforce the rules?
Presumably, the eurobonds would be under the control of the eurozone finance ministers.
The board would constitute the fiscal counterpart of the European Central Bank; it would also be the European counterpart of the International Monetary Fund.
The debate will therefore revolve around voting rights.
The ECB operates on the principle of one vote per country; the IMF assigns voting rights according to countries’ capital contributions.
Which system should prevail?
The former could give carte blanche to debtor countries to run up their deficits; the latter might perpetuate a two-speed Europe.
Some compromise will be necessary.
Because the fate of Europe depends on Germany, and because the issuance of eurobonds will put Germany’s own credit standing at risk, the compromise will clearly have to put Germany in the driver’s seat.
Unfortunately, Germany has some unsound ideas about macroeconomic policy: it wants the rest of Europe to follow its example.
But what works for Germany cannot work for the rest of Europe: no country can run a chronic trade surplus without others running deficits.
Germany must propose rules that other countries can follow.
These rules must allow for a gradual reduction in indebtedness. They must also allow countries with high unemployment, like Spain, to continue running&nbsp; budget deficits.
Rules involving targets for cyclically adjusted deficits can accomplish both of these goals.
Most importantly, the rules must recognize their own imperfection – and thus must remain open to review and improvement.
Bruegel, the Brussels-based think tank, has proposed that eurobonds should constitute 60% of eurozone members’ outstanding external debt.
Given the high risk premiums currently prevailing in Europe, this percentage is too low to constitute a level playing field.
In my view, new issues should be entirely in eurobonds up to a limit set by the Board.
The higher the volume of eurobonds a country seeks to issue, the more severe the conditions the Board would impose.
The Board should have no problem imposing its will, because denying the right to issue additional eurobonds would be a powerful deterrent.
Surveillance must be improved, however, in order to give countries timely notice when they are in violation.
This leads directly to the third unsolved problem: What happens if a country is unwilling or unable to keep within agreed conditions?
Inability to issue eurobonds could result in a disorderly default or devaluation.
In the absence of an exit mechanism, this would have catastrophic consequences.
A deterrent that is too dangerous to invoke would lack credibility. Greece constitutes a cautionary example.
This is the most difficult of the three problem areas, and I do not claim to have a ready solution.
Much depends on how the Greek crisis plays out.
It might be possible to devise an orderly exit for a small country like Greece that could not be applied to a large one like Italy.
In that case, the eurobond regime would have to carry sanctions from which there is no escape – something like a European finance ministry that has political as well as financial legitimacy which could emerge from the intense debate and soul-searching that is so badly needed (particularly in Germany).
One thing is certain: these three problem areas – reform and recapitalization of the banking system, a eurobond regime, and an exit mechanism – need to be resolved to make the euro a viable currency.
But financial markets might not offer the respite necessary to put the new arrangements in place.
Under continued market pressure, the European Council might have to find a stopgap arrangement to avoid a calamity.
It could authorize the ECB to lend directly to governments that cannot borrow from the markets on reasonable terms until a eurobond regime is introduced.
How to Save Brazil
SÃO PAULO – Brazil’s political crisis appears to be coming to a head.
Now that the lower house of the National Congress has voted in favor of President Dilma Rousseff’s impeachment for violating fiscal rules, the Senate’s 81 members will vote in the coming days on whether to try her.
If 42 agree, she will be suspended for up to 180 days, during which time Vice President Michel Temer will assume the presidency.
If the Senate does not produce a two-thirds vote for conviction during that period, Rousseff will return to the presidency.
But the most likely outcome, it seems, will be for Temer to carry out the final two years of Rousseff’s term.
Whatever happens next, Brazil is not out of the woods.
Its economic situation is dire – a direct result of populist policies initiated by Rousseff’s predecessor, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, and which she maintained.
In the early 2000s, flush with cash thanks to a commodity boom, Lula’s government began to distribute subsidized credit to consumers and businesses, hold down energy prices artificially, and expand government spending at more than double the rate of GDP growth.
The result was mounting public debt, which has now reached 70% of GDP, and a widening deficit, which has now reached nearly 11% of GDP.
Rather than acknowledge the problem and revise policies accordingly, Rousseff allegedly resorted to dodgy accounting tricks to enable her government ostensibly to meet its primary-surplus target without cutting social transfers, even as commodity prices collapsed.
This enabled her to win reelection in 2014 – and it is propelling her toward impeachment today.
(The massive corruption scandal engulfing Petrobras, the state-owned oil company, which Rousseff used to head, has not helped her case.)
But Rousseff is of course far from the only one suffering the consequences of this approach.
Brazil is now facing its worst economic recession in 80 years; unemployment stands at almost 10%; annual inflation exceeds 10%; and living standards have collapsed.
Though Brazilians pay 37% of GDP in taxes each year – about the same rate as Europeans – the quality of their public services remains very low.
Assuming he takes over as President, Temer will have to act fast to put the economy back on track, rebuild business confidence, and restore the people’s trust in government.
It would be a daunting task for any leader, but it is especially so for one who will spend only two years in power and does not enjoy widespread popular support.
For Temer, there is no room for mistakes.
His first mission will be to form a cabinet that can produce rigorous and credible economic policies and secure the needed congressional support.
A four-point agenda for economic revitalization should then be implemented.
The first point of that agenda should be to fast-track infrastructure investment.
This is the fastest way to revive the economy and generate employment.
But Brazil desperately needs foreign capital to finance construction of roads, ports, and airports, as well as energy projects.
To attract it, the government must improve transparency, simplify rules and regulations, introduce performance bonds (to guarantee the completion of projects), and abolish the cap on return on investment.
The second item on the agenda should be labor-market reform.
The best approach, which would enable the government to avoid an endless political debate about which labor laws should be revoked, would be to approve a constitutional amendment that guarantees the right of workers to conclude private contracts with employers.
Such a measure would reduce labor costs significantly and bring workers out of the informal sector.
Third, Temer must tackle pension reform.
Though there is a consensus that the retirement age should be raised from 60 to 65, there is strong resistance to cutting benefits.
Again, the government can minimize time-wasting political entanglements – this time, by focusing on the public sector.
Brazil’s government currently spends roughly the same amount on 950,000 retired public servants that it spends on 28 million retired private-sector workers, meaning that the bigger problem is also the one that will be less politically difficult to address.
Finally, Brazil needs to reinsert itself into the global economy.
To that end, it must revive productivity growth, expand exports, open its economy to international competition, and forge new bilateral and regional trade deals with major economic players.
If Temer’s government succeeds in the first three areas, building up its credibility in the process, it will be in a strong position to fulfill these objectives, as well.
This four-point agenda is crucial to restoring Brazil’s economy and bringing public spending under control.
But it will not be enough to stop the vicious boom-and-bust cycles to which Brazil has long been vulnerable.
For that, Brazilians must take a hard look at the attitudes and expectations that have placed them in this situation.
Real change means breaking the addiction to a paternalistic and interventionist state and supporting needed policy adjustments, even when they are unpleasant.
Brazilians still have a long way to go to eliminate corruption, reform or rescind populist policies, and create efficient and responsible state institutions.
But the combination of popular indignation, courageous and independent judges, and a dynamic free press seems to be propelling the country along a promising path, as the irresponsible actions of politicians and businessmen are not only brought to light, but also punished.
By itself, Rousseff’s likely impeachment will solve nothing.
But if it helps to bury beliefs and values that have been holding Brazil back, the country, to paraphrase Winston Churchill, may find itself at the end of the beginning.
How to Sell Anti-Protectionism
STOCKHOLM – The looming global recession has brought government intervention to save failing companies to the forefront of economic policy.
In a speech just prior to the recent G-20 summit, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown warned President-elect Barack Obama against bailing out America’s struggling Big Three automakers, arguing that global competition has made their decline irreversible.
A bailout, then, would simply delay the inevitable at a huge cost to taxpayers.
Such advice is always tough to sell – all the more so in the face of the worst economic outlook in 70 years.
After all, according to conventional wisdom, global competition moves jobs to low-cost countries and puts downward pressure on wages everywhere else.
As globalization intensifies and accelerates economic change, it affects the lives of ordinary citizens like never before, stoking popular fear.
Little wonder, then, that French president Nicolas Sarkozy succumbed to the allure of protectionism during last year’s election campaign, as did both presidential candidates in the United States.
But protectionism need not be the only alternative to fear of global competition.
In the Scandinavian countries, as in the US, foreign competition intensified sharply during the past decade.
China and India gained considerable economic power, and close neighbors in previously isolated communist states were rapidly integrated in the European economy.
However, surveys by Pew Research show that in Sweden, 85% of the population agrees that trade is good for their country, compared to only 59% of Americans.
Among Swedish industrial workers, the figure is 75% in favor.
How can that be?
By designing educational and social protection policies that strengthen the individual, Scandinavian politicians have sought to promote change rather than prevent it.
The positive public opinion in Sweden is not a symptom of brainwashing, but a rational response to people’s experience during the last decade.
As competition intensified and production started moving to the Baltic States and Eastern Europe, Sweden’s policy answer was to upgrade the skills of the work force.
As a result, from 1997 to 2007, Swedish exports nearly doubled and industrial production grew by 36%, with manufacturing companies achieving record-high productivity growth.
Indeed, while annual US output per hour grew by 6.2% during this period, Swedish productivity rose by 8%.
Sweden accumulated a current-account surplus of 53% of GDP, in contrast to America’s 48%-of-GDP deficit.
Employment rose by 11%, and blue-collar workers’ wages increased by 24%, fueling a more than 30% surge in private consumption.
In short, even as globalization progressed, Swedish wage earners enjoyed a substantial improvement in living standards.
While some jobs moved abroad, the net effect was still greatly positive.
The secret behind Sweden’s successful development, and hence people’s attitudes, is how the costs of change are distributed.
Official policy aims to reduce the cost of globalization for individuals, but never for companies.
Entrepreneurs need to face competition in order to develop, whereas individuals who are laid off may have difficulties getting back into productive work.
As trade minister of Sweden for most of this period, I never hindered or postponed import competition.
In the European Union, Sweden voted against almost all anti-dumping and other protectionist proposals.
This never met any criticism from my voters, because educational policy and the social safety net were designed to lower workers’ risk aversion.
Broad educational policies equip an increasing share of Sweden’s population with basic education, thereby enhancing their employability.
Higher education is free of charge and accessible in all parts of the country.
But reaching one cohort per year is too little to meet demands in a fast-changing economy.
Therefore, on top of this, large resources are spent on modernizing the skills of those already in the labor force.
Social protection also has a broad, general nature.
In the Scandinavian countries, as opposed to, say, Germany and the US, the government, not individual companies, are responsible for most social benefits.
That way, economically irrational lock-in effects, whereby workers simply cannot afford to change jobs, are avoided.
Furthermore, benefits are generous enough to ensure that short periods of unemployment don’t force workers to sell their homes or even cars.
The system protects not only the unemployed, who can continue to pay their mortgages and interest, but also indirectly the banks, because their loans to households are repaid even in times of recession.
And, instead of solving all sorts of economically caused private problems, laid-off workers can concentrate on finding new and more future-oriented jobs.
No doubt, these policies are expensive. But they pay for themselves by producing growth and revenues.
As the past decade shows, they have served the Scandinavian countries well during a period of extreme internationalization.
Instead of giving in to conventional wisdom, we have exploited the possibilities that globalization and technological change offer.
Could the Scandinavian model work for others?
At the very least, the Scandinavian example shows that politicians have more than one option to choose from when considering how to handle globalization.
Intense foreign competition and rapid technological change does not have to be a race to the bottom.
On the contrary, it can be compatible with rapidly rising real income and more and better jobs.
How to Sell Global Re-Balancing
CHICAGO – At its most recent meeting in Toronto this spring, the G-20 agreed to disagree.
Even though the world economy is desperately in need of rebalancing, their declaration was deliberately vague enough to accommodate any set of domestic policies that countries might choose.
Everyone came away thinking that they had won, but the world largely lost.
World trade is highly imbalanced.
Households in the United States, having spent too much, are now weighed down by debt.
Exporters in Europe and Asia have become excessively dependent on selling to the US and other, now-weakened, economies like Spain and the United Kingdom.
Myopic actions on both sides have helped entrench a longer-term pattern of behavior that only makes it harder to move away from today’s unsustainable equilibrium.
As ever, change upsets the cozy status quo and the interests that benefit from it.
For example, the real-estate lobby in the US obviously has no desire to see government support for housing diminish, despite the fact that the US probably has far more housing stock than it can afford.
Similarly, the export lobby in China has no interest in a strong renminbi, even though it is in China’s long-term interest to let its currency appreciate.
We keep hoping that somehow meetings of heads of state will magically produce the policies that will rebalance world trade.
Unfortunately, the macroeconomic changes that countries must make involve actions to which even heads of state are unable to commit.
No US president can unilaterally agree to alter the pattern of government support and spending; that is a decision for Congress.
Similarly, no Chinese president can unilaterally agree to allow the renminbi to appreciate faster; that is a consensus decision reached together with the various apparatchiks in the State Council and Communist Party.
Moreover, the necessary reforms in both America and China go well beyond these two steps. They require deep, fundamental changes.
So we are caught between a financially unsustainable pattern of global demand and the need for politically difficult changes in many countries’ domestic policies.
All politics is local, and there is no local constituency for the global economy, so what triumphs often erodes global imbalances further.
The G-20 asked the International Monetary Fund to prepare a road map for the policies that countries will have to follow to restore stable global growth.
But neither the G-20 nor the IMF can impose its will on national governments – nor should they.
How, then, can we go beyond ritualistic meetings that do little to advance the global agenda?
Obviously, we need more political support for that agenda.
Perhaps non-governmental organizations (NGOs) like Oxfam or Mothers against Land Mines suggest a way.
These movements use pressure from below to convince political leaders that there is domestic support for international agreement.
The ability of grassroots movements to influence policy is set to increase.
As the power of the Internet spreads through social and political networking sites, and as virtual democracy grows, this bottom-up influence is likely to grow.
Those who want to influence political leaders must get used to convincing their masters, the people, directly.
Unfortunately, it is difficult for existing NGOs to take up the cause of popularizing global economic policy coordination.
Unlike hunger or land mines, the cause of rectifying global trade imbalances will not touch the public enough to attract the donations that are necessary to keep NGOs afloat.
But there is an organization that could do the job: the IMF. If the IMF reoriented a substantial portion of its activities towards influencing the influential among the world’s public, it could have far more impact on global macroeconomic policy, especially policies followed by countries that do not need its loans, than it does today.
The IMF is currently under-equipped for this task.
If it is to improve its persuasive capabilities, it must learn to become more like grassroots activists, with punchy prose, clear policy recommendations, and TV-ready talking points.
It must go directly to the public – including political parties, nongovernmental organizations, and influential figures – in each country, and explain its position.
The Fund must also do more to enhance its presence on the Web and in school and university classrooms, especially as students are often the most receptive to ideas about global citizenship.
Above all, the Fund must change how it is perceived from outside.
It must be seen as an institution that respects each country’s sovereignty but works for the global good.
A transparent and fair process of arriving at its policy recommendations, based primarily on convincing economic research and data analysis, will be essential.
Countries will have to agree to accept and facilitate the IMF’s direct engagement with their influential citizenry as long as it is carried out in good faith.
The IMF’s expression of its economic views to local publics should then be protected by international agreement, much like embassies and their activities.  
If we can make these changes – and one should not minimize the scale of the task – perhaps when G-20 leaders meet in the future, they will not think that their citizens have little interest in the outcome. Instead, they will have a political mandate to attend meaningfully to the welfare of the global economy.
How to Waste a Crisis
The global financial crisis is reaching a bottom, and yet political frustration is growing, because the low point of the collapse seems to offer a last opportunity to promote dramatic change, and that opportunity may be missed.
Last year, President Obama’s chief of staff Rahm Emanuel remarked that a good crisis should never be wasted.
Disaster is an opportunity for thinking of ways to make the world fundamentally better – and also prevent future crises.
People do a great deal of thinking, but sometimes they think so much that they come up with contradictory responses.
Indeed, what really makes a crisis profound is precisely the broad variety of differing diagnoses and different remedies.
The political passions aroused by the clashes of interpretation often make the crisis seemingly insoluble.
It was those conflicts, rather than some technical flaw in the operation of the economy, which made the Great Depression of the 1930’s such a dismal and destructive event.
Responses to a crisis fall into two categories.
The first type aims at an institutional reordering, so that inefficiencies and perverse incentives are removed, and the economy functions more smoothly and efficiently.
The second, more radical approach, tries to improve not the economy but the way people themselves go about their lives.
No institutional solution is purely neutral in its effects on relative incomes – and it is relative income and wealth around which political debate typically revolves.
Bailout operations invariably bring bitter controversy because they help some but not others.
Rescuing automobile producers looks good to their employees and suppliers. But the costs must be borne by everyone, including firms that are not rescued – probably because they operate more efficiently – and are put at a competitive disadvantage as a result.
Such rescues, in short, appear to help big companies with bad managers.
Small businesses will always complain that they do not have the organizational clout to extract public funds from governments.
And bank bailouts, involving the direct use of public money to recapitalize failing institutions, are even more costly and politically unpopular.
Advocates of monetary stimulation sometimes argue that it is preferable because it is more neutral in its distributional effects, and that its benefits are spread more widely.
But monetary stimulus is often in reality just as selective as bailouts.
The analogy popularized by the great monetarist economist Milton Friedman was that the central bank could always deal with deflationary problems by dropping money from a helicopter.
But, in the real world, not everyone is underneath the helicopter when it makes the drop.
In fact, it is likely that the helicopter pilot will hover over friends and relatives when dropping the money.
And even if the pilot is completely non-corrupt, the crowd on the ground will always assume that there is some hidden and partisan plan.
That has been precisely the problem with the aggressive provision of liquidity, quantitative easing, and the reduction of central bank interest rates used to address the current crisis.
In today’s credit crunch, as in the Great Depression, central banks lend at practically zero interest rates.
Depositors are paid almost nothing on their deposits. But when businesses and consumers try to borrow, they find that it is very costly, if not impossible.
Lenders (the bankers) are suspicious, worried about creditworthiness, and demand high risk premia.
As a consequence, in most countries, credit is still contracting.
In practice, it is only banks that have access to cheap borrowing, so they can reconstitute their balance sheets by borrowing cheaply and lending expensively.
This is why banks suddenly look so unexpectedly profitable.
But the contrast between bank profitability and the woes of everyone else turns up the political heat on the central banks, which have to explain why it is only their “friends,” the banks, who are standing under the helicopter when it drops money.
Frustration with the complexities of trying to provide ready fixes leads to attempts to find even more radical solutions.
Some try to deal with basic human proclivities, and to modify behavior to make people better.
It is in times of crisis that Utopian ideas about ways of guaranteeing human happiness flourish, often claiming some scientific basis.
For example, long before the financial collapse, experimental economists joined psychologists in attempting to measure varying propensities to greediness.
Some evidence suggests that there is a link between the level of dopamine, addiction, and greedy behavior.
Since a common diagnosis of the problems generated in the financial services business holds that human greed is to blame, a German think tank recently suggested that people with a genetic proclivity to high dopamine levels should be barred from taking leading positions in financial institutions.
But such apparently attractive strategies aimed at making better people turn out to be exclusionary – and based on rather arbitrary testing.
If implemented, the German proposal would most likely exclude behavior that involves acceptable risk, as well as sidelining those who take wild and inappropriate decisions.
Both the institutional and the behavioral responses to a crisis are fundamentally problematical.  The search for technical solutions leads to political polarization, and may produce stalemate.
The search for deep human roots of the crisis, by contrast, leads to attempts to change human nature, which are futile – and also inherently much more dangerous.
How Trump Would Weaken America
CAMBRIDGE – Donald Trump, the Republican Party’s presumptive US presidential nominee, has expressed deep skepticism about the value of America’s alliances.
His is a very nineteenth-century view of the world.
Back then, the United States followed George Washington’s advice to avoid “entangling alliances” and pursued the Monroe Doctrine, which focused on US interests in the Western Hemisphere.
Lacking a large standing army (and with a navy that in the 1870s was smaller than Chile’s), the US played a minor role in the nineteenth-century global balance of power.
That changed decisively with America’s entry into World War I, when Woodrow Wilson broke with tradition and sent US troops to fight in Europe.
Moreover, he proposed a League of Nations to organize collective security on a global basis.
But, after the Senate rejected US membership in the League in 1919, the troops stayed home and America “returned to normal.”
Though it was now a major global actor, the US became virulently isolationist.
Its absence of alliances in the 1930s set the stage for a disastrous decade marked by economic depression, genocide, and another world war.
Ominously, Trump’s most detailed speech on foreign policy suggests that he takes his inspiration from precisely this period of isolation and “America First” sentiment.
Such sentiment has always been a current in US politics, but it has remained out of the mainstream since the end of World War II for good reason: It hinders, rather than advances, peace and prosperity at home and abroad.
The turn away from isolation and the beginning of the “American century” in world politics was marked by President Harry Truman’s decisions after WWII, which led to permanent alliances and a military presence abroad.
The US invested heavily in the Marshall Plan in 1948, created NATO in 1949, and led a United Nations coalition that fought in Korea in 1950.
In 1960, President Dwight Eisenhower signed a security treaty with Japan.
American troops remain in Europe, Japan, and Korea to this day.
While the US has had bitter partisan differences over disastrous interventions in developing countries such as Vietnam and Iraq, there is a bedrock of consensus on its alliance system – and not just among those who make and think about foreign policy.
Opinion polls show popular majorities in support of NATO and the US-Japan alliance.
Nonetheless, for the first time in 70 years, a major US presidential candidate is calling this consensus into question.
Alliances not only reinforce US power; they also maintain geopolitical stability – for example, by slowing the dangerous proliferation of nuclear weapons.
While US presidents and defense secretaries have sometimes complained about its allies’ low levels of defense spending, they have always understood that alliances are best viewed as stabilizing commitments – like friendships, not real-estate transactions.
Unlike the constantly shifting alliances of convenience that characterized the nineteenth century, modern American alliances have sustained a relatively predictable international order.
In some cases, such as Japan, host-country support even makes it cheaper to station troops overseas than in the US.
And yet Trump extols the virtues of unpredictability – a potentially useful tactic when bargaining with enemies, but a disastrous approach to reassuring friends.
Americans often complain about free riders, without recognizing that the US has been the one steering the bus.
It is not impossible that a new challenger – say, Europe, Russia, India, Brazil, or China – surpasses the US in the coming decades and takes the wheel.
But it is not likely, either.
Among the features that distinguish the US from “the dominant great powers of the past,” according to the distinguished British strategist Lawrence Freedman, is that “American power is based on alliances rather than colonies.”
Alliances are assets; colonies are liabilities.
A narrative of American decline is likely to be inaccurate and misleading.
More important, it holds dangerous policy implications if it encourages countries like Russia to engage in adventurous policies, China to be more assertive with its neighbors, or the US to overreact out of fear.
America has many problems, but it is not in absolute decline, and it is likely to remain more powerful than any single state for the foreseeable future.
The real problem for the US is not that it will be overtaken by China or another contender, but that a rise in the power resources of many others – both states and non-state actors – will pose new obstacles to global governance.
The real challenge will be entropy – the inability to get work done.
Weakening America’s alliances, the likely result of Trump’s policies, is hardly the way to “make America great again.”
America will face an increasing number of new transnational issues that require it to exercise power with others as much as over others.
The Economist magazine estimates that of the world’s 150 largest countries, nearly 100 lean toward the US, while 21 lean against it.
Contrary to claims that the “Chinese century” is at hand, we have not entered a post-American world.
The US remains central to the workings of the global balance of power, and to the provision of global public goods.
But American preeminence in military, economic, and soft-power terms will not look like it once did.
The US share of the world economy will fall, and its ability to wield influence and organize action will become increasingly constrained.
More than ever, America’s ability to sustain the credibility of its alliances as well as establish new networks will be central to its global success.
Kenya’s Unity Test
NAIROBI – Kenya’s fiercely contested presidential election in March, and its disputed outcome, has left the victor, Uhuru Kenyatta, with a daunting challenge: to unite a country riven with ethnic violence and distrust.
Although this election was accompanied by far less violence than the previous presidential vote in 2007, the opposition candidate Raila Odinga’s second consecutive defeat has only re-enforced his supporters’ fears that they are once again being cheated out of power.
Kenyatta, a member of the dominant Kikuyu ethnic group, says that he wants to heal the country’s divisions, echoing the promise of his predecessor, Mwai Kibaki.
There is a simple way to start: combat the corruption and nepotism that characterize so much state employment.
Kenyatta assumes power a half-century after his father, Jomo Kenyatta, led Kenya to independence.
The anniversary provides a reason to reflect on some of the country’s achievements and failings, especially in the field of education –&#160;the key to economic opportunity and professionalization of the public sector.
During the colonial era, most of Kenya’s children were denied schooling.