French President François Hollande appears to have an advanced case of Tartuffe’s malady, repeatedly making political pledges that he cannot honor, partly because of factors beyond his control – namely, the European Monetary Union (EMU) – but mostly because he lacks the determination.
For France, the consequences of Hollande’s failures will be much more dramatic than his political downfall.
Indeed, the country could be facing catastrophe, as Hollande’s actions risk miring the economy into sustained stagnation and driving an increasingly angry French public to elect the far-right National Front party’s Marine Le Pen as his successor.
France’s economic policies are untenable, meaning that both of the main determinants of those policies, the EMU and Hollande’s approach, must change radically.
So far, that does not seem to be happening.
Earlier this month, an opinion poll showed Hollande’s approval rating plummeting to 12% – the worst result for any French president in the history of modern polling.
On the same day, Hollande gave a long televised interview in which he combined admissions of failure with new promises.
Consider unemployment, which in September stood at 10.5%, compared to only 5% in Germany.
In the interview, Hollande acknowledged that, despite his pledge, a reversal of the negative employment trend “didn’t happen” this year.
(He failed to mention that he had set the same goal last year as well.)
France’s unemployment problem is the result of leviathan labor regulations (the labor code runs 3,648 pages) and, above all, a crippling tax burden on labor.
Hollande’s main new promise – not to impose any new taxes, beginning next year – might have been an implicit acknowledgement of this.
In the meantime, however, there will be an increase in diesel excise duties, and a 20% surcharge on property taxes will be imposed on unoccupied second homes in densely populated areas.
Because these tax hikes will likely be approved by the end of the year, they should be the last – if, that is, Hollande follows through on his pledge.
Given Hollande’s track record – the tax burden has risen by €40 billion ($50 billion) over the last two years – it seems unlikely that he will.
Indeed, Hollande’s own officials are already backpedaling, with the budget minister, Christian Eckert, stating that more tax hikes could not be ruled out: “You can’t set in stone a situation that depends on an international context that we don’t control.”
Of course, that “international context” is the EMU, which places considerable external constraints on French policy.
Even without such constraints, it is only prudent for fiscal policymakers to keep their options open.
Either way, the euro’s creators were wrong to expect that the common currency would promote economic and political convergence among its members.
By ruling out exchange-rate adjustment to address differences in competitiveness, the euro has forced less competitive countries to pursue painful and slow “internal devaluation” (suppressing real wages).
This has driven down demand and prices, causing the disparities among eurozone member countries’ economic performance to widen.
France now has a 2%-of-GDP current-account deficit, compared to Germany’s 8%-of-GDP surplus.
The deflationary impact of internal devaluation is compounded by the rule, reinforced in the 2012 “fiscal compact,” that eurozone countries are wholly responsible for their own debts and thus must adopt strict budgetary discipline.
With demand relentlessly squeezed, not even depressed wages can generate adequate employment.
The only solution, many euro supporters now contend, is full political union, which would allow for fiscal transfers from the eurozone’s more competitive countries to their weaker counterparts.
But southern Italy, which has not used the fiscal transfers from the north on which it has long depended to transform its economy or boost productivity, demonstrates how little impact this approach can have.
The notion that a eurozone fiscal union could do better is a dangerous fantasy.
Another potential approach would be for strong eurozone economies, especially Germany, to support productivity-enhancing structural reforms in less competitive countries like France and Italy.
This is probably what German Chancellor Angela Merkel meant when, in private discussions at last December’s European Council meeting, she reportedly said that, though Germany “cannot afford transfers to the whole of Europe,” it can “help to pay the doctors’ bills.”
But, sooner or later, the weaker economies will probably opt out of such reforms, reclaiming their monetary sovereignty as a necessary – though far from sufficient – means of averting economic and social breakdown.
In the meantime, Hollande will continue to channel Tartuffe.
Locked into the single currency, mainstream French politicians’ powerlessness to take real action renders their promises worthless.
As a result, France can expect popular protest, as well as a further increase in support for more extreme parties – above all, Le Pen’s National Front.
Hollywood’s Favorite Villains
Once upon a time, Cold War enemies, white supremacists, and evil geniuses reigned supreme as Hollywood’s favorite bad guys.
No more.
Today, it is multinational corporations that are increasingly being cast as the über-villains of our globalized world.
For all their subliminal paid promotions and subtle product placements, corporations are getting drubbed in the main story lines of our popular culture.
This treatment goes far beyond documentaries like Michael Moore’s polemical Fahrenheit 9/11 or The Corporation , an earnest if somewhat paranoid portrayal of multinational companies’ role in globalization.
It extends to mainstream hits like The Constant Gardener , in which the idealistic protagonists do battle with a malicious global pharmaceutical company that is bent on exploiting Africa’s misery to test experimental drugs.
To be sure, sociopathic corporations have populated books and films for more than a century.
But corporate villains, typically multinational companies, have never been so ubiquitous as today.
Is it unfair?
Most corporations, after all, are merely convenient mechanisms for ensuring that scarce global capital is used at maximum efficiency, to the benefit of all.
Are famously liberal Hollywood film directors spending too much time going to anti-globalization rallies?
Perhaps.
But I would submit that Hollywood’s misgivings, however untutored, represent only the tip of a growing iceberg of resentment against the perceived injustices of globalization.
The simple truth is that corporations represent capital, and capital – in the form of factories, equipment, machines, money, and even houses – has been the single biggest winner in the modern era of globalization.
Corporate profits are bursting at the seams of investors’ expectations in virtually every corner of the world.
Even in moribund economies like Germany and Italy, where employment security is vanishing, corporations are swimming in cash.
This phenomenon comes as no surprise to economists.
Not likely.
Capital’s piece of the pie has been getting bigger for more than 20 years, and the trend looks set to continue.
Indeed, corporations’ growing share of income has been a major driver behind the long, if uneven, bull market in stocks that began in the early 1990’s.
At the same time, inflation-adjusted wages for rich-country unskilled workers have barely budged over the last two decades.
Some of these trends also have to do with the nature of modern technological change, which seems to favor capital and skilled workers disproportionately.
But, regardless of their cause, rapidly growing inequalities are a powerful force for instability everywhere, from wealthy America to rapidly growing China to reform-challenged Europe.
“A rising tide lifts all boats,” conservatives like to say.
Fine, but what happens to people, like the poor of hurricane-struck New Orleans, who don’t own boats? 
Growing inequality would not be such a problem if governments could simply raise taxes on the rich and strengthen subsidies to the poor.
Unfortunately, any country that taxes capital too aggressively will only succeed in chasing it to regions where the tax burden is lighter.
In a globalized world, national governments’ ability to tax potentially mobile factors of production is sharply circumscribed.
The same mechanism that pours profits into the pockets of global corporations also prevents governments from claiming a larger share of the spoils.
Unfortunately, the long-term trend towards ever-lower income shares for unskilled workers is likely to continue over the coming decades, as modern technology permeates the globe, and as emerging markets like China, India, Brazil, and Eastern Europe continue to integrate into global production.
This is not to say that unskilled workers are actually being made worse off by globalization in absolute terms; the vast majority are actually breaking even or better.
But unskilled workers’ incomes are not keeping pace with overall economic growth, and the resulting social strains are a ticking bomb. 
If so, then Hollywood’s cartoon-like caricatures of evil multinational corporations may some day seize mainstream consciousness, leading to political upheavals that shatter today’s social contract.
That won’t be good for profits, or for the poor.
Governments – and corporations – must find better ways to provide equal opportunity through improved education, broader financial markets, and other channels.
Otherwise, globalization’s storyline may not proceed according to the script.
Homeless at Home
Today, the United Nations estimates that 77 million people – more than 1% of the world’s population – are displaced within their own countries, having been forced to flee their homes by armed conflicts, violence, urbanization, development, and natural disasters.
This is more than the population of France, the United Kingdom, or Turkey.
These people are not “refugees,” because they have not crossed an international border, but their experiences are often equally devastating.
Today, the number of people who have been internally displaced by conflicts alone is twice that of refugees.
With the increasing pattern of internal, rather than international, armed conflicts, and the rising regularity of extreme weather events affecting millions of people, internal displacement poses an even greater challenge to future generations.
Uprooted from their homes and livelihoods, and traumatized by the violence or sudden disaster that forced them to flee, the displaced are often thrust into an extremely precarious future with few resources.
Think of the 15 million Chinese displaced following the Sichuan earthquake, the more than two million Iraqis uprooted within their country’s borders by sectarian and other violence, the 2.4 million displaced in Darfur, or the hundreds of thousands who have fled Mogadishu in the last year.
In the last decade, those displaced by conflicts alone rose from 19 million to 26 million, with millions more displaced by disasters.
The plight of these victims long went unrecognized, as governments and the international community alike failed to acknowledge their rights to protection and assistance.
In 1998, the UN issued Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, which sets out these legal rights.
Ten years on, what impact have the Principles had on displaced people’s lives?
The achievements are notable, if insufficient.
We have raised awareness of the plight of the displaced, brought about changes in government policies, and raised billions of dollars to respond to their basic needs.
This has helped save countless lives.
Humanitarian efforts continue to be strengthened, including through a new rapid funding mechanism, the UN Central Emergency Response Fund.
But for every gain we have made, enormous difficulties still remain.
The number of those displaced by natural disasters is rising, as the adverse effects of climate change continue to mount.
Nine of every ten recorded disasters are now climate-related.
As many as 50 million people around the world are estimated to be displaced each year by floods, hurricanes, tsunamis, earthquakes, and landslides.
However sudden the initial displacement, the impact can last for generations, together with a long-term need for clean water, shelter, health care, and other basic services, as victims of Hurricane Mitch in Central America in 1998 know from bitter experience.
Nor are rich countries immune.
Two years after Hurricane Katrina, thousands of people remain in temporary shelters.
Moreover, violent armed groups, be they government-supported militias or rebel movements, increasingly embrace terror as a tactic to force civilians from their homes, as seen in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, Iraq, and elsewhere.
Millions of people remain impoverished, face discrimination, and suffer long-lasting trauma even after the guns fall silent.
Life in camps is demoralizing and ultimately dehumanizing.
The world rightly focuses on the tragedy in Darfur, but overlooks another four million Sudanese still displaced as a result of the north-south conflict, many of whom continue to live in terrible poverty in Khartoum slums or in makeshift camps across the country, with little opportunity to re-build their lives.
We must prevent displacement from occurring, and end it as quickly as possible.
On the preventive front, countless lives can be saved by simple actions such as flood-proofing coastlines, or strengthening earthquake codes for hospitals and schools.
Countries like Bangladesh and Mozambique have proven that disaster risk reduction and preparedness can be a life-saving investment.
In conflict situations, preventing displacement primarily requires political will.
Those who forcibly displace civilians in violation of international law must be held accountable in order to deter others in the future.
States that are not involved in the conflict are also required to uphold the rights of the displaced, including the right to return to their homes wherever possible, and this must be addressed in peace agreements and enforced in peacekeeping mandates.
So here’s the bottom line: conflicts will continue and natural disasters are growing in frequency and intensity.
Addressing the root causes and reducing the impact of displacement should start by heeding victims’ voices – their needs and wishes must be understood and their rights respected.
The international community can help. But national authorities must lead.
Ten years after the Guiding Principles were signed, the time for excuses and inaction has run out.
Homeless in Iraq
BAGHDAD &#45;&#45; American officials report that the number of sectarian and other killings in Iraq has declined since the onset of the military “surge.”
But, while the number of killings may, indeed, have fallen, does that mean Iraq is really safer?
Insecurity in Iraq is most strikingly illustrated by the number of people fleeing their homes.
The United Nations estimates that, since July, the number has risen by 60,000 every month.
The best estimate is that around 16% of Iraq’s population, or one in six Iraqis, no longer live in their homes.
Roughly half of those who have fled have also left the country, implying two million refugees.
This leaves another two million who have been displaced internally, and who represent an emerging humanitarian tragedy.
There have been international reports and fundraising campaigns to support Iraqi refugees in Syria and Jordan, but the internally displaced have received less attention, despite their greater vulnerability, owing to their proximity to the conflict and the poor standard of basic services in Iraq.
They tend to be less visible, and it is more difficult for donors and agencies to assist them.
Internal displacement predates the 2003 Iraq invasion.
During former President Saddam Hussein’s rule, large numbers of people were forcibly relocated through either conflict or government policy.
Since 2003, displacement has affected all the peoples of Iraq, and the central reason remains the same – the use of violence to expel people from an area with the aim of increasing political and economic power.
Mixed neighborhoods across Iraq have been targeted by one side or another as sectarian violence has risen and local militias wield power.
The inability of the government or the multi-national force to curb this intimidation reflects the absence of the rule of law.
Other factors causing displacement include operations of the multinational force itself, crime, the lack of basic services, and desperate poverty.
The complexity of Iraq’s society and history means that many people have been displaced more than once, or have returned from exile only to become internally displaced.
According to the UN, 69% of those displaced since February 2006 come from Baghdad, which demonstrates the extent of the “sectarianization” of the capital.
Thus, one reason for the “success” claimed by supporters of the military surge may well be that sectarian cleansing in Baghdad has been hugely effective and is now nearly complete.
Displaced Iraqis who remain in the country move to areas where their community is strong.
Displaced Shi’a tend to move from the center of the country to the south, Sunnis from the south to the center, and Christians to Nineveh province.
In mixed cities such as Baghdad and Baquba, those forced to move gravitate towards newly homogenized districts.
Most displaced people rent accommodation, stay with family or friends, or squat, while a smaller number take refuge in camps.
There are big refugee camps in Kerbala, Wasit, Diyala, and Nineveh, but most of the displacement is urban rather than camp-based, and thousands of displaced families live in major cities such as Baghdad and Mosul.
These people now account for many of the eight million Iraqis who are in absolute poverty and in need of emergency assistance.
Education is minimal, health care is inadequate, and many die without even being accounted for.
Whereas between 25% and 40% of Iraqis may require food assistance at any given time, this figure is much higher for displaced people, owing to their poor access to the public distribution system.
Only a third of the displaced had access to the system last year, while half reported receiving food rations only occasionally.
It is a new phenomenon in Iraq to see people, particularly women and children, looking in the rubbish every day for something to eat.
In such conditions, many young people feel they have little choice but to join violent groups, if only to provide some income and a level of protection.
Female-headed households, in particular, face great difficulties in protecting and supporting their families.
There are increasing reports of Iraqi women resorting to prostitution and of trafficking in women and children to neighboring countries.
The government recently announced the extension of a program of emergency cash allowances to widows.
However, this is insufficient to help most of the three million widows, while corruption and bureaucratic inefficiency hamper efforts further.
Another tragedy of the current conflict has been its impact on minority communities, which make up 10% of the population and are targets for eradication.
Violent attacks have caused a huge exodus, jeopardizing the existence of Christians, Yazidis, and Mandeans, who have lived in Iraq for hundreds of years.
Despite the vulnerability of minorities, the religious breakdown of displaced people closely reflects that of the country: 64% Shi’a, 32% Sunni, and 4% Christian.
But the ethnic breakdown of displaced people – 93% Arab, 4% Assyrian, and 1% Kurd – illustrates the grave insecurity in central Iraq and the relative stability of Kurdistan.
With the prospects of return continuing to deteriorate, prolonged displacement may well become permanent.
Should levels of displacement remain high, as appears likely, the humanitarian crisis may deepen further, especially because strained local resources have led some governorates to begin refusing to admit displaced people.
Their predicament, too, must be reflected in any calculation of Iraq’s security conditions.
Home Sweet Second Home
Whenever I speak at finance and economics conferences around the world, I find that a great conversation starter with the spouses of the middle-aged business people who attend is to inquire about their vacation home.
I then find myself entertained by stories of gorgeous ocean sunsets seen from the porch, views onto expanses of colorful wildflowers on mountainsides, and happy family reunions in beautiful seclusion (as well as problems with the plumbing).
Years ago, I never asked about vacation homes.
They never seemed so much on people’s minds.
Purchases of second homes for pleasure were confined to the rich, and thus did not seem quite so much of a conversation topic for the rank-and-file business people that I meet at such conferences.
But now the world is undergoing a second-home boom: an increasing number of people are buying vacation homes in beautiful and fun places that are within a few hours’ flying time from their first homes and jobs.
Their second homes are a retreat where they will spend only a fraction of the year, and recently pristine mountain ridges and ocean cliffs are being dotted with new homes to meet the demand.
A study by the National Association of Realtors (NAR) indicates that 13% of all homes purchased in the United States in 2004 were vacation homes.
This does not include buyers who purchased homes as investment properties, mostly to rent out.
According to the NAR, investment buyers account for another 23% of home sales, bringing second-home purchases to 36% of the total.
Some of the US counties with a high proportion of vacation homes are seeing price increases that rival, if not outstrip, the booming metropolitan areas.
For example, according to the Case-Shiller Indexes, home prices in the fashionable Cape Cod vacation area in Massachusetts soared 184% from 1997 to 2005, compared to the 131% increase in nearby Boston over the same period.
America is not alone.
Europeans are buying gemütliche Alpine ski chalets, glamorous condominiums with Mediterranean views in the South of Spain, and, increasingly, villas in picturesque sites in Turkey, Hungary, and Croatia.
Australians are buying oceanfront properties at the Sunshine Coast and the Whitsundays.
Japan’s vacation-home boom of the 1980’s has largely fizzled with its collapsing stock market and urban land market.
But even there, the market for vacation homes remains hot in places like Karuizawa, Lake Kawaguchi, and Hakone.
Being able to afford a vacation home in beautiful surroundings may mean a lot to some people.
Indeed, sometimes the talk that I hear about these properties seems to integrate them into the true meaning of life.
After all, where do we imagine that philosophers and poets and gurus live?
In one of these captivatingly charming places, of course, and not as tourists in hotel rooms.
Most people who couldn’t possibly afford such a vacation home probably don’t miss it.
Craving one seems to be a desire, like fine wine, that one discovers only when one has substantial wealth.
So, as global economic growth continues, and as household incomes rise in today’s most populous emerging countries, demand – and thus prices – for vacation homes in beautiful places, either at home or abroad, will most likely soar.
There is reason to worry about this.
Real GDP has been growing at around 3% a year in many advanced countries, and twice that or more in some emerging countries.
Properties in beautiful places are likely to be what economists call “superior goods” – those goods that account for a higher proportion of consumption as incomes rise.
With fixed supply, rents on these properties should increase at a rate equal to or above the rate of GDP growth.
Prices could increase much faster at times.
On the other hand, in some places, a speculative bubble is fueling today’s boom in vacation-home prices.
The vacation-home boom appears psychologically tied to the urban home-price bubble in many of the world’s “glamour cities,” and prices of these vacation homes are similarly vulnerable to a significant drop in coming years.
Moreover, there are plenty of ways for the construction industry to offer untold millions more people the opportunity to call some beautiful place home, simply by building more high-density and high-rise vacation apartment buildings there.
Many of the single-family vacation mansions or low-density apartment buildings that are being built today will likely eventually be sold, torn down, and replaced with higher-density megastructures, boosting supply and thus easing pressure on prices of the remaining low-density vacation homes.
Such higher-density construction must be the best possible outcome, for it will please the most people.
Most vacationers seem to derive a sense of excitement from the presence of many other vacationers around them. Large numbers of people contribute to a holiday atmosphere and attract entertainment and sports industries.
But, for many of those who imagine relaxing in a place that offers a quaint life of undisturbed beauty, there is a strong risk that prices will rise out of reach in future decades.
No economic strategy can change that, even if it produces spectacular GDP growth.
Hope for Hong Kong
LONDON – Hong Kong’s democracy movement has gained admiration worldwide.
The principles, decency, and behavior of its youthful vanguard inspire confidence in the qualities of the generation that one day will run the great city.
That said, it is time to move on to a sensible endgame.
The longer the standoff between Hong Kong’s Chief Executive and the demonstrators continues, the more likely it is that individual citizens – and Hong Kong itself – will be hurt.
The Hong Kong government should demonstrate some statesmanship, which the so-called “Umbrella Movement” – occupying the moral high ground and not wishing to risk losing public support – would surely reciprocate.
A substantive and successful dialogue with the government would not require the protesters to call off their campaign for democracy; it would simply end the current phase of a campaign that eventually will succeed.
Despite their protestations to the contrary, Hong Kong Chief Executive C. Y. Leung and his government have considerable room for maneuver.
As many Hong Kong citizens have argued, the Chinese government’s current position is based on a report, submitted by Leung’s officials, which purported to reflect accurately the outcome of local consultations on constitutional development.
But the report plainly understated the degree of public support for change.
Given what has happened in the last few weeks, Leung could quite properly give a new report to the authorities in Beijing focusing on two issues not proscribed by Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
The first issue concerns not just the immediate question of the terms on which the Chief Executive will be elected in 2017, but also how the Legislative Council should be elected in 2016 and after.
The procedure is largely a matter for the Hong Kong government to decide.
It is surprising that 17 years after the handover of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to China, Hong Kong still does not have a directly elected legislature.
In December 1992, Margaret Thatcher suggested in a speech in the House of Lords that, if all went well, Hong Kong could have universal suffrage by 2007.
Unfortunately, all has not gone well.
The legislature today comprises a mix of directly elected members and those representing functional constituencies: corporate interests and groups of employees.
Some civic groups have advocated increasing the number of directly elected legislators and opening up the functional constituencies to broader electorates.
Moreover, the brake that the functional constituencies can put on legislation should be scrapped, leaving decisions to a simple majority.
This could be accompanied by a pledge to create a legislature composed entirely of directly elected members in 2020.
The second issue concerns the composition and the voting rules of the handpicked 1,200-member election committee that will choose the Chief Executive in the future.
The current proposed arrangements would permit the Chinese government to veto any candidate that it did not like, prompting criticism that what is on offer is an Iranian-style election: “You can vote for anyone we choose.”
The Hong Kong government could call for changes to increase the openness and fairness by which the Chief Executive is chosen, without abandoning its current method in favor of universal suffrage.
According to the Basic Law, the election committee should be “broadly representative” – a provision that the committee’s current composition violates.
Its membership is chosen by only 7% of the total Hong Kong electorate, and its voting procedures seek to prevent the nomination of any candidates who may harbor democratic sympathies.
Since 1997, 55-61% of voters have voted for democratic candidates in Legislative Council elections.
The last time a slightly smaller election committee met (to choose Leung), less restrictive constraints on candidate selection were in place, and the leader of the Democratic Party was able to be nominated (though he still received less than 7% of the vote).
So Leung and his team should put forward proposals to broaden the electoral base of the election committee and open up the nominating process for candidates.
There are plenty of recommendations from civil-society groups about how to accomplish these objectives.
Both sides will need to give a little to prevent the confrontation in the streets from escalating, with the police forced to provide a substitute for a sensible policy.
The British government has said that it is important that “the people of Hong Kong have a genuine choice.”
Leung and his colleagues can give them one.
This would not be all that the Umbrella Movement has demanded, but it should encourage the protesters to reach a compromise without departing from their longer-term goal.
That is why Leung should embrace dialogue and compromise.
Even a ruler whose mandate comes from heaven should heed the words of the Confucian sage Mencius: “Heaven sees with the eyes of its people.
Heaven hears with the ears of its people.”
The Way Ahead in Hong Kong
LONDON – It is not wholly true to say that the eyes of the entire world are on Hong Kong.
They would be, of course, if people in mainland China were allowed to know what is happening in their country’s most successful city.
But China’s government has tried to block any news about the Hong Kong democracy demonstrations from reaching the rest of the country – not exactly a sign of confidence on the part of China’s rulers in their system of authoritarian government.
Before suggesting a way forward for Hong Kong’s ham-fisted authorities, three things need to be made clear.
First, it is a slur on the integrity and principles of Hong Kong’s citizens to assert, as the Chinese government’s propaganda machine does, that they are being manipulated by outside forces.
What motivates Hong Kong’s tens of thousands of demonstrators is a passionate belief that they should be able to run their affairs as they were promised, choosing those who govern them in free and fair elections.
Second, others outside of Hong Kong have a legitimate interest in what happens in the city.
Hong Kong is a great international center, whose freedoms and autonomy were guaranteed in a treaty registered at the United Nations.
In particular, the United Kingdom, the other party to this Sino-British Joint Declaration, sought and received guarantees that the survival of Hong Kong’s autonomy and liberties would be guaranteed for 50 years.
So it is ridiculous to suggest that British ministers and parliamentarians should keep their noses out of Hong Kong’s affairs.
In fact, they have a right and a moral obligation to continue to check on whether China is keeping its side of the bargain – as, to be fair, it has mostly done so far.
But, third, the biggest problems have arisen because of a dispute about where Hong Kong’s promised path to democracy should take it, and when.
No one told Hong Kongers when they were assured of universal suffrage that it would not mean being able to choose for whom they could vote.
No one said that Iran was the democratic model that China’s Communist bureaucracy had in mind, with the Chinese government authorized to exercise an effective veto over candidates.
In fact, that is not what China had in mind.
As early as 1993, China’s chief negotiator on Hong Kong, Lu Ping, told the newspaper People’s Daily, “The [method of universal suffrage] should be reported to [China’s Parliament] for the record, whereas the central government’s agreement is not necessary.
How Hong Kong develops its democracy in the future is completely within the sphere of the autonomy of Hong Kong.
The central government will not interfere.”
The following year, China’s foreign ministry confirmed this.
The British Parliament summarized what had been said and promised in a report on Hong Kong in 2000.
“The Chinese government has therefore formally accepted that it is for the Hong Kong government to determine the extent and nature of democracy in Hong Kong.”
So, what next?
The peaceful demonstrators in Hong Kong, with their umbrellas and refuse-collection bags, will not themselves be swept off the streets like garbage or bullied into submission by tear gas and pepper spray.
Any attempt to do so would present a terrible and damaging picture of Hong Kong and China to the world, and would be an affront to all that China should aspire to be.
The Hong Kong authorities have gravely miscalculated the views of their citizens.
Like the bad courtiers against whom Confucius warned, they went to Beijing and told the emperor what they thought he wanted to hear, not what the situation really was in the city.
They must think again.
Under the existing plans, there is supposed to be a second phase of consultations on democratic development to follow what turned out to be a counterfeit start to the process.
Hong Kong’s government should now offer its people a proper second round of consultation, one that is open and honest.
Dialogue is the only sensible way forward.
Hong Kong’s citizens are not irresponsible or unreasonable.
A decent compromise that allows for elections that people can recognize as fair, not fixed, is surely available.
The demonstrators in Hong Kong, young and old, represent the city’s future.
Their hopes are for a peaceful and prosperous life in which they can enjoy the freedoms and rule of law that they were promised.
That is not only in the interest of their city; it is in China’s interest, too.
Hong Kong’s future is the main issue; but so, too, is China’s honor and its standing in the world.
Hong Kong Holds its Breath
Hong Kong's residents used to be branded as "apolitical."
But that description hardly seems appropriate nowadays.
Since turning out to rally in record numbers on the anniversary of the handover to China in 2003, hundreds of thousands of Hong Kong citizens have taken peacefully to the streets on various occasions to protest government decisions and demand political reform.
But China's government clings to the belief that Hong Kong's people are not ready for democracy.
In April 2004, China's legislators ruled out universal suffrage in Hong Kong's 2007 election of its chief executive, as well as for its 2008 Legislative Council election.
They acknowledged that under the city's special constitution, the Basic Law, these elections could be the first opportunities for the territory to choose its representatives according to the principle of "one person, one vote."
But they expressed concern that major reform could undermine political stability and economic development.
Currently, all eyes in China are on Hong Kong's upcoming legislative election on September 12, which will indicate to Hong Kong's government and to China's leaders what people think about the pace and direction of reform.
A high turnout in favor of pro-democracy candidates is expected, although this won't guarantee them a majority in the legislature because of Hong Kong's unusual political structure.
For this month's election, Hong Kong's 3.2 million registered voters can elect only 30 of the 60 seats.
The pro-democracy camp is likely to win 22 seats of those 30 seats, which are based on five large geographical constituencies.
The other 30 seats, however, are chosen through functional constituencies, which represent specific interests, such as banks, insurance companies, stockbrokers, chambers of commerce, and transport operators.
Only 199,000 voters, some of them representatives from corporations, elect the legislators who fill these seats.
Some of these constituencies have only a few hundred voters and are easily controlled by a small number of vested interests.
Indeed, at the close of nomination on August 4, eleven functional candidates were chosen without opposition, including those representing banks and the Chinese chamber of commerce.
The British and Chinese governments in the 1980's designed Hong Kong's awkward political system during their negotiations over the eventual transfer of sovereignty.
Its purpose was to ensure that the will of the public could not be fully expressed through the ballot box.
After 1997, Hong Kong's government made doubly sure that legislators' already limited powers to initiate debates, legislation, and amendments to laws were further restricted.
It imposed rules requiring majority support from members of functional constituencies as well as geographic constituencies to take such steps.
So resistance to change is built into the system.
If the government can influence 16 of the 30 functional votes, it can thwart proposals from the directly elected legislators.
This has happened with controversial issues concerning political reform and government accountability over the past few years.
Yet no one should forget that on July 1, 2003, over 500,000 people protested because the government refused to allow more time to discuss proposed national security legislation.
Hong Kong's government felt it could ignore public opinion and push the bill through with a large majority of the functional members, plus a handful of directly elected pro-government legislators.
It only backed down when the pro-government Liberal Party, which held a number of functional seats, broke ranks as a result of intense public pressure.
The Civic Exchange-Hong Kong Transition Project's latest survey results, from early August, recorded a sharp upturn in public protests over the past year.
It noted that people increasingly adopted informal means of expressing unhappiness with Hong Kong's government, because they did not think that formal channels were sufficient.
People began taking matters into their own hands by attending rallies, signing petitions, and donating to political parties and activist groups in unprecedented numbers.
The survey also showed that although China's government ruled out universal suffrage in the 2007 and 2008 elections, over 40% of respondents still wanted democracy by then, with nearly 20% more wanting it by the next round of elections in 2011 and 2012.
Furthermore, the majority did not think democratization would hurt the economy, although there were clear concerns that political instability could arise from China's intervention in Hong Kong affairs.
China's government may well adopt a new Hong Kong policy after the election.
The best case would be if China agreed to universal suffrage no later than the 2011 and 2012 elections, gaining legitimacy in Hong Kong by backing reform of the political system.
While China's rulers may fear losing control, they also need to recognize that the current system is causing intense discontent.
The worst case would be if China disregarded a decisive pro-democracy win in 2007 and 2008 and continued to insist that Hong Kong's people were unready for democracy or to allege foreign manipulation of the pro-democracy camp.
Hong Kong's people may well conclude that they have no alternative but to use every occasion to protest chief executive Tung Chee-hwa's unpopular government, making it even harder for him to govern.
Hong Kong’s Independence Trap
LONDON – Nearly 40 years ago, when I visited Moscow for the first time, my initial reaction was surprise.
The hotels and restaurants were so poorly run that it seemed shocking that the military could be run competently enough to pose a genuine threat to the Soviet Union’s adversaries.
Yet we in the West feared the Red Army – and with good reason.
Hong Kong, my favorite city, sends the opposite message.
Its restaurants are run with precision, and it boasts some of the world’s best hotels.
Surely any city that can look after visitors so superbly should have nothing to worry about, except, perhaps, how best to use the proceeds of its competence and entrepreneurial genius.
But, again, things may not be quite what they seem.
Hong Kong’s success partly reflects a fundamental moderation within the culture, a competency and rationality that enables the city – an autonomous Chinese territory – to thrive in a complex context.
But, when I visited Hong Kong last month – my first visit since the momentous but abortive democracy demonstrations of 2014 – people seemed more nervous than they had in some time.
The reason is that a fledgling independence movement is shaking things up in Hong Kong.
It started with characteristically moderate calls for greater democracy.
But menacing noises from China, together with the Hong Kong government’s failure to attempt a sensible dialogue with its critics about governance concerns or economic challenges, has driven many democracy activists to extremism.
This is unwise.
The reality is that Hong Kong is not an incipient nation-state, and it will not become one.
China would oppose this idea to the bitter end.
It is not a fight Hong Kong would win.
Instead, Hong Kong is a Chinese city with a strong sense of identity as a free, plural, decent, and open society under the rule of law.
This is what democracy activists should be discussing.
This is where they are on sound footing and can advance positive goals.
As soon as those activists begin demanding independence, however, they risk splintering their support and losing the moral high ground that they gained with their campaign in 2014.
This plays into the hands of the Chinese Communist Party and its stooges in Hong Kong.
As if demanding independence were not damaging enough to the pro-democracy cause, some independence campaigners are using brash tactics that are guaranteed to backfire.
Most consequential, two young pro-independence campaigners who were elected to the Legislative Council – Yau Wai-ching and Sixtus Leung – chose to make a mockery of their oath of office last September.
Such oaths are common for legislators.
In the United Kingdom, for example, you cannot assume your role as an elected representative without taking one.
But Yau and Leung wanted to win publicity for their cause.
So they altered the words of the oath; displayed a banner stating that “Hong Kong is not China”; and referred to China using what many consider a slur.
Yau and Leung immediately incurred the wrath of China’s central government.
Although the Hong Kong courts surely could have dealt with the issue themselves – under the “one country, two systems” framework, Hong Kong is assured an independent court system, in addition to the right to elect its own legislature – an enraged China intervened.
Restraint is not, after all, a Leninist virtue.
In an extraordinary move, China’s National People’s Congress Standing Committee stepped in to “clarify” Article 104 of the Basic Law, declaring that all oaths taken by office-holders must be “solemn, accurate, complete, and sincere.”
Yau and Leung were barred from taking their seats in the Legislative Council.
To most Hong Kong lawyers, the display of political authority did not represent simply a reinterpretation of old rules, but a move toward making new ones.
And, in fact, Hong Kong’s government is now launching legal challenges against four more legislators – all relatively moderate pro-democracy activists – arguing that their oaths of office were also invalid.
In short, Hong Kong’s democracy may now be more constrained than it was before.
It is depressing to see Hong Kong once more bereft of inclusive leadership and roiled by political grandstanding.
If this situation persists, China’s moves to assert more authority in Hong Kong could well become even more brazen.
That is why it is so important for the people of Hong Kong to ensure that their vision is not clouded by extremism, and to stand up to protect the virtues that comprise their unique identity.
Fortunately, there are many in Hong Kong doing just that.
The legal profession, in particular, continues to show brave leadership in upholding the rule of law, a target of regular criticism by Communist Party officials who either do not understand what it means or know all too well.
Similarly, civil-society organizations such as the Project Citizens Foundation are committed to educating the public on Hong Kong’s rules and rights.
Thanks partly to their efforts, the public tends to be knowledgeable and vigilant about encroachment on Hong Kong’s freedoms, such as the recent abduction of five book publishers by mainland agents.
These are anxious times for Hong Kong.
But the problem is not so entrenched that it could not be solved by a bold attempt to forge a consensus between the government and those whom it is supposed to serve.
With enough political will – and level heads – Hong Kong can return to a path leading toward a freer, more open democracy.
Who Loves China?
NEW YORK – Tens of thousands of people have been “occupying” the tear-gas-filled streets of Hong Kong’s Central district to fight for their democratic rights.
Many more may soon join them.
Though some businessmen and bankers are annoyed by the disruption, the demonstrators are right to protest.
China’s government has promised Hong Kong’s citizens that they can freely elect their Chief Executive in 2017.
But, given that candidates are to be carefully vetted by an unelected committee of pro-Chinese appointees, citizens would have no meaningful choice at all.
Only people who “love China” – that is, love the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) – need apply.
One can almost understand why China’s leaders should be baffled by this show of defiance in Hong Kong.
After all, the British simply appointed governors when Hong Kong was still a crown colony, and nobody protested then.
Indeed, the deal that Hong Kong’s colonial subjects appeared to accept – leaving politics alone in exchange for the opportunity to pursue material prosperity in a safe and orderly environment – is not so different from the deal accepted by China’s educated classes today.
The common opinion among British colonial civil servants, businessmen, and diplomats was that the Chinese were not really interested in politics anyway; all they cared about was money.
Anyone with the slightest knowledge of Chinese history knows that this view was patently false.
But, for a long time, it seemed to be true in Hong Kong.
There was, however, a significant difference between Hong Kong under the British and under China today.
Hong Kong was never a democracy, but it did have a relatively free press, a relatively honest government, and an independent judiciary – all backed by a democratic government in London.
For most Hong Kong citizens, the prospect of being handed over in 1997 from one colonial power to another was never an entirely happy one.
But what really invigorated politics in Hong Kong was the brutal crackdown in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square and in other Chinese cities in 1989.
Huge demonstrations took place in Hong Kong to protest the massacre, and massive commemorations of the event are held every June, keeping alive a memory that is repressed and fading in the rest of China.
It was not simply humanitarian rage that galvanized so many people in Hong Kong to act in 1989.
They recognized then that under future Chinese rule, only genuine democracy might safeguard the institutions that protected Hong Kong’s freedoms.
Without any significant say in how they were to be governed, Hong Kong’s citizens would be at the mercy of China’s leaders.
From the point of view of China’s Communist rulers, this seems perverse.
They regard Hong Kongers’ democratic demands as a misguided effort to mimic Western politics, or even as a form of nostalgia for British imperialism.
Either way, the demonstrators’ agenda is considered “anti-Chinese.”
The way China’s rulers see it, only firm control from the top and the CCP’s unquestioned supremacy can create the conditions needed for a rich and powerful China to emerge.
Democracy, in their view, leads to disorder; freedom of thought causes popular “confusion”; and public criticism of the Party tends toward the breakdown of authority.
In this sense, the CCP is rather traditional.
But, though Chinese government always was authoritarian, it was not always as corrupt as it is now.
Nor were China’s politics always as lawless.
China traditionally had institutions – clan associations, religious communities, business groups, and so on – that were relatively autonomous.
Imperial rule may have been authoritarian, but there were large pockets of independence from central control.
In that sense, Hong Kong is perhaps more traditional than the rest of China, excluding, of course, Taiwan.
Today, the CCP’s political supremacy places it above the law, which encourages corruption among Party officials, whether at the local or national level.
Strict Party control of religious, academic, artistic, and journalistic expression stifles the dissemination of necessary information and creative thought.
The lack of an independent judiciary undermines the rule of law.
None of this benefits future development.
When Hong Kong was formally handed back to China 17 years ago, some optimists thought that the former colony’s greater freedoms would help to reform the rest of China.
The example of a clean bureaucracy and independent judges would strengthen the rule of law throughout the country.
Others, for the same reason, regarded Hong Kong as a dangerous Trojan horse that could seriously undermine the Communist order.
So far, there is no evidence that the protesters in Hong Kong’s Central district have any ambition to undermine, let alone topple, the government in Beijing.
They have their hands full just standing up for their own rights in Hong Kong, and the chance that they will succeed appears to be slim.
Chinese President Xi Jinping is anxious to show how tough he can be.
Compromise would smack of weakness.
His aim seems to be to make Hong Kong more like the rest of China, rather than the other way round.
And yet, there is every reason to believe that China would benefit greatly from the opposite course.
Less official corruption, more trust in the law, and greater freedom of thought would make China a more stable, more creative, and even more prosperous society.
In the short term, this probably will not happen.
But the people who truly “love China” are more likely to be found in the streets of Hong Kong than in the closed government compounds of Beijing.
China’s Hong Kong Follies
HONG KONG – The massive public demonstrations by students and young members of the middle-class that have roiled Hong Kong in recent weeks are ostensibly demands for democracy.
But they actually reflect frustration among a population that has been poorly governed by a succession of leaders picked by China’s central government more for their loyalty than their competence.
In fact, the current near-uprising is the culmination of a long series of demonstrations since Hong Kong’s handover from the United Kingdom to China in 1997, after Chris Patten, the last British governor failed to persuade China to allow Hong Kong to establish a genuine democratic government.
In China’s view, Patten’s position was hypocritical, even offensive, given that the British had ruled Hong Kong autocratically.
China believed that it could easily manage the same kind of “executive-led” government that had served Hong Kong well for 150 years under the British.
In order to placate Hong Kong’s restive population – which included many refugees from China – a “one country, two systems” policy was embedded in the region’s constitution, promising Hong Kong “a high degree of autonomy,” except in foreign and defense affairs for 50 years.
Indeed, Hong Kong enjoys many freedoms that the rest of China lacks, including a judiciary system that is guided by British common law and independent from the executive branch.
China has yet to follow through on its second promise: that Hong Kong would elect its chief executive by “universal suffrage” by 2017.
Instead, a committee – initially comprising 800 members, but since expanded to 1,200 – selects the chief executive in accordance with the Chinese government’s wishes.
Hong Kong’s first chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, was widely viewed as a wise choice.
The Western-educated heir to a shipping fortune, and unusually well connected with the global elite, Tung was thought to be a conservative, thoughtful, cosmopolitan man imbued with liberal values and free of ties to the powerful families that dominated the real-estate industry in the territory.
This perception could not have been more wrong.
Tung turned out to be shallow, radical in his views, more chauvinist than China’s top leaders, and prone to rash decision-making on important policies with wide-ranging social and economic consequences.
He forced out his competent chief secretary, Anson Chan, a veteran Hong Kong civil servant, for her colonial background, thereby signaling his mistrust of the entire civil service that the British had created.
It did not take long for Hong Kongers to realize that their new leader harbored a deep – and deeply flawed – “patriotic” worldview that regarded Western “values” as unsuitable for Hong Kong, the first globalized Chinese city in modern history.
But it was not until Tung tried to ram through draconian internal-security legislation that many of Hong Kong’s citizens began to feel that they were being overtaken by the repressive governance from which they were supposed to be exempt.
Under Tung’s leadership, mass protests became a frequent sight in Hong Kong.
The Chinese government also belatedly recognized that Tung was a liability.
In 2004, then-Chinese President Hu Jintao unceremoniously dressed down Tung on live television.
Three months later, Tung resigned for “health reasons” and was elected Vice Chairman of the largely symbolic Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference.
Tung’s successor, Donald Tsang, was chosen reluctantly.
But he was a senior civil servant, and seemed to be the only technocrat who could credibly hold together Hong Kong’s disaffected civil service, which China knew was indispensable to governing the territory, regardless of its British heritage.
But Tsang brought his own weaknesses to Hong Kong’s government – most notably, greed.
Tsang, who enjoyed spending time with the wealthy on their yachts and in their private suites, pursued a restrictive land policy that boosted real-estate values – and thus the wealth of the land-owning tycoons.
Prices rose so high, however, that real estate became accessible only to the very well-off, such as the families of high officials from the mainland.
This kind of corrupt behavior earned Tsang a disgraceful exit from government.
Next came Leung Chun-ying, the current governor.
Leung – who was not China’s first choice for the position – inherited a mess.
But he did not do himself any favors with his cabinet choices, many of whom had mediocre records that indicated corruptibility.
One of them, Paul Chan Mo-po, was tasked with managing Hong Kong’s land-supply policy, despite a history of corruption in his personal property transactions.
Worse, Leung pushed forward an unpopular plan to introduce “patriotic education” to Hong Kong, stoking fear among students of a China-dictated brainwashing.
After the failure of three consecutive Chinese-selected leaders to address Hong Kong’s concerns, it is no wonder that Hong Kong’s citizens are increasingly seeking to loosen China’s grip on their government.
But, for the Chinese authorities, this movement reflects an unacceptable challenge to China’s sovereignty.
In this sense, Hong Kong is locked in a vicious circle – and it is up to China’s government to break it.
The fact is that Hong Kong’s citizens understand that they need China, and they have no interest in subverting the central government – nor do they have the power to do so.
Their demands for democracy are simply calls for good governance.
They believe that free and fair elections represent their best chance of having a competent leader – someone like Patten, China’s former nemesis, who is remembered fondly in Hong Kong.
China’s government is doing itself a disservice by demanding that Hong Kong’s citizens bow before their sovereign, while blaming “outside hostile forces” for spurring some kind of unconstitutional rebellion.
Instead, it should focus on the problems created by the chief executives that it chose for the wrong reasons, and it should resolve the underlying governance problems that the demonstrations reflect.
The New Geo-Economics
COLOMBO, SRI LANKA – Last year was a memorable one for the global economy.
Not only was overall performance disappointing, but profound changes – both for better and for worse – occurred in the global economic system.
Most notable was the Paris climate agreement reached last month.
By itself, the agreement is far from enough to limit the increase in global warming to the target of 2º Celsius above the pre-industrial level.
But it did put everyone on notice: The world is moving, inexorably, toward a green economy.
One day not too far off, fossil fuels will be largely a thing of the past.
So anyone who invests in coal now does so at his or her peril.
With more green investments coming to the fore, those financing them will, we should hope, counterbalance powerful lobbying by the coal industry, which is willing to put the world at risk to advance its shortsighted interests.
Indeed, the move away from a high-carbon economy, where coal, gas, and oil interests often dominate, is just one of several major changes in the global geo-economic order.
Many others are inevitable, given China’s soaring share of global output and demand.
The New Development Bank, established by the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), was launched during the year, becoming the first major international financial institution led by emerging countries.
And, despite US President Barack Obama’s resistance, the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank was established as well, and is to start operation this month.
The US did act with greater wisdom where China’s currency was concerned.
It did not obstruct the renminbi’s admission to the basket of currencies that constitute the International Monetary Fund’s reserve asset, Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).
In addition, a half-decade after the Obama administration agreed to modest changes in the voting rights of China and other emerging markets at the IMF – a small nod to the new economic realities – the US Congress finally approved the reforms.
The most controversial geo-economic decisions last year concerned trade.
Almost unnoticed after years of desultory talks, the World Trade Organization’s Doha Development Round – initiated to redress imbalances in previous trade agreements that favored developed countries – was given a quiet burial.
America’s hypocrisy – advocating free trade but refusing to abandon subsidies on cotton and other agricultural commodities – had posed an insurmountable obstacle to the Doha negotiations.
In place of global trade talks, the US and Europe have mounted a divide-and-conquer strategy, based on overlapping trade blocs and agreements.
As a result, what was intended to be a global free-trade regime has given way to a discordant managed-trade regime.
Trade for much of the Pacific and Atlantic regions will be governed by agreements, thousands of pages in length and replete with complex rules of origin that contradict basic principles of efficiency and the free flow of goods.
The US concluded secret negotiations on what may turn out to be the worst trade agreement in decades, the so-called Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), and now faces an uphill battle for ratification, as all the leading Democratic presidential candidates and many of the Republicans have weighed in against it.
The problem is not so much with the agreement’s trade provisions, but with the “investment” chapter, which severely constrains environmental, health, and safety regulation, and even financial regulations with significant macroeconomic impacts.
In particular, the chapter gives foreign investors the right to sue governments in private international tribunals when they believe government regulations contravene the TPP’s terms (inscribed on more than 6,000 pages).
In the past, such tribunals have interpreted the requirement that foreign investors receive “fair and equitable treatment” as grounds for striking down new government regulations – even if they are non-discriminatory and are adopted simply to protect citizens from newly discovered egregious harms.
While the language is complex – inviting costly lawsuits pitting powerful corporations against poorly financed governments – even regulations protecting the planet from greenhouse-gas emissions are vulnerable.
The only regulations that appear safe are those involving cigarettes (lawsuits filed against Uruguay and Australia for requiring modest labeling about health hazards had drawn too much negative attention). But there remain a host of questions about the possibility of lawsuits in myriad other areas.
Furthermore, a “most favored nation” provision ensures that corporations can claim the best treatment offered in any of a host country’s treaties.
That sets up a race to the bottom – exactly the opposite of what US President Barack Obama promised.
Even the way Obama argued for the new trade agreement showed how out of touch with the emerging global economy his administration is.
He repeatedly said that the TPP would determine who – America or China – would write the twenty-first century’s trade rules.
The correct approach is to arrive at such rules collectively, with all voices heard, and in a transparent way.
Obama has sought to perpetuate business as usual, whereby the rules governing global trade and investment are written by US corporations for US corporations.
This should be unacceptable to anyone committed to democratic principles.
Those seeking closer economic integration have a special responsibility to be strong advocates of global governance reforms: If authority over domestic policies is ceded to supranational bodies, then the drafting, implementation, and enforcement of the rules and regulations has to be particularly sensitive to democratic concerns.
Unfortunately, that was not always the case in 2015.
In 2016, we should hope for the TPP’s defeat and the beginning of a new era of trade agreements that don’t reward the powerful and punish the weak.
The Paris climate agreement may be a harbinger of the spirit and mindset needed to sustain genuine global cooperation.
Hopeless Unemployment
BERKELEY – However bad you think the global economy is today in terms of the business cycle, that is only one lens through which to view the world.
In terms of global life expectancy, total world wealth, the overall level of technology, growth prospects in emerging economies, and global income distribution, things look rather good, while on still other dimensions – say, global warming or domestic income inequality and its effects on countries’ social solidarity – they look bad.
Even on the business-cycle dimension, conditions have been far worse in the past than they are today.
Consider the Great Depression and the implications of market economies’ inability back then to recover on their own, owing to the burden of long-term unemployment.
But, while we are not at that point today, the Great Depression is no less relevant for us, because it is increasingly likely that long-term unemployment will become a similar impediment to recovery within the next two years.
At its nadir in the winter of 1933, the Great Depression was a form of collective insanity.
Workers were idle because firms would not hire them; firms would not hire them because they saw no market for their output; and there was no market for output because workers had no incomes to spend.
By that point, a great deal of unemployment had become long-term unemployment, which had two consequences.
First, the burden of economic dislocation was borne unequally.
Because consumer prices fell faster than wages, the welfare of those who remained employed rose in the Great Depression.
Overwhelmingly, those who became and remained unemployed suffered the most.
Second, reintegrating the unemployed even into a smoothly functioning market economy would prove to be very difficult.
After all, how many employers would not prefer a fresh entrant into the labor force to someone who has been out of work for years?
The simple fact that an economy had recently undergone a period of mass unemployment made it difficult to recover levels of growth and employment that are often attained as a matter of course.
Devalued exchange rates, moderate government budget deficits, and the passage of time all appeared to be equally ineffective remedies.
Highly centralized and unionized labor markets, like Australia’s, did as poorly as decentralized and laissez-faire labor markets, like that of the United States, in dealing with long-term unemployment.
Fascist solutions were equally unsuccessful, as in Italy, unless accompanied by rapid rearmament, as in Germany.
In the end, in the US, it was the approach of World War II and the associated demand for military goods that led private-sector employers to hire the long-term unemployed at wages they would accept.
But, even today, economists can provide no clear explanation of why the private sector could not find ways to employ the long-term unemployed in the near-decade from the winter of 1933 to full war mobilization.
The extent of persistent unemployment, despite different labor-market structures and national institutions, suggests that theories that pinpoint one key failure should be taken with a grain of salt.
At first, the long-term unemployed in the Great Depression searched eagerly and diligently for alternative sources of work.
But, after six months or so passed without successful reemployment, they tended to become discouraged and distraught.
After 12 months of continuous unemployment, the typical unemployed worker still searched for a job, but in a desultory fashion, without much hope.
And, after two years of unemployment, the worker, accurately expecting to be at the end of every hiring queue, had lost hope and, for all practical purposes, left the labor market.
This was the pattern of the long-term unemployed in the Great Depression.
It was also the pattern of the long-term unemployed in Western Europe at the end of the 1980s.
And, in a year or two, it will be the pattern again for the long-term unemployed in the North Atlantic region.
I have been arguing for four years that our business-cycle problems call for more aggressively expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and that our biggest problems would quickly melt away were such policies to be adopted.
That is still true.
But, over the next two years, barring a sudden and unexpected interruption of current trends, it will become less true.
The current balance of probabilities is that two years from now, the North Atlantic’s principal labor-market failures will not be demand-side market failures that could be easily remedied by more aggressive policies to boost economic activity and employment.