But this may be a vision that gives Europe a chance to remain big and inclusive, while retaining the politically integrated core that the eurozone needs.
Can China Adapt?
SHANGHAI – China’s “Two Sessions” – the annual gatherings of the National People’s Congress and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference held every March – have always drawn global attention.
But the meetings this year seemed particularly significant, owing not only to the country’s leadership transition, but also to its economic slowdown amid calls for deeper reform.
How, then, will China’s new leaders respond?
The problem is simple: No one can predict accurately how long the slowdown will last.
The authorities, lacking confidence in their ability to restore pre-2009 rates of annual GDP growth, have lowered the official target to 7.5%.
Many economists are becoming even more pessimistic, pointing to Japan as evidence that, after three decades, China’s breakneck growth may be coming to an end.
Japan’s economy, they point out, achieved more than 20 years of sustained rapid growth; but, in the 40 years since 1973, annual growth has exceeded 5% only a handful of times, and output has stagnated for the last two decades.
But today’s pessimists need to account for some fundamental differences between the two economies.
For example, Japan was already a high-income country in 1973, with per capita income (in terms of purchasing power parity) at roughly 60% of the United States’ level.
The “Four Asian Tigers” (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan) experienced a slowdown in GDP growth at a similar relative income level.
By contrast, China’s per capita income is only about 20% of the US level.
In other words, we should not underestimate the Chinese economy’s potential to converge toward developed countries.
The pessimists, however, doubt that China can maintain catch-up economic growth.
They argue that the current growth model, if not the economic system more broadly, is driving the country into a “middle-income trap.”
Attributing problems to systemic causes is a typical habit of thought in China.
But can a system that has sustained 30 years of hyper-growth really be worse than those systems adopted in Japan and the Four Tigers?
China’s economic system, which developed from the institutions of central planning, must have had some merits during this period.
But the development and ultimate structure of economic institutions are closely related to a country’s income level or stage of economic development.
If some aspects of the current system cannot be adapted to support further economic development, they could end up hindering it.
What really matters for economic growth is not whether a system is the “best,” but whether it can be adjusted to serve a new phase of economic development.
From this perspective, it is vital to ensure that an economic system is open to institutional reform.
No economic system, however “optimal,” can sustain long-term growth once it is no longer reformable.
After its extraordinary post-1945 economic miracle, Japan fell into a pattern of ultra-slow growth because it lacked the flexibility to adapt its institutions for a new phase of economic development, characterized by heightened global competition.
By contrast, South Korea has maintained its growth momentum since the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990’s.
Western economists often criticize its economic system, but the key point is that its institutions are flexible and open to change, which implies a high degree of economic resilience.
Why is one system amenable to reform, while another is not?
In recent years, research has indicated that vested interests and powerful lobbies distort economic policies and cause governments to miss good opportunities.
A system receptive to reform requires the government to have greater power or wealth than any interest group, thus enabling it to pursue long-term policy goals and ensure the success of reform.
For example, Yao Yang of Peking University has argued that the Chinese government is able to decide the right policies at critical points, because it is not unduly swayed by any interest group.
It is this neutrality, he says, that explains the success of China’s economic transition and its three decades of rapid economic growth.
But what about now?
China is entering a new phase of development, and institutional reform in key areas – particularly the public sector, income distribution, land ownership, the household registration system, and the financial sector – has become imperative.
Obviously, reform is more difficult today than it was when China began its economic transition.
State-owned enterprises, for example, currently account for 40% of total corporate assets, but only 2% of all firms, which implies significant policy influence.
But China seems unlikely to go the way of, say, Russia.
On the contrary, the accumulation of wealth in the Chinese government’s hands should enhance its ability to press ahead with reform.
Institutional flexibility has been the key to China’s economic transition and rapid growth over the last three decades, and it is vitally important that the Chinese government remains neutral and avoids being captured by interest groups.
In short, the authorities must ensure that the system remains open to change in the long run.
Successful implementation of another round of far-reaching reform depends on it.
Emerging Economies’ Misinsurance Problem
LONDON – Over the last decade, America’s expansionary monetary policy and China’s rapid growth have been the two key drivers of global financial flows.
Now, both dynamics are being reversed, generating new risks for the global economy – particularly for emerging countries.
Whether they can cope with these changes will depend on whether they have taken out enough insurance against the right risks.
Following the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990’s, emerging economies began to accumulate massive foreign-exchange reserves to protect themselves against the risks of external over-indebtedness.
In fact, they amassed far more than they needed – $6.5 trillion, at last count – effectively becoming over-insured against external balance-of-payments shocks.
But they remained underinsured against domestic credit risks ­–&#160;the leading threat to emerging economies today.
After the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, interest rates plummeted, fueling private-sector credit booms in many of the largest emerging markets, including Brazil, India, Indonesia, and Turkey.
Although these booms were initially financed by domestic capital, they soon became dependent on foreign capital, which flowed into their economies as advanced-country central banks pumped huge amounts of liquidity into financial markets.
Now, just as the US Federal Reserve contemplates an exit from its unconventional monetary policies, emerging economies’ current-account positions are weakening, making their reliance on capital inflows increasingly apparent – and increasingly dangerous.
Ironically, today’s pain stems from one of the great successes that emerging economies have achieved: the reduction of foreign-currency funding in favor of local-currency debt.
As emerging-market central banks leaned against heavy capital inflows in order to mitigate exchange-rate appreciation, their currencies became less volatile.
The resulting perception that currency risk was declining bolstered capital inflows further.
This virtuous feedback loop has now turned vicious, with capital inflows amounting to only a fraction of outflows.
Given this, the likely upshot of monetary tightening in the advanced economies will be a long depreciation of emerging-market currencies and, in turn, a significant interest-rate hike – a trend that puts emerging economies at risk for the kinds of credit crises that have bedeviled developed economies over the last six years.
The higher interest rates rise to stabilize emerging markets’ currencies, the more severe their crises will be.
Ultimately, even if emerging economies manage to diversify their funding away from foreign currencies, they will remain hostages to US monetary-policy cycles.
Had emerging economies resisted the temptation of excessive private-sector credit growth, raising interest rates in order to stabilize currencies would not pose a severe threat to economic performance.
But, unsurprisingly, they did not; rather, they succumbed to the notion that unprecedentedly high rates of GDP growth were the new normal.
Nowhere was this more apparent than in China, where double-digit annual output gains long obscured the flaws in a state-led, credit-fueled growth model that favors state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and selected industries, like the real-estate sector, to the detriment of private savers.
Since 2008, banking-sector credit growth in China has been among the fastest in the world, far outpacing GDP growth, and China’s total debt has risen from 130% of GDP to 220% of GDP.
As of this year, ¥1 of GDP growth is consistent with more than ¥3.5 of credit growth.
China’s financial sector is now increasingly feeling the strain of this rapid credit growth, which has led to overcapacity in favored sectors and mounting debt problems for local governments, SOEs, and banks.
Meanwhile, China’s shadow-banking system has expanded at an unprecedented rate.
But here, too, mounting risks have been largely ignored, owing partly to the collateralization of real property, which is believed to retain its value permanently, and partly to the system of implicit government guarantees that backs loans to local governments and SOEs.
At the very least, the combination of higher interest rates in the shadow-banking sector and weaker nominal GDP growth undermines borrowers’ debt-repayment capacity.
In a worst-case scenario, falling property prices or diminishing faith in implicit government guarantees would compound the risks generated by the shadow-banking system, severely undermining China’s financial stability.
In that sense, although China, with its $3.5 trillion stock of foreign-exchange reserves, may seem to exemplify emerging economies’ tendency to be over-insured against external risks, it actually faces the same credit risks as its counterparts.
The difference is that China has implemented structural – and thus longer-lasting – credit-based policies, while other emerging economies have been drawn into a cyclical lending binge.
Indeed, China’s slowness to implement an alternative to the investment-led, debt-financed growth model that has prevailed for the last two decades means that its domestic credit risks are the most significant threat to the global economy today.
While China may have the financial resources to cover its debt overhang, it risks being left with a low-to-middle-income economy, high debt levels, and nominal growth rates roughly two-thirds lower than the 17% average annual rate achieved in 2004-2011.
This is bad news for other emerging economies, which have depended heavily on China’s growth for their own.
Unless emerging-market governments take advantage of the limited space provided by their foreign-exchange reserves and floating currencies to enact vital structural reforms, the onus of adjustment will fall on interest rates, compounding the effects of slowing growth and the risks associated with bad debt.
Whether this becomes a systemic issue affecting the entire global economy will hinge on China.
Insuring the Worst
In the nearly six months since Hurricane Katrina destroyed half of New Orleans, many storm victims’ expectations of help have been dashed, creating a legacy of bitterness.
That legacy may be all the more painful when we consider that many homeowners suffered unnecessarily devastating losses because of their lack of insurance or their underinsurance, often owing to the belief that they could not afford the right coverage.
Future catastrophes – storms, earthquakes, tsunamis, volcano eruptions, forest fires, agricultural or other environmental crises, disease epidemics, or terrorist attacks – are likely to result in the same kinds of problems.
So it is important to consider the causes of underinsurance and whether our insurance institutions are adequate to the risks that we face.
According to a report from the Insurance Information Institute, nearly 70% of homeowners’ claims in Louisiana were settled by the end of January, for a total of $7.5 billion dollars.
Sounds good, but there were roughly 200,000 homes that were either severely damaged or destroyed, so the total amounts to less than $40,000 per home – far below what was needed.
Indeed, a large share of New Orleans homeowners – 60% in Orleans Parish – were completely uninsured against floods.
Many of those who were insured discovered that clauses in their policies barred them from collecting full benefits.
In some cases, insurance companies argued that houses were damaged by flood, not wind, which their policies cover more generously.
That may seem like capricious hair-splitting to people who have suffered a major loss, but such terms are in the insurance contracts that they signed, whether they understood them or not.
Claims disputes have led to many lawsuits, and many of those who have lost their homes have discovered that the only help available to them now is a low-interest loan.
Not unreasonably, President George W. Bush wants government grants to bail out only the approximately 20,000 homeowners who can’t be faulted for failing to buy flood insurance, because they lived outside the designated flood plains.
Despite the disappointments, private insurance is still the best way to deal with possible future disasters.
Insurance policies that clearly specify the amounts that will be paid and the types of damage that will be covered are far better than the government-administered, after-the-fact bailout that many people seem to have expected.
Adequate private insurance can be boosted in the future through public education, improved insurance institutions, and lower insurance costs.
We need to work on all of these agendas, because each must be part of any new plan to deal with the next catastrophe.
The cost of insurance may be the most serious problem.
According to estimates by Robert Klein of Georgia State University, homeowners’ insurance premiums in Louisiana had already gone up by 70% between 1997 and 2005.
State insurance regulators resist rate increases, but they are ultimately powerless, because insurers can simply take their business elsewhere.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) proposed in December that each of America’s 50 states should establish a disaster insurance fund to cover a wide range of big calamities.
The funds – modeled after similar funds in France and Spain – would be designed to cover the biggest, once-in-fifty-years catastrophes.
The federal government would then augment the protection up to the once-in-five-hundred-year level.
The NAIC’S proposal is now under discussion.
If it were fully implemented, which is unlikely, it would constitute a revolution in risk management in the US similar to that of the creation of Social Security in 1934.
But preparation for catastrophe does not have to reside exclusively with the government.
Mega-disaster risks can be handled with private financial markets, as long as these markets manage to get the full attention and interest of portfolio investors.
Consider catastrophe bonds (or “cat bonds”), which contain clauses that stipulate that the issuer of the bond (the borrower) does not have to repay the money if a specified catastrophe occurs.
The bonds can be sold to a worldwide market by insurance companies that incur major risks by writing policies.
If the insurance companies can get a good enough price for such bonds, they can eliminate their exposure to the risk of a major disaster, thereby allowing them to issue policies to homeowners at a lower cost.
Cat bonds have been growing in importance in recent years.
According to estimates by Lane Financial, there were $1.8 billion worth of cat bonds issued in the year April 2004-March 2005.
Since Katrina, issuance has accelerated.
In the first three post-Katrina months alone (September to December 2005), $2.1 billion were issued.
The total value of outstanding cat bonds is small by Katrina standards.
But the trend towards increasing sophistication and breadth of our financial markets suggests that we can expect to see much further growth in cat bonds.
Ultimately, even Hurricane Katrina and other disasters of similar magnitude are small by world standards.
The total insured property loss of Katrina, $34.4 billion according to an insurance industry estimate, even if expanded to represent uninsured losses, represents a miniscule fraction of world wealth.
But such disasters represent a much larger share of a single country’s wealth.
This is why financial theory prescribes spreading risks as evenly as possible around the world, rather than around only one country, as plans for a national catastrophe fund envision.
The possibility of managing national risks globally is another example of the advantages of economic globalization and expansion of financial markets.
Intellectual-Property Rights and Wrongs
Last October, the General Assembly of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) decided to consider what a development-oriented intellectual property regime might look like.
The move was little noticed, but, in some ways, it was as important as the World Trade Organization’s decision that the current round of trade negotiations be devoted to development.
Both decisions acknowledge that the current rules of the international economic game reflect the interests of the advanced industrial countries – especially of their big corporations – more than the interests of the developing world.
Without intellectual property protection, incentives to engage in certain types of creative endeavors would be weakened.
But there are high costs associated with intellectual property.
Ideas are the most important input into research, and if intellectual property slows down the ability to use others’ ideas, then scientific and technological progress will suffer. 
In fact, many of the most important ideas – for example, the mathematics that underlies the modern computer or the theories behind atomic energy or lasers – are not protected by intellectual property.
Academics spend considerable energy freely disseminating their research findings.
I am pleased when someone uses my ideas on asymmetric information – though I do appreciate them giving me some credit.
The growth of the “open source” movement on the Internet shows that not just the most basic ideas, but even products of enormous immediate commercial value can be produced without intellectual property protection.
By contrast, an intellectual property regime rewards innovators by creating a temporary monopoly power, allowing them to charge far higher prices than they could if there were competition.
In the process, ideas are disseminated and used less than they would be otherwise.
The economic rationale for intellectual property is that faster innovation offsets the enormous costs of such inefficiencies.
But it has become increasingly clear that excessively strong or badly formulated intellectual property rights may actually impede innovation – and not just by increasing the price of research.
Monopolists may have much less incentive to innovate than they would if they had to compete.
Modern research has shown that the great economist Joseph Schumpeter was wrong in thinking that competition in innovation leads to a succession of firms.
In fact, a monopolist, once established, may be hard to dislodge, as Microsoft has so amply demonstrated.
Indeed, once established, a monopoly can use its market power to squelch competitors, as Microsoft so amply demonstrated in the case of the Netscape Web browser.
Such abuses of market power discourage innovation.
Moreover, so-called “patent thickets” – the fear that some advance will tread on pre-existing patents, of which the innovator may not even be aware – may also discourage innovation.
After the pioneering work of the Wright brothers and the Curtis brothers, overlapping patent claims thwarted the development of the airplane, until the United States government finally forced a patent pool as World War I loomed.
Today, many in the computer industry worry that such a patent thicket may impede software development.
The creation of any product requires many ideas, and sorting out their relative contribution to the outcome – let alone which ones are really new – can be nearly impossible.
Consider a drug based on traditional knowledge, say, of an herb well known for its medicinal properties.
How important is the contribution of the American firm that isolates the active ingredient?
Pharmaceutical companies argue that they should be entitled to a full patent, paying nothing to the developing country from which the traditional knowledge was taken, even though the country preserves the biodiversity without which the drug would never have come to market.
Not surprisingly, developing countries see things differently.
Society has always recognized that other values may trump intellectual property.  The need to prevent excessive monopoly power has led anti-trust authorities to require compulsory licensing (as the US government did with the telephone company AT&T).
When America faced an anthrax threat in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, officials issued a compulsory license for Cipro, the best-known antidote. 
Unfortunately, the trade negotiators who framed the intellectual-property agreement of the Uruguay trade round of the early 1990’s (TRIP’s) were either unaware of all of this, or more likely, uninterested.
I served on the Clinton administration’s Council of Economic Advisors at the time, and it was clear that there was more interest in pleasing the pharmaceutical and entertainment industries than in ensuring an intellectual-property regime that was good for science, let alone for developing countries. 
I suspect that most of those who signed the agreement did not fully understand what they were doing.
If they had, would they have willingly condemned thousands of AIDS sufferers to death because they might no longer be able to get affordable generic drugs?
Had the question been posed in this way to parliaments around the world, I believe that TRIP’s would have been soundly rejected.
Intellectual property is important, but the appropriate intellectual-property regime for a developing country is different from that for an advanced industrial country.
The TRIP’s scheme failed to recognize this.
In fact, intellectual property should never have been included in a trade agreement in the first place, at least partly because its regulation is demonstrably beyond the competency of trade negotiators.
Besides, an international organization already exists to protect intellectual property.
Hopefully, in WIPO’s reconsideration of intellectual property regimes, the voices of the developing world will be heard more clearly than it was in the WTO negotiations; hopefully, WIPO will succeed in outlining what a pro-developing intellectual property regime implies; and hopefully, WTO will listen: the aim of trade liberalization is to boost development, not hinder it.
Hambatan Internasional untuk Rencana Ekonomi Trump
DUBAI – Presiden Amerika Serikat terpilih, Donald Trump, dapat dengan mudah menjalankan program ekonominya: karena Partai Republik menjadi mayoritas di Kongres AS, Trump sepertinya akan mendapat manfaat dari tidak adanya kebuntuan politik yang telah melumpuhkan institusi tersebut selama enam tahun terakhir.
Namun, perekonomian Amerika Serikat tidak berada dalam ruang hampa.
Jika Trump ingin berhasil mencapai pertumbuhan ekonomi dan stabilitas finansial yang ia janjikan, maka Trump akan membutuhkan bantuan dari luar negeri.
Trump telah menjadikan investasi pada bidang infrastruktur, reformasi perpajakan, dan deregulasi sebagai komponen utama dari strateginya untuk meningkatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi riil dan meningkatkan potensi pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Percaya diri bahwa program akan berjalan sesuai rencana, Trump telah menetapkan target yang ambisius, termasuk pertumbuhan PDB sebesar 4% per tahun.
Untuk saat ini, investor tampaknya percaya bahwa rencana ini bisa dicapai.
Dengan asumsi bahwa pemerintahan Trump tidak akan memulai perang dagang, mereka bertindak cepat untuk memanfaatkan prospek optimistis yang ada untuk pertumbuhan riil yang lebih tinggi, inflasi yang lebih tinggi, dan bertambahnya uang yang masuk ke pasar finansial Amerika.
Hal ini memungkinkan Bank Sentral Amerika Serikat untuk menormalisasi kebijakan moneter mereka; disamping adanya kenaikan suku bunga sebesar 25 basis poin pada tanggal 14 Desember lalu, Bank Sentral Amerika telah memberikan indikasi bahwa laju kenaikan tersebut akan meningkat pada tahun 2017.  
Oleh karena itu, pasar yakin bahwa Amerika Serikat secara bertahap akan menghentikan ketergantungan mereka terhadap kebijakan moneter yang tidak konvensional dan menggantikan hal tersebut dengan kebijakan fiskal yang lebih longgar dan reformasi struktural yang mendukung pertumbuhan – sebuah pendekatan yang mirip dengan kebijakan mantan Presiden Amerika Serikat Ronald Reagan.
Presiden Obama telah mencoba untuk melakukan pendekatan yang sama, namun terhambat karena kondisi Kongres yang sangat terpolarisasi. 
Ekspektasi bahwa Trump akan mempunyai nasib yang lebih baik dalam melaksanakan pendekatan ini menghasilkan reaksi pasar yang sesuai dengan buku pelajaran.
Harga saham naik dengan kenaikan tertinggi di saham sektor finansial dan industri; suku bunga obligasi Pemerintah Amerika Serikat meningkat, baik secara mandiri maupun secara relatif terhadap negara-negara maju lainnya; serta nilai dollar meningkat ke level tertinggi sejak tahun 2003.  
Disinilah peran negara lain dalam perekonomian Amerika Serikat.
Negara dengan perekonomian besar lainnya – misalnya di Eropa dan Asia – akan menghadapi lebih banyak tantangan untuk menyeimbangkan keragaman kebijakan mereka (yang terus menerus ditandai dengan kebijakan moneter yang terlalu longgar, kurangnya reformasi struktural, dan, dalam beberapa kasus, kebijakan fiskal yang terlalu ketat).
Jika mereka tidak berhasil menyeimbangkan keragaman kebijakan mereka, kenaikan suku bunga dari Bank Sentral Amerika akan merangsang investor untuk menjual obligasi Pemerintahan Jerman dan Jepang, khususnya – karena sekarang mendatangkan keuntungan rendah atau bahkan negatif – dan membeli obligasi pemerintah Amerika Serikat yang lebih menguntungkan.
Dengan meningkatnya aliran modal ke dalam Amerika Serikat, maka nilai dollar akan menjadi semakin tinggi.    
Walalupun perekonomian Amerika Serikat berada dalam kondisi yang lebih baik dibandingkan kebanyakan negara maju lainnya, perekonomiannya masih belum cukup kuat untuk menahan dampak dollar yang jauh lebih kuat, karena hal tersebut akan menurunkan daya saing Amerika Serikat di tingkat internasional – dan prospek ekonomi Amerika Serikat yang lebih luas.
Resiko ini diperparah dengan adanya prospek bahwa dampak ekonomi dari dollar yang lebih kuat akan membuat pemerintahan Trump untuk benar-benar melaksanakan retorika proteksionisme, yang mempunyai potensi untuk melemahkan pasar dan kepercayaan dari pelaku bisnis dan, dalam skenario yang lebih buruk, mungkin akan memicu balasan dari mitra dagang besar Amerika Serikat.       
Agar rencana ekonomi Trump dapat mencapai tujuannya, negara-negara penting – khususnya, Jerman (negara dengan ekonomi terbesar dan paling berpengaruh di Eropa) dan Tiongkok serta Jepang (negara dengan ekonomi kedua dan ketiga terbesar) – harus mendorong penyesuaian kebijakan yang mendukung pertumbuhan.
Negara-negara ini harus dengan cepat melaksanakan reformasi struktural yang dapat meningkatkan pertumbuhan untuk mendukung stimulus moneter.
Jerman, khususnya, harus menerapkan kebijakan fiskal yang lebih longgar dan bersikap lebih lunak terhadap pengurangan hutang langsung kepada Yunani.  
Tapi sayangnya bagi Trump, saat ini negara-negara lain tampaknya masih belum siap untuk menerapkan pergantian kebijakan yang menyeluruh.
Oleh karena itu, disamping menerapkan rencana yang mendukung pertumbuhan di dalam negeri, anggota tim ekonomi Trump yang baru dipilih harus melakukan kontak langsung dengan Jerman, Tiongkok, dan Jepang untuk meningkatkan koordinasi kebijakan internasional.         
Jerman, Tiongkok, dan Jepang mempunyai alasan yang kuat untuk menerima pendekatan tersebut.
Hal ini dikarenakan mereka tidak mendapatkan keuntungan dari ekspansi moneter pada saat ini; resiko kerugian lebih lanjut dan konsekuensi lainnya akan meningkat; dan reformasi struktural yang mendukung pembangunan masih belum dilakukan.
Lebih jauh lagi, membantu Amerika Serikat untuk mencapai pertumbuhan yang sehat dan berkelanjutan akan membawa keuntungan secara tidak langsung terhadap ekonomi kedua negara tersebut.
Hal ini juga menghindari skenario dimana Pemerintahan Trump mengancam untuk melakukan tindakan proteksionisme karena tekanan politik, sehingga meningkatkan resiko perang dagang yang akan merugikan semua pihak.    
Meskipun ada ketidakpastian dalam pemerintahan Trump, satu hal yang pasti, setidaknya di atas kertas: Trump mempunyai posisi yang kuat untuk meningkatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi Amerika Serikat.
Namun, dia dan timnya harus menghilangkan potensi hambatan internasional untuk mencapai kesuksesan. 
Financial Scarcity Amid Plenty
MILAN – With interest rates at all-time lows and central banks buying everything that moves, the world is awash with credit.
Yet, paradoxically, a dangerous shortage of international liquidity is putting the global economy at risk.
“International liquidity” refers to high-quality assets accepted around the world for paying import bills and servicing foreign debts. These are the same assets that central banks use when intervening in foreign-exchange markets.
They serve as reliable stores of value for international investors.
They provide pricing benchmarks in financial markets. And they are widely accepted as collateral for cross-border loans.
The key difference between these international assets and liquid assets in general, then, is that only the former are accepted in a large number of different countries and regularly used in transactions between them.
The single most important form of international liquidity is, of course, US government bonds, which are held by banks, firms, and other countries’ governments.
More generally, international liquidity comprises the liabilities of OECD countries’ central banks (their “high-powered money”), those countries’ AAA-rated and AA-rated central-government bonds, the debt securities of supranational organizations like the World Bank and regional development banks, and gold in official and private hands.
But add them up and you immediately come to a startling conclusion. International liquidity has plummeted from nearly 60% of global GDP in 2009 to barely 30% today.
This change is due, equally, to downgrades in the ratings of heavily indebted crisis countries’ government bonds, which make them unattractive for use in international transactions, and the inelasticity of other sources of supply.
Observers are perplexed by why global trade, having long grown faster than world GDP, is now expanding more slowly. They are also struggling to understand an unprecedented decline in global capital flows.
A shortage of international liquidity, by making it harder to finance and settle these cross-border transactions, is one explanation.
Urging the US government to issue more debt is no solution; doing so would only threaten rating downgrades and make foreign investors reluctant to hold US Treasury bonds.
Alternatively, one could urge crisis countries whose bonds have lost their investment-grade status to repair their finances so that these securities are again attractive for financing international transactions.
But financial strengthening takes time even for the most committed government, as any Greek official can tell you.
Can privately-issued obligations – high-grade corporate bonds, for example – supplement official forms of international liquidity?
This question dates back to the 1990s, when observers quaintly worried that the US government, by running surpluses, might retire its entire stock of debt.
It turned out that central banks and governments, in particular, were reluctant to hold private-label securities, even when these instruments had investment-grade ratings.
The reason is simple: Privately-issued assets without the backing of a government with the power of the purse might look safe in normal times; but, following a shock, they could quickly be reassessed as risky.
Others suggest that the International Monetary Fund could augment the supply of international liquidity by issuing Special Drawing Rights.
SDRs are accounting units made up of US dollars, British pounds, euros, Japanese yen, and Chinese renminbi. They can be credited to the accounts of IMF member countries, which are obliged to accept them in cross-border transactions under the Fund’s Articles of Agreement.
Voilà: problem solved.
Or not.
There are no private markets in SDRs.
To use them, a holder has to exchange them for, say, dollars in a transaction with the US government.
As a result, no additional liquidity is created.
The corresponding amount of dollar currency or deposits is simply transferred from one set of hands to another – from the US Treasury to the foreign holder.
Meanwhile, the world as a whole has gained no additional liquid resources.
Things would be different if, instead of allocating SDRs to governments, the IMF could sell them directly to central banks like the Fed, which, in return, would provide the Fund with additional dollars, which the Fund could then distribute among its members.
But while this is a neat solution in principle, the Fed and its political masters would surely be reluctant to cede control of the money printing press in practice.
Probably the most practical solution is to permit the IMF to borrow on private financial markets and use the proceeds to issue additional SDRs.
With member governments collectively guaranteeing its obligations, its bonds would be as good as gold.
To be sure, for their guarantee to be credible, members would have to commit to recapitalizing the Fund if it ever took losses on its loans. But, then, nothing is free.
Globalization’s benefits are sometimes exaggerated, but there have been important benefits.
Failure to address the international liquidity problem could jeopardize all that has been accomplished.
International Norms in Cyberspace
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, the Netherlands hosted the Global Conference on Cyberspace 2015, which brought together nearly 2,000 government officials, academics, industry representatives, and others.
I chaired a panel on cyber peace and security that included a Microsoft vice president and two foreign ministers.
This “multi-stakeholder” conference was the latest in a series of efforts to establish rules of the road to avoid cyber conflict.
The capacity to use the Internet to inflict damage is now well established.
Many observers believe the American and Israeli governments were behind an earlier attack that destroyed centrifuges at an Iranian nuclear facility.
Some say an Iranian government attack destroyed thousands of Saudi Aramco computers.
Russia is blamed for denial-of-service attacks on Estonia and Georgia.
And just last December, US President Barack Obama attributed an attack on Sony Pictures to the North Korean government.
Until recently, cyber security was largely the domain of a small community of computer experts.
When the Internet was created in the 1970s, its members formed a virtual village; everyone knew one another, and together they designed an open system, paying little attention to security.
Then, in the early 1990s, the World Wide Web emerged, growing from a few million users then to more than three billion today.
In little more than a generation, the Internet has become the substrate of the global economy and governance worldwide.
Several billion more human users will be added in the next decade, as will tens of billions of devices, ranging from thermostats to industrial control systems (the “Internet of Things”).
All of this burgeoning interdependence implies vulnerabilities that governments and non-governmental actors can exploit.
At the same time, we are only beginning to come to terms with the national-security implications of this.
Strategic studies of the cyber domain resemble nuclear strategy in the 1950s: analysts are still not clear about the meaning of offense, defense, deterrence, escalation, norms, and arms control.
The term “cyber war” is used very loosely for a wide range of behaviors, ranging from simple probes, website defacement, and denial of service to espionage and destruction.
In this, it reflects dictionary definitions of “war,” which include any organized effort to “stop or defeat something that is viewed as dangerous or bad” (for example, “war on drugs”).
A more useful definition of cyber war is any hostile action in cyberspace that amplifies or is equivalent in effect to major physical violence.
Determining whether an action meets that criterion is a decision that only a country’s political leaders can make.
There are four major categories of cyber threats to national security, each with a different time horizon and (in principle) different solutions: cyber war and economic espionage, which are largely associated with states, and cyber crime and cyber terrorism, which are mostly associated with non-state actors.
The highest costs currently stem from espionage and crime, but the other two may become greater threats over the next decade than they are today.
Moreover, as alliances and tactics evolve, the categories may increasingly overlap.
During the Cold War, ideological competition limited US-Soviet cooperation, but both sides’ awareness of nuclear destructiveness led them to develop a crude code of conduct to avoid military confrontation.
These basic rules of prudence included no direct fighting, no first use of nuclear weapons, and crisis communication, such as the Moscow-Washington hotline and the Accidents Measures and Incidents at Sea agreements.
The first formal arms-control agreement was the 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty, which can be considered mainly an environmental treaty.
The second major agreement was the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which aimed at limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.
The US and the Soviet Union perceived both agreements as positive-sum games, because they involved nature or third parties.
Similarly, the most promising areas for early international cooperation on securing cyberspace are problems posed by third parties such as criminals and terrorists.
Russia and China have sought a treaty for broad United Nations oversight of the Internet.
Though their vision of “information security” could legitimize authoritarian governments’ censorship, and is therefore unacceptable to democratic governments, it may be possible to identify and target behaviors that are illegal everywhere.
Limiting all intrusions would be impossible, but one could start with cyber crime and cyber terrorism.
Major states would have an interest in limiting damage by agreeing to cooperate on forensics and controls.
Of course, historical analogies are imperfect.
Obviously, cyber technology is very different from nuclear technology, particularly because non-governmental actors can exploit it much more easily.
Nonetheless, some institutions, both formal and informal, already govern the basic functioning of the Internet.
The US wisely plans to strengthen the non-governmental Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) by having it supervise the Internet “address book.”
There is also the Council of Europe’s 2001 Convention on Cybercrime, with Interpol and Europol facilitating cooperation among national police forces.
And a UN Group of Government Experts has been analyzing how international law relates to cyber security.
It is likely to take longer to conclude agreements on contentious issues such as cyber intrusions for purposes like espionage and preparing the battlefield.
Nonetheless, the inability to envisage an overall cyber arms-control agreement need not prevent progress on some issues now.
International norms tend to develop slowly.
It took two decades in the case of nuclear technology.
The most important message of the recent Dutch conference was that massive cyber vulnerability is now nearing that point.
The Olympics’ Lesser Gods
BERLIN – The Summer Olympic Games are in full swing in Rio.
Every time the world’s top athletes gather for the Games, people everywhere have the opportunity not just to root for their countries, but also to become engrossed by stories of sacrifice and success, of broken bones and broken records.
Beyond the incredible feats of athleticism are powerful triumphs of the spirit, like that of the Syrian refugee swimmer Yusra Mardini, who less than a year ago jumped into the Mediterranean to help push her broken-down dinghy, containing 19 other refugees, to safety in Greece.
In this sense, the Olympic Games are as much about inspiration as they are about competition.
But, thanks to the International Olympic Committee, the Games are also about something much darker.
In fact, the IOC – together with its national branches, as well as the associations representing particular sports – embodies some of the most prominent problems the world is facing today, from inequality to exploitation to sheer hypocrisy among our leaders.
Over the years, the IOC and its national branch organizations have been accused of everything from poor governance to corruption.
Most recently, a Washington Post analysis damningly depicted the chasm between the earnings of the executives who run the show and the athletes who make it.
Many, if not most, athletes perform for little or no money.
Sponsorships can provide funds, but they also include restrictive rules that limit athletes’ ability to raise more money for their training.
As the Olympic sailor Ben Barger noted, the money that the “Olympic Movement” produces “goes to executives first, then administrators, then coaches, and then athletes.”
So, for example, while IOC President Thomas Bach luxuriates rent-free in a lavish hotel suite in Switzerland, US Olympic medalist rower Megan Kalmoe lives close to the poverty line.
Such extremes cast a pall of exploitation over the whole affair.
And the exploitation is not only financial.
The IOC and its partners have a history of ignoring the perils that arise from the relationship between coaches and the young athletes they train – a relationship that has provided fertile ground for manipulation and abuse.
Coaches can use their position of authority to lead young athletes to start doping or to take advantage of them sexually.
As a recent Indianapolis Star report on US women’s gymnastics has revealed, such conduct is rampant, and the national federation overseeing the sport – an Olympic organization – has consistently failed to address it.
But the athletes are not the only ones the IOC disregards; the Committee is also apparently indifferent to how host cities and countries comes to be host cities and countries.
What exactly it takes to win an Olympic bid is fuzzy, though gifts, junkets, and wining and dining clearly factor into it.
Whether Tokyo’s winning bid for the 2020 Olympics was aided by payments to a company linked to the son of the disgraced former world athletics chief Lamine Diack is currently under investigation.
The process may be murky, but the results are clear. In Rio, tens of thousands of Brazilians were displaced to make room for Olympic infrastructure, some of which has been criticized for posing safety hazards.
There is something deeply jarring about the glittering new projects that sit cheek by jowl with the poverty of the favelas and the juxtaposition of extravagant ceremony and the depth of the political and economic crises facing Brazil.
The party goes on, while its host edges toward the abyss.
Clearly, the IOC’s priorities are badly skewed.
Can the Olympic Movement be redeemed?
The testimony of the runner Yuliya Stepanova was the key to exposing Russia’s state-run doping program.
The bad news is that the IOC simply ignored the World Anti-Doping Agency’s report on Russia’s official scheme and stopped well short of banning its national team.
As FIFA’s experience showed, once sponsors become concerned about their reputations, their interests shift.
Now that they have been revealed, the enrichment schemes – which benefit, above all, the sponsors, executives, and a couple of superstar Olympians – are hurting profits. So, too, will continuing to turn a blind eye to powerful countries’ efforts to cheat.
Sponsors must show themselves to be responsive and responsible, saving face by recalling the Olympic spirit.
The rule of law and ethics, built into the fabric of corporate governance, must now take center stage.
The Olympic Games reflect not just who we are, but also who we hope to be.
The system that underpins them has widened the gap between the two.
The IOC has become a monument to some of humanity’s worst tendencies – the greed, hypocrisy, and exploitation that have led so many to distrust institutions.
One hopes that the example of FIFA will help to mark a path to redemption for the IOC, and that the Olympic Movement’s governing body embarks upon it before the flame of what is worthy and inspiring about the Games is snuffed out.
The Trouble with International Policy Coordination
BOLOGNA – After a 30-year hiatus, international coordination of macroeconomic policy seems to be back on policymakers’ agendas.
The reason is understandable: growth remains anemic in most countries, and many fear the US Federal Reserve’s impending interest-rate hike.
Unfortunately, the reasons why coordination fell into abeyance are still with us.
The heyday of international policy coordination, from 1978 to 1987, began with a G-7 summit in Bonn in 1978 and included the 1985 Plaza Accord.
But doubts about the benefits of such cooperation persisted.
The Germans, for example, regretted having agreed to joint fiscal expansion at the Bonn summit, because reflation turned out to be the wrong objective in the inflation-plagued late 1970s.
Similarly, the Japanese came to regret the appreciated yen after the Plaza Accord succeeded in bringing down an overvalued dollar.
Moreover, emerging-market countries’ representation in global governance did not keep pace with the increasingly significant role of their economies and currencies.
These countries’ very success thus became an obstacle to policy coordination.
The effort to revive international coordination began in response to the 2008 global financial crisis.
The larger emerging-market countries acquired more representation when the G-20 succeeded the G-7 as the preeminent global economic grouping.
G-20 leaders agreed on coordinated expansionary policies at their London summit in April 2009.
Then they agreed in Seoul in 2010 to give emerging-market countries quota shares in the International Monetary Fund that would be more commensurate with their economic weight.
(The US Congress, to its shame, has yet to pass the necessary legislation.)
Since then, many calls for coordination have lamented the outbreak of “currency wars,” otherwise known as competitive depreciation – an old phenomenon that recalls the tit-for-tat devaluations of the 1930s.
Now, as then, the fear is that if all countries try to depreciate their currency to gain export competitiveness and boost their economies, all will fail.
This concern has been reflected, for example, in complaints about intervention by China and other emerging markets to prevent currency appreciation.
Likewise, successive rounds of quantitative easing by the US Federal Reserve in 2009-2014, the Bank of Japan since 2013, and the European Central Bank since earlier this year, resulted in depreciations of the dollar, yen, and euro, respectively.
The most recent set of calls for coordination arise from fears – articulated, for example, by Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India – that the Fed will not adequately take into account the adverse impact on emerging-market economies when it raises interest rates.
The US has led some international attempts to address competitive depreciation, including an agreement among G-7 ministers in February 2013 to refrain from foreign-exchange intervention and a November 2015 side agreement to the Trans-Pacific Partnership to address currency manipulation.
But critics are agitating for a stronger agreement backed up by the threat of trade sanctions.
Attempting to use game theory to interpret the various calls for coordination is revealing, though not in the way that game theorists assume.
The players often do not think they are playing the same game.
For example, when the US urges German fiscal stimulus – as at it did in Bonn in 1978, in London in 2009, and at the G-20’s Brisbane summit in 2014 – it has in mind the “locomotive game,” in which fiscal stimulus has positive “spillover effects” on its trading partners.
The global economy will do better if the major countries – each afraid to undertake fiscal expansion on its own, for fear of worsening its trade balance – agree to act together to pull it out of recession and up to speed.
Germans, by contrast, think they are playing a “discipline game.”
They view budget deficits as creating negative spillover effects for neighbors, owing, for example, to the moral hazard of bailouts.
Their idea of a cooperative equilibrium is the European Union’s 2013 “fiscal compact,” under which euro members agreed yet again to rules for limiting their budget deficits.
The most recent example of this “dialogue of the deaf” occurred in Europe, from January to July 2015.
Month after month, the Greek government and its eurozone partners sat at the board, one side thinking the game was checkers and the other thinking it was chess.
Interpretations vary no less when it comes to monetary policy.
Some believe that monetary expansion in one country shifts the trade balance against its partners, owing to the exchange-rate effect; others believe that any adverse effect on trade balances is offset by higher spending.
Some argue that the problem is competitive depreciation or too-low interest rates; others maintain that the real problem is overvalued currencies or too-high interest rates.
Some believe that the way to overcome competitive depreciation for good is to fix exchange rates, as the architects of the Bretton Woods arrangements did in 1944; others, including some US politicians today, advocate the opposite approach: an agreement against seeking to influence exchange rates at all.
Yes, regular meetings of officials can be useful.
Consultation can minimize surprises.
Exchanges of views might help narrow differences in perceptions.
But some calls for international coordination are less useful, particularly when the aim is to blame foreigners in order to distract attention from domestic constraints and disagreements.
Consider the Brazilian officials who coined the phrase “currency wars” in 2010.
Their country’s budget deficit was too large, causing its economy to overheat.
Private demand was going to be crowded out one way or another, if not via currency appreciation, then via higher interest rates.
Yet officials blamed the US and others for the strong real.
Likewise, US politicians’ ongoing efforts to ban currency manipulation in trade agreements may be an effort to scapegoat Asians for US workers’ stagnant real incomes.
Officials would often be better advised to improve their own policies, before they tell others what to do.
Otherwise, calls for international cooperation may do more harm than good.
The Rule of the Lawless
CAIRO – In one of his last essays, the late, great historian Tony Judt asked what we should have learned from the last century, a period in which so many soldiers and civilians died in conflict.
One important part of the answer, I think, is the critical importance of the rule of law, both domestically and internationally.
To be sure, there are many other things that are crucial to the good life in peaceful, open societies: freedom of speech, religion, and association, and the power to choose – and remove – your own government.
But nothing guarantees free societies' liberties as much as the application of the rule of law with equal force to the governed and the governing.
When I was a British cabinet minister and chairman of the Conservative Party, I had a legal adviser who was aptly named Mr. Maybe.
When I was taken to task for some infringement of administrative law or alleged excessive use of my legal powers, he would never be able to tell me how the courts would ultimately rule.
“Will we win this case?" I'd ask Mr. Maybe.
His reply was always conditional.
“You should win," he once said.
“But I cannot promise that you will."
Authoritarian governments find this a difficult concept to understand.
I recall negotiations with my Chinese counterpart when I was Governor of Hong Kong.
I was attempting to explain why the rule of law mattered so much to the territory's future, and I noted that when I was in the British government, the law applied to me just as much as to those I helped govern.
My interlocutor thought I was joking.
What the Chinese practice is rule by law – the law as defined by the Communist Party to its own advantage.
Consider China's ongoing anti-corruption campaign, for example.
It is plainly being used by President Xi Jinping and his ally in the Politburo, Wang Qishan, as a tool to target not just the corrupt, but those who are not part of Xi's faction of red princelings.
In Xi's hands, the law is an instrument for securing his political objectives.
Likewise, in Russia, President Vladimir Putin rules a state apparatus designed and run by elements of the country's old intelligence services and its new mafia.
The law is used to reward the regime's cronies and to penalize its critics, such as the businessman Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the activist Alexei Navalny.
Because neither Russia nor China apply the rule of law at home, it is unsurprising that they do not recognize its value in international affairs.
Indeed, Putin has breached one of the most fundamental principles of international law: that national borders may not be changed by force.
Indeed, he has made it a regular feature of Russian foreign policy, which is characterized by deceit, bullying, violence, and the desire to restore the empire that was dismembered after the collapse of communism.
Long before Russia's armed annexation of Crimea and its invasion of eastern Ukraine, the Kremlin played similar games when it engineered the secession of Georgia's South Ossetia and Abkhazia regions and propped up the bandit territory of Transnistria in Moldova.
And, given such blatant disregard for the international order, it is no surprise that Putin's agents have been implicated in the murder of at least one opponent on the streets of London.
Building on the Geneva Conventions on the laws of war and similar binding agreements, global rules were first institutionalized with the establishment of the United Nations.
But, above all, the international framework for managing global affairs was the creation of the United States.
What was remarkable about this framework was that its principal author, the major superpower of the day, accepted its authority.
As US President Harry Truman memorably put it, “We all have to recognize – no matter how great our strength – that we must deny ourselves the license to do always as we please."
In times when the international system has been under assault, only America has had the standing to provide renewed credibility to the rule of law.
Unfortunately, this may no longer be the case.
During President George W. Bush's administration, the US was willfully destructive of its global interests when it disregarded international law on issues like torture.
Those US politicians who regard international institutions as anti-American conspiracies are continuing the harm, costing their country much of its moral authority.
The picture is no brighter in Europe, where countries' willful neglect of their military capabilities has undermined their ability to enforce the rule of law when international mechanisms break down.
The UN Security Council, meanwhile, has become ineffectual, stymied by the great-power interests of China and Russia.
So it does nothing, even as Europe's borders are challenged, Ukrainian citizens are bombed in their homes by Russian troops, and a violent, bandit army ravages the greater Middle East, from the beaches of Libya to the borders of Iran.
After the massacres in Rwanda and Bosnia in the 1990s, world leaders once again solemnly declared, “Never again."
Today, Syrian, Iraqi, and now Egyptian citizens must be wondering what happened to that pledge.
In short, the growing, bloody challenges of the twenty-first century are to be confronted by a toothless UN, a morally weakened US, and a Europe well on the path toward disarmament.
If that prospect worries you, it should.
In the absence of a change of heart by our political leaders, the power of prayer may be our only recourse.
International Taxation and Global Development
NEW YORK – When it comes to funding development, taxes are perhaps the most critical piece of the puzzle.
But the system of taxing global profits is broken – and it is exacerbating inequality both within and across countries.
If the world is to make progress toward its goals of eradicating poverty and stemming rising inequality, the system must be reformed.
The biggest problem with the current system is that, by taxing the subsidiaries of multinational corporations as separate entities, it provides plenty of room for global companies to dodge their tax obligations.
The reform efforts by the OECD, acting at the request of the G-20, represent welcome attempts to address so-called “base erosion and profit shifting” (BEPS), but they do not go far enough.
The most significant deliverable of the OECD’s BEPS initiative lies in its new country-by-country reporting requirements, which force multinationals to provide aggregate information annually, in each jurisdiction where they do business, relating to the global allocation of income and taxes paid.
They must also provide information about which entities do business in each jurisdiction and the economic activities in which they engage.
But such reporting will apply only to entities with revenues above €750 million ($845 million) and will not be made public.
Furthermore, countries have to meet certain conditions to access the information – a structure that will not benefit most developing countries.
Yet developing countries have the most at stake.
Indeed, the International Monetary Fund recently reported that developing countries lose three times more of their corporate-tax revenue to BEPS activities than their developed counterparts.
According to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, such activities by multinationals – which represent one-third of the potential corporate-tax base in developing countries – result in annual losses of $100 billion.
Given the major role that tax revenues play in funding development efforts – providing two-thirds of the financing for the UN Millennium Development Goals, with official aid and private flows covering the rest – the bleeding must be stanched.
As world leaders gear up for this month’s Third International Conference on Financing for Development (FFD3) in Addis Ababa, where they will develop a strategy to fund the post-2015 global development agenda, a move toward a more efficient and equitable global tax system could not be more urgent.
That is why a group of public intellectuals from around the world has created the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation (ICRICT), which I chair.
We believe that the world has an unprecedented opportunity to bring about significant reform of the international corporate-taxation system that serves the global public interest, rather than national advantage.
To help induce world leaders to take advantage of this opportunity, the ICRICT has issued a set of recommendations for reform of the rules and institutions governing international corporate-taxation.
The proposals include a minimum corporate tax agreed by developed countries, and mechanisms to prevent multinationals from shifting their profits to subsidiaries in low-tax jurisdictions.
Moreover, in contrast to the OECD reforms, the ICRICT recommends public reporting by multinationals on taxes paid in all jurisdictions.
And, in the longer term, it calls for a transition to a system in which multinationals are taxed as one firm, with taxes allocated to the different countries in which they operate according to an agreed-upon formula.
A first step toward achieving these objectives would be the establishment of an intergovernmental body with the mandate and resources to push through much-needed tax reform, while promoting stronger tax cooperation among governments.
The decision about whether to establish such a body is an important feature of the FFD3 agenda.
Such a globally representative forum on taxation should not only serve as a venue for inter-governmental cooperation; it should also support a broader, more inclusive debate on tax reform.
For too long, such discussions have been the preserve of closed-door negotiations among governments and large corporations, with the topic considered too technical for the general public to understand.
Even now, many argue that including everyone in the discussion would result in politicization of the tax system, and that decisions should thus be left to the experts.
But taxation is inherently political, as it involves issues of equity, justice, and the common good.
Indeed, issues of taxation were at the heart of the creation of modern democratic parliaments.
An issue with such far-reaching consequences should not be debated in secrecy.
If world leaders are serious about reducing inequality and eradicating poverty, they must commit to creating a just and transparent tax system.
One hopes that this month in Addis Ababa, they take credible steps in that direction.
Inequality and the Internet
BERKELEY – The conclusion that America has become vastly more unequal over the past 35 years is beyond doubt.
Since 1979, the pattern has been clear: The richer you were, the far richer you have become.
And if you were poor, you probably stayed poor.
But the same period has also been an era of rapid technological change.
The United States is undergoing a third industrial revolution, an information-age upheaval that could be as momentous as its predecessors, which transformed society through the introduction of steam, iron, cotton, and machinery, and then internal combustion, electricity, and steel.
Today, nearly every resident of a developed country – and soon most of the rest of the world – can easily afford a smartphone, thereby gaining inexpensive access to a universe of human knowledge and entertainment that, until a generation ago, was far beyond the reach of all but the rich.
Is it possible that conventional measures of inequality and income vastly underestimate just how good we have it?
According to conventional economics, the answer, at first glance, seems to be no.
The calculations of economic growth that reveal growing inequality already take into account spending on telecommunications, information processing, and audiovisual entertainment.
Unless the benefits from information-age goods and services greatly outstrip what we spend on them, the wellbeing they provide will have already been accounted for.
But is that “unless” really so far-fetched?
When we invest in our wellbeing, we not only spend money to purchase goods and services; we allocate a portion of our free time to use them properly.
A movie ticket will not do you much good if you leave before the curtain rises.
Time, like money, is a scarce resource; and, because goods and services related to information require our attention, they are time-intensive.
Ever since Homer chanted his Iliad around the campfire after dark, we have been willing to pay dearly for stories, entertainment, and information.
The technology of the information age has given us the possibility to invest our time in ways that once only the most powerful could afford.
If, in the seventeenth century, you wanted to watch Macbeth in your house, you had to be named James Stuart, have William Shakespeare and his acting company on retainer, and have a full-sized theater in your royal palace.
We spend, on average, two hours a day with our audio-video devices.
Assume for a minute that the opportunities provided by the rollout of broadband Internet has at least doubled the utility – the pleasure – that we get during that time.
Is watching television on demand more rewarding than visiting a movie theater?
Is your Twitter stream more illuminating than a trip to a nearby library?
Are Facebook friends more valuable than, well, friends?
Whatever the answer to those questions, there is an even bigger wrinkle.
We do not consume goods and services in a vacuum.
Part of the pleasure we receive from them derives from a feeling that our status is rising relative to that of our peers.
The information age has not only provided us with new entertainment options; it has opened new vistas into our neighbors’ lifestyles – and what we have noticed is that some of them are getting much, much richer.
If I were to hazard a guess, I would say that, as a society, the benefits we have received from information-age technology have been neutralized by the envy and spite that results from living in a world that is ever more unequal.
Connectivity for All
OXFORD – Over the last decade, the number of new Internet users tripled.
But, though a large majority of the world’s population remains offline, the pace of expansion has slowed sharply in recent years.
Is the Internet revolution losing steam?
From 2005 to 2008, the number of Internet users increased at a compound annual rate of 15.1%, bringing the number of people online to some 2.7 billion.
But, according to a new report by&nbsp;McKinsey &amp; Company, the growth rate fell to 10.4% in 2010-2013.
Given the enormous economic benefits of connectivity, finding ways to provide Internet access to the world’s remaining four billion people should be a high priority.
Of course, that is easier said than done.
Around three-quarters of the unconnected – 3.4 billion people – live in just 20 countries.
In 2012, about 64% lived in rural areas, compared with only 24% of Internet users, while about half live below their country’s poverty line and median income.
Some 18% are older than 54, compared with about 7% of the online population, and roughly 28% are illiterate, whereas the literacy rate for Internet users is close to 100%.
Finally, women comprise 52% of the offline population and only 42% of the online population.
These groups face particularly high barriers to Internet connectivity, beginning with inadequate infrastructure, including poor mobile Internet coverage or network access and unreliable electricity supply.
Indeed, 1.1-2.8 billion people cannot get online via a mobile network, because their area lacks sufficient coverage.
Another barrier is affordability: Internet access is simply too costly for many low-income people.
Beyond the need to address insufficient competition, inadequate regulation, and high taxes on Internet-enabled devices and service plans, there is the fundamental challenge of supplying cost-effective access to the most remote regions.
In ten countries, largely in Africa and the Asia-Pacific region, fixed broadband prices exceed per capita GDP.
The third major barrier to Internet adoption is user capability.
The high level of illiteracy among those who remain offline often implies an inability not only to read and write, but also to use digital technology.
An estimated 43% of India’s unconnected citizens are illiterate.
Without technological solutions, such as user interfaces that feature text-to-speech and voice-recognition capabilities, people who have not attained basic language proficiency will struggle to engage with Internet content.
The lack of relevant local-language content may also limit use.
Making matters worse, misperceptions of the Internet – for example, that it is a security risk or solely for the wealthy – mean that many people will remain reluctant to use it, even if affordable access becomes available.
In many emerging economies, a lack of trust in the system has fueled resistance to doing business online.
The final barrier to Internet adoption is a lack of incentives.
As research by the Oxford Internet Institute on broadband in East Africa has shown, many poor people in rural areas may know little, if anything, about the Internet, or may not be offered it.
Given that tailoring content to such potential customers is expensive, Internet service providers are unlikely to do so without clear incentives like government support or high profit margins.
Advertisers are not interested in reaching such markets.
McKinsey has developed a new Internet Barriers Index that ranks 25 developed and developing countries on their performance in the face of these challenges.
The top five countries are the United States, Germany, South Korea, Japan, and Spain.
The bottom five are Nigeria, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Tanzania, and Ethiopia.
Nearly half of the world’s offline population lives in ten countries that face a significant struggle to overcome all four barriers.
In the bottom five countries in the McKinsey index, the average Internet penetration rate was only 15% in 2013.
The offline population was largely young and rural, with low literacy rates.
Five other countries – Egypt, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand – face medium to high barriers across the board, especially when it comes to infrastructure and incentives.
With an offline population of more than 1.4 billion people, these countries had an average Internet penetration rate of 19% in 2013.
Another 1.1 billion people live in countries where a single barrier – especially a lack of awareness of the Internet, weak purchasing power, or low levels of digital literacy – dominates.
Identifying the particular barriers affecting a country or region enables the development of effective solutions – not least because some barriers, such as awareness, are far cheaper to tackle than others, like infrastructure.
That is the purpose of the Internet Barriers Index.
By mapping the major social, political, and economic obstacles to Internet adoption, the index can help make efforts by governments and network and service providers as targeted and efficient as possible.
The imperative to address the formidable challenges to further expansion of Internet usage is clear.
Doing so would create considerable potential for economic growth.
Many governments have recognized this to some extent, setting ambitious goals for mobile Internet coverage, broadband infrastructure, and public Wi-Fi access.
But investment in infrastructure is not enough.
Only comprehensive, targeted, and nationally tailored strategies, backed by a strong commitment from policymakers, can bring the next one billion people online.
The Digital Transformation of Europe
SAN JOSE – Europe is on the cusp of an unprecedented technological transformation.
I call it the Internet of Everything: the penetration of the World Wide Web into the everyday aspects of our lives.
Wearable technology will tell us how well we are sleeping and whether we need to exercise.
Sensors in the street will help us avoid traffic jams and find parking.