BERKELEY – At the end of 2008, as the financial crisis hit with full force, the countries of the world divided into two groups: those whose leaders decided to muddle through, and China.
Only the Chinese took seriously Milton Friedman’s and John Maynard Keynes’s argument that, when faced with the possibility of a depression, the first thing to do is use the government to intervene strategically in product and financial markets to maintain the flow of aggregate demand.
Then, at the start of 2010, the countries that had been muddling through divided into two groups: those where government credit was unimpaired continued to muddle through, while countries like Greece and Ireland, where government credit was impaired, had no choice but to pursue austerity and try to restore fiscal confidence.
Today, another split is occurring, this time between those countries that are continuing to muddle through and Great Britain.
Even though the British government’s credit is still solid gold, Prime Minister David Cameron’s administration is about to embark on what may be the largest sustained fiscal contraction ever: a plan to shrink the government budget deficit by 9% of GDP over the next four years.
So far, China is doing the best in dealing with the financial crisis.
The mudding-through countries lag behind.
And those where confidence in the government’s liabilities has cracked, forcing the government into austerity, are doing worst.
Now the question is: will Britain – where confidence in the government has not cracked and where austerity is not forced but chosen – join the others at the bottom and serve as a horrible warning?
Cameron’s government used to claim that its policies would produce a boom by bringing a visit from the Confidence Fairy that would greatly reduce long-term interest rates and cause a huge surge of private investment spending.
Now it appears to have abandoned that claim in favor of the message that failure to cut will produce disaster.
As Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne put it:
“The emergency Budget in June was the moment when fiscal credibility was restored.
Our market interest rates fell to near-record lows.
Our country's credit rating was affirmed.
And the IMF went from issuing warnings to calling our Budget ‘essential’ Now we must implement some of the key decisions required by that Budget.
To back down now and abandon our plans would be the road to economic ruin.”
But if you ask the government’s supporters why there is no alternative to mammoth cuts in government spending and increases in taxes, they sound confused and incoherent.
Or perhaps they are merely parroting talking points backed by little thought.
What is so bad about continuing to run large budget deficits until the economic recovery is well established?
Yes, the debt will be higher and interest on that debt will have to be paid, but the British government can borrow now at extraordinarily favorable terms.
When interest rates are low and you can borrow on favorable terms, the market is telling you to pull government spending forward into the present and push taxes back into the future.
Advocates of austerity counter that confidence in the government’s credit might collapse, and the government might have to roll over its debt on unfavorable terms.
Worse, the government might be unable to refinance its debt at all, and then would have to cut spending and raise taxes sharply.
But that is what the British government is doing now.
How is the possibility that a government might be forced into radical fiscal consolidation an argument for taking that step immediately, under no duress and before the recovery is well established?
To be sure, back in the 1970’s, confidence in the credit of the British government collapsed, forcing it to borrow from the IMF so that spending could be cut and taxes raised gradually rather than abruptly.
But that is why Keynes and Harry Dexter White established the IMF in the first place.
An IMF program restores confidence in the fiscal soundness of governments that markets distrust. The lending allows the necessary medium- and long-term spending cuts and tax increases to be undertaken at a more appropriate time.
Borrowing from the IMF may be humiliating for government officials.
But businesses establish lines of credit for future contingencies all the time, and they don’t think there is anything humiliating about resorting to them when those contingencies come to pass.
And what, really, is so humiliating about borrowing from your own citizens?
Britons, as Osborne knows, are willing to lend to their government on an enormous scale – and on terms that are more generous than those on offer from the IMF.
And, if one is worried that the British people might change their minds, well, the princes of Wall Street or the barons of Canary Wharf or US Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner would certainly be willing to sell derivatives contracts to protect Britain against exchange-rate risk for the next several years.
To borrow from your own people is especially non-humiliating when your economy is in depression, when the interest rates at which you can borrow are at near-record lows, and when every economic argument cries out for spending now and taxing later.
What is humiliating is to have a government that cuts a half-million public-sector jobs and causes the loss of another half-million jobs in the private sector.
In an economy of 30 million jobs, that translates into an increase in the unemployment rate of 3.5 percentage points – at a time when no sources of expanding private-sector demand exist to pick up the slack.
Britain’s finest hour this is not.
Hybrid Humans
SINGAPORE – The election of a new pope always sparks debate about the tension between tradition and modernity in the Catholic Church.
Perhaps more interesting is the ongoing modernization of the language in which those debates are conducted: Latin.
While Catholic doctrines have evolved slowly, the Latin vocabulary has been expanding steadily in recent years, reflecting the surge of neologisms (new words, usages, and expressions) that has accompanied technology’s increasingly prominent role in people’s daily lives.
The addition of terms like telephonium albo televisifico coniunctum (video telepresence) and usus agonisticus medicamenti stupecfactivi (performance-enhancing drugs) has helped to spark a revival of Latin education in the West, despite growing competition from Mandarin.
Likewise, the English language’s ability to produce and absorb neologisms is an important reason why it will endure as the world’s lingua franca.
The Oxford English Dictionary, now updated quarterly, revised more than 1,900 entries in its March 2011 edition, and added new terms, such as “subdomain,” “dataveillance,” and “geotagging.”
Humans use language to make sense not only of specific concepts, but also of larger scientific, social, and historical movements.
With technology changing the face – and pace – of such movements, devising terms that capture its far-reaching impact on human life is becoming increasingly important.
For example, according to Nobel laureate Robert Fogel, medical and nutritional advances since the Industrial Revolution have accelerated and directed the evolutionary process, making modern humans a fundamentally different species from Homo sapiens.
In 2011, bio-technology investor Juan Enriquez coined the term Homo evolutis to denote this shift.
But do widely accepted labels like “Information Age” and “knowledge-based society” adequately describe the global movement that is underway?
Technology-fueled development is causing historical eras to become cumulative, rather than linear.
As the world enters the Information Age, most countries are still experiencing the Agricultural and Industrial Ages.
In order to describe emerging socio-technological patterns – including the merging of scientific disciplines and the fusion of human life with progress in these fields – the current era should be called the “Hybrid Age.”
It is an age, most tellingly, of proliferating new terminology.
For example, we now have “synthetic biology” to describe a hybrid of biology and chemical engineering in which scientists create biological systems that are not found in nature.
Man-made cells can now be inserted into humans.
In 2010, the biologist Craig Venter created the first fully synthetic and self-replicating cell.
In another hybrid discipline, “molecular computing,” organic or artificial enzymes are programmed to conduct complex calculations faster than silicon chips.
The field could provide an avenue, alongside 3D silicon chips, for maintaining – or even accelerating – the pace of Moore’s Law, which states that the number of transistors on the integrated circuits used by computers doubles every two years.
Humans’ biological hybridization with technology also requires new vocabulary.
At the MIT Media Lab, double-amputee Hugh Herr has pioneered “biomechatronics,” which combines biology, mechanical engineering, and electronics to invent efficient, lifelike prosthetics.
Some believe that Herr’s work heralds an age of bionic superhumans.
Moving from muscles to the mind, brain-computer interface technologies have advanced significantly in recent years, giving rise to “neuro-prosthetics,” which has already enabled paraplegics to navigate a computer mouse with their thoughts and monkeys to operate a giant robotic arm.
Scientists are now working to pinpoint the neuro-chemistry of thought and emotions so accurately that new technologies could be developed to allow humans to communicate them silently.
With scientists working tirelessly to refine such technologies, the public must become more knowledgeable about their socioeconomic implications.
Neither of the existing paradigms for assessing individual potential – intelligence quotient and emotional quotient – can assess a person’s ability to compete against the growing “robo-collar” workforce.
Industrial robots are now displacing Foxconn workers making iPhones in China; Intuitive Surgical’s da Vinci robot reduces the need for surgical assistants in operating rooms; and the Engkey robot teaching English in South Korea may gradually fill the 30,000 teaching positions that Westerners there currently occupy.
Increasingly sophisticated algorithms are replacing currency traders, paralegals, and even news reporters.
Competing with the increasingly competent robotic labor force will require people to enhance their “technology quotient.”
Societies and governments must drive this shift by boosting technology’s role in both the form and content of educational curricula.
Improved technological capacity would not only help citizens to compete for jobs; it would help countries thrive in the new global environment of increasing hybridization.
The rise and fall of empires has long been considered a geopolitical matter, based on factors such as military assets, resource endowments, and population size.
Likewise, geo-economic calculations of relative GDP, terms of trade, and foreign-exchange reserves carry significant weight in determining the balance of power.
But all of these metrics fail to account for factors like research and development, technological innovation, and commercialization, which are now more indicative of future success than nuclear arsenals or economic size.
Indeed, the Hybrid Age is shaping up to be an era of “geo-technology.”
The stakes of geo-technological competition are higher than ever.
Cyberwarfare is proving to be as threatening to political and economic stability as conventional military conflict.
At the same time, technologies like water filtration systems, drought-resistant seeds, renewable energy, and the Internet have the potential to fulfill the basic needs of a crowded planet better than any empire could.
Many historical periods have been named after imperial hegemons: Pax Romana, Pax Britannica, Pax Americana.
Some believe that, with the rise of China, Pax Sinica is next.
But these eras have been characterized by conquest and exploitation, not peace.
Perhaps what comes next will be a fundamental break from the past, a truly modern era of Pax Technologica.
The Idle Fireman
WASHINGTON, DC – One of the IMF’s main purposes is to “give confidence to members by making [its] general resources temporarily available to them.”
However, its members are increasingly facing capital volatility, and there is a sharp decline in the use of Fund resources.
Ironically, this is happening at a moment when the Fund should want to be lending: it is awash in liquidity and has almost no sources of income other than repayment of its loans.
If the IMF had to live up to private-sector standards, it would create a new instrument that would meet members’ potential demand for short-term liquidity.
Alas, there is no urge to do this.
Until a year ago, the IMF used to congratulate itself for running out of clients.
An idle fireman looked desirable.
But the situation is different now.
There is a fire out there, but no one is calling the fire brigade.
Only Georgia, not surprisingly, is asking for help.
Potential borrowers have been accumulating massive reserves and pooling them regionally to protect themselves against shocks and speculative capital, but not at the Fund’s urging.
On the contrary, accumulating reserves beyond a certain threshold carries a high opportunity cost and suggests the need to let the currency appreciate.
The implication is that potential borrowers are not absorbing as many imports as they could and not relying, as they should, on the multilateral pooling of reserves that the Fund is meant to use to “give confidence” to its members.
So what’s wrong with the fireman?
The traditional model of trading financial support for conditionality does not bode well with emerging economies that, despite having strong macroeconomic fundamentals, still need help to cope with external shocks.
“Giving confidence” to this sort of customer requires the capacity to provide quick, automatic, meaningful, and front-loaded financial support; otherwise, accumulating reserves and pooling them in regional agreements will still look like a more reliable option.
But the IMF is in no position to provide such support.
Its financial support is limited to a percentage of members’ quotas, which do not reflect their potential borrowing needs.
Unfortunately, a recently approved reform, despite being marketed as a strategic improvement, has only benefited a few, and far too little.
According to the “new quota formula,” members that issue international reserve currencies still appear to be those with more “potential need to borrow” from the IMF.
This is laughable.
So this brings us to the need to increase “normal” access limits.
In 2003-2004, arguably the last period in which the Fund had to provide meaningful assistance to members, approximately 80% of the volume of financial support was provided on an “exceptional” basis, defined as more than 300% of quotas.
Needless to say, “exceptional” access comes at exceptional financial and political costs.
No wonder, then, that members rely more on their capacity to accumulate reserves than on the Fund’s ability to provide opportune, affordable, and reliable financial support.
The Fund has no instrument to provide short-term liquidity to emerging markets facing capital volatility.
In today’s crisis, we have seen some agile and creative reactions from central bankers in advanced economies.
They stepped beyond their mandates to provide quick financial support to investment banks, mostly by supplying private banks with liquid instruments in exchange for longer-term and less liquid assets.
Why couldn’t the Fund do the same thing for central banks from developing countries and emerging economies?
If the IMF is to provide short-term liquidity to members in need, a crucial question that must be resolved is whether such financial assistance should be available only to those with strong macroeconomic fundamentals.
Overly strict qualification criteria are likely to deter members that may need this kind of support most from applying for it; but overly loose criteria may stigmatize potential users. 
The Fund could solve this dilemma by applying an insurance-like approach.
All members would, in principle, be eligible, but premium rates would be differentiated and established on the basis of quantitative criteria.
The scale of premium rates would need to be transparent but the actual cost of access for individual members would remain strictly confidential (as in any insurance contract).
Admittedly, this would require departing from the Fund’s traditional lending in exchange for conditionality.
It could also require some adjustments to the Fund’s Charter, but so what?  The recently approved reforms already require changes to the IMF’s “Articles of Agreement.”
Some argue that furnishing members with rapid and front-loaded liquidity insurance would encourage irresponsible policies or reckless borrowing.
Admittedly, it could help members cope better with volatility and, therefore, be more open to inflows of short-tern capital, but this need not result in bad policies.
Given the Northern Rock and Bear Stearns bailouts, overplaying the “moral hazard” argument here sounds hypocritical.
If the IMF fireman remains idle, it is not because of a lack of fires, but because neighbors, rather than relying on the fire brigade, are protecting themselves.
This undermines the IMF’s relevance and is at the root of the early repayments that have left the Fund with almost no income.
The IMF must change this.
“Normal access” should be raised to levels that are concomitant with members’ potential need to borrow, and a new liquidity line to provide reliable and meaningful front-loaded financial support should be created.
This would make emerging markets and developing country members regard reserve accumulation as expensive and extravagant, thereby helping to liberate those resources to help the world economy overcome today’s crisis.
The Ill Wind from the West
NEW DELHI – At the nadir of the financial crisis four years ago, many Asian governments came to believe that robust growth had led to a near-“decoupling” of their economies from the West and its ongoing problems.
But now, as the eurozone teeters and America’s recovery weakens, Asia, too, is showing signs of faltering.
Some Asian politicians will, quite conveniently, blame the West for any softening of growth.
But their failure to pursue necessary structural reforms and economic opportunities is equally responsible, if not more so, for the region’s growing travails.
Consider India.
According to the forecaster International Market Assessment, “capital flows that have dried up are not…a reflection of global market conditions,” but of a loss in confidence among investors, arising principally from fiscal mismanagement, which has led to “price instability, falling investments and eventually a decline in…growth.”
With the “government in dormancy,” IMA concludes, “India is quickly losing the plot.”
India’s situation is indeed worrisome.
Double-digit food-price inflation has been accompanied by debate about the share of Indians living below the poverty line, and, indeed, where the poverty line should be drawn.
Official statistics use an average daily income of 32 rupees ($0.57) a day to separate the merely poor from the desperately impoverished.
Instead of addressing the central paradox of contemporary Indian society – poverty amidst plenty – India’s government has buried its head in the sand.
It proclaims bold reforms, which it then repudiates before the ink is dry.
Even worse, growing official corruption is sapping private-sector dynamism.
But India is not alone in stumbling.
China, too, is fearful of a growth slowdown and rising wage inflation.
In response, China’s central bank is lowering interest rates to spur domestic investment, and the resulting depreciation of the renminbi’s exchange rate has helped to keep exports afloat.
But China’s import figures for the first half of this year have virtually flat-lined, suggesting that Chinese firms are not investing in new equipment – and thus that China’s economy may hit the doldrums soon.
Although their political systems are mirror opposites, there are striking parallels in some of China’s and India’s deepest structural problems.
Both countries undertook reforms – China in the 1980’s and India in the 1990’s – that decentralized decision-making, and both progressed rapidly.
India was compelled by its democracy to pursue a politically decentralizing route, yet much economic decision-making authority remained embedded in New Delhi’s ossified bureaucracy, retarding growth.
By contrast, China achieved economic decentralization, but preserved centralized political power, transferring economic-management responsibilities largely to provincial officials, which has created its own imbalances.
Thus, even as China is compelled to shift from exports to domestic consumption in order to sustain growth, India continues to rely on inward investment, exports of services and raw materials, and lower fiscal and current-account deficits to maintain its growth course.
But its most damaging deficit is to be found in governance, as is true of China, where the Bo Xilai scandal has exposed the pathological underside of China’s vaunted technocratic leadership.
Elsewhere in Asia, structural problems are also mounting.
In Vietnam, inflation has hovered near 20% or more, with the government seemingly unwilling to embrace deeper reforms.
Thailand’s interminable political imbroglio has left its economy at stall speed; the reformist zeal of Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has petered out in his second term following the departure of Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati; and Japan seems to remain in a state of suspended animation.
Europe’s malaise, and the resulting rise of populist politics, suggests that Asia’s governments can ill afford to sit on their growth laurels.
Indeed, they should heed a recent comment by Oxford University’s Pavlos Eleftheriadis about a Greek electorate “livid at being led by those who dishonestly caused the problem.”
Indeed, according to Eleftheriadis, tax collectors in Greece today are confronted by bull-whip-wielding citizens.
That sounds a lot like India nowadays.
There are bold ideas in circulation in Asia that could sustain and promote growth.
The recent decision by the leaders of China, Japan, and South Korea to launch talks on a trilateral free-trade agreement among, respectively, the world’s second, third, and 12th largest economies is certainly audacious, though reaching an agreement between two of Asia’s great democracies and China will likely make the failed Doha Round of global trade talks seem simple.
But India is nowhere to be seen in all of this.
Indeed, with Burma’s economy opening to the world, India ought to be taking the lead in seeking to stimulate South Asian growth and economic integration, for only by doing so can it anchor its neighbor within the region.
Yet, when Prime Minister Manmohan Singh recently visited Burma, he had little to offer aside from the usual investment proposals.
A bold initiative toward Bangladesh would also yield a strongly positive impact on growth, and yet nothing is happening there, either.&nbsp;
With the major emerging countries, particularly China and India, already in trouble, Asia can expect to be hit hard if the euro sinks.
Before that happens, governments must seize the policy initiative, thereby strengthening global financial markets’ confidence in Asia’s ability to withstand the ill wind from the West.
A Metaphor for Obama
NEW HAVEN – As US President Barack Obama begins his second term, he needs a simple way to express his vision and policies for the economy – a metaphor around which support for his policies might crystallize, thereby boosting his administration’s political effectiveness.
So, what makes a successful metaphor work?
The 2008 Obama campaign used the slogan “Change we can believe in.”
But “change” is not a metaphor for a new government: it does not stand for any policies.
Nor does “Hope” or “Yes we can!”
The 2012 Obama campaign used the one-word slogan “Forward!”
Once again, it signifies nothing about policies or their underlying philosophy.
Every politician, whether liberal or conservative, wants to move forward, not backward.
Obama’s slogans are examples of “dead metaphors”: they are not part of an overall conceptual scheme.
By contrast, in the 1930’s, President Franklin Roosevelt used a metaphor that remains very much alive today.
The idea of a “new deal” was conceived during his first presidential election campaign in 1932, though at the time he was still very vague about what the term stood for.
Apparently, Roosevelt, or his speechwriters, borrowed it from A New Deal, a book by Stuart Chase that was published in 1932 and adapted the same year into a cover story for the magazine The New Republic.
Chase described his new deal in general terms as “the drastic and progressive revision of the economic structure, avoiding an utter break with the past.”
And, while the book’s specific policy proposals bear little resemblance to Roosevelt’s subsequent actions, the title had an intrinsic appeal that he must have recognized.
The New Deal created an image of a commercial transaction, like the buyout of a company or an incentive package for executives – something that contracting parties bargain over and agree to.
It is not imposed.
By calling it a “deal,” Roosevelt made clear that the plan was not anti-business: it sounded like an offer to work, to participate, to seize an opportunity.
And, because deals can be good or bad, fair or exploitative, the word “new” provided metaphoric depth, suggesting that Roosevelt’s deal was better, fairer, and more attractive.
The metaphor, overwhelmingly endorsed by voters, stood for Roosevelt’s mandate to fix the ailing economy along lines that were innovative but still essentially capitalist.
Some of his administration’s initiatives, such as the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission, seemed anti-business to some at the time, but have long since been accepted as a boon to competition and dynamism by hemming in unfair or manipulative behavior.
Metaphors, it turns out, are not just words.
Modern neuroscience is revealing that metaphors are intrinsic to creativity, for their use activates diverse regions of the brain associated with their multiple meanings.
Good metaphors are those that set off the right intuitive connections in our brains.
For example, much progress in understanding sound and light resulted when scientists imagined them in terms of sea waves.
Formulating a good metaphor for Obama’s second term is itself a task for intuitive creative thought that entails rethinking what he will propose in his second term.
A good metaphor might embody the idea of an “inclusive economy.”
The word “inclusive” resonates strongly: Americans do not want more government per se; rather, they want the government to get more people involved in the market economy.
Opinion polls show that, above all, what Americans want are jobs – the beginning of inclusion.
The parallel to Chase’s book today is the 2012 bestseller Why Nations Fail by the economist Daron Acemoglu and the political scientist James Robinson.
Acemoglu and Robinson argue that in the broad sweep of history, political orders that include everyone in the economic process are more likely to succeed in the long term.
The time seems ripe for that idea, and it fits with the triumph of inclusiveness symbolized by Obama himself.
But another step in metaphor-building is needed to encapsulate the idea of economic inclusion.
The biggest successes of Obama’s first term concerned economic inclusion.
The Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) is providing more people with access to health care – and bringing more people to privately-issued insurance – than ever before in the United States.
The Dodd-Frank financial reforms created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, so that privately issued financial products would serve the public better, and created incentives for derivatives to be traded on public markets.
And he signed the JOBS Act, proposed by his Republican opponents, which aims to create crowdfunding Web sites that allow small investors to participate in start-up ventures.
We have not reached the pinnacle of economic inclusion.
There are hundreds of other possibilities, including improved investor education and financial advice, more flexible mortgages, better kinds of securitization, more insurance for a broader array of life’s risks, and better management of career risks.
Much more progress toward comprehensive public futures and derivatives markets would help, as would policies to encourage the emerging world to participate more in the US economy.
(Indeed, the inclusion metaphor is essentially global in spirit; had Obama used it in the past, his economic policies might have been less protectionist.)
The right metaphor would spin some of these ideas, or others like them, into a vision for America’s future that, like the New Deal, would gain coherence as it is transformed into reality.
On January 29, Obama will give the first State of the Union address of his new term.
He should be thinking about how to express – vividly and compellingly – the principles that have guided his choices so far, and that set a path for America’s future.
The IMF as Global Financial Anchor
Today’s financial market turmoil has exposed weaknesses in the current global financial system, of which many were known but went unaddressed.
This lack of action reflects the increased complexity and linkages of the global financial system, and the absence of an effective anchor for financial stability.
Restoring financial market confidence has had to rely on liquidity injections by major central banks.
While this appears to have been successful, questions remain as to whether the turmoil could have been averted and its impact mitigated.
The IMF can play an important role in this regard, owing to its truly global perspective – one that encompasses both advanced economies and emerging and developing economies, which are increasingly integrating into the global financial system.
Moreover, the IMF does not focus on financial markets per se , but has unique expertise on the linkages between the real and financial economy.
Finally, the IMF’s perspective is universal, looking across sectors and markets.
So far, the Fund has not fully exploited its unique position, because it has often been passive in reaching out, giving clear messages, and making recommendations to its members.
But the current financial market turmoil has shown that there are regulatory and supervisory gaps and poorly understood international linkages that call for a global response.
We believe that the IMF needs to move decisively on financial stability issues and be more proactive to help prevent and mitigate future crises.
The IMF should work closely with the Financial Stability Forum, the Bank for International Settlements and other relevant international bodies.
To strengthen the Fund’s financial stability role, we propose action in three related areas.
First, the IMF should promote financial stability through multilateral surveillance.
It should be positioned at the center of international financial markets and provide an analytical platform, not only for central banks and finance ministries, but also for regulators, standard setters, and market participants.
In particular, the Fund should enhance its understanding of the links between supervisory frameworks and macroeconomic conditions, including balance-of-payments and exchange-rate developments, by leveraging the wealth of cross-country information and expertise that it acquires through missions to its 185 members.
This would enable it to identify macroeconomic threats to stability and encourage best practices for supervisors and regulators.
Building on its research, the IMF could contribute more to the debate on the macroeconomic and financial implications of private equity, hedge funds, and sovereign wealth funds, and develop practical recommendations to enhance their contribution to international financial stability.
Second, the IMF should promote financial stability through bilateral surveillance.
It needs to rethink how to address financial stability in its day-to-day work with members.
Financial sector analysis should become fully integrated into the IMF’s surveillance activities.
The IMF should also be more proactive and speak with greater candor in systemically important countries, where shortcomings in financial supervision and crisis management have appeared.
It should assist emerging economies in shaping sound domestic financial markets.
These steps would require the IMF mission teams to become more diverse, bringing financial sector expertise in addition to the traditional macro and fiscal skills.
The Fund needs to hire more financial sector experts, relying less on academic professionals.
Third, the Fund should assist members who have well-defined programs for liberalizing and integrating their economy into the global financial system.
It should consider developing appropriate liquidity instruments to give confidence to emerging market economies that may be affected by a crisis beyond their control, rather than forcing them to build up ever-larger reserves or resort to regional arrangements for self-insurance.
Action in these three areas would help to create a multilateral institution with the authority and expertise to advise countries on supervisory and regulatory issues of systemic importance.
The current turmoil highlights the international financial system’s need for such an institution.
The members that we represent – advanced and emerging countries in Asia and Europe – want to play a role in re-establishing a strengthened IMF at the heart of the international monetary system. 
The IMF Is Bleeding Argentina to Death
When Argentina's financial crisis first exploded, I pinned the primary responsibility on Argentina itself, rather than on international institutions such as the IMF.
Now, half-a-year later, the balance of responsibility needs to be reconsidered.
Even though Argentina is, in the last analysis, mainly responsible for its fate, the IMF is not helping.
The problem is not only, or even mainly, the IMF's delay in providing money to Argentina. The bigger problem is the paucity of correct ideas coming from the IMF.
The IMF lacks a clear idea about what to do in Argentina. It continues to pound on one theme alone: that Argentina's economic crisis is the result of fiscal profligacy, the result of a government living beyond its means.
So it emphasizes the need for Argentina to cut budget expenditures.
As Argentina's crisis worsens, indeed with output possibly collapsing by 10 to 15% this year and with unemployment soaring, the IMF keeps asking for deeper cuts.
This is something like the 18 th century medical practice in which doctors "treated" feverish patients by drawing blood from them, weakening the patients further and frequently hastening their deaths.
This IMF approach was abandoned in rich countries about seventy years ago during the Great Depression.
When output crumbled due to a profound banking and financial crisis (linked to the collapse of the gold standard), tax revenues plummeted in the US and Europe, and conservative governments tried to cut budget spending to limit budget deficits.
As they cut, output fell further and economic misery deepened.
In 1936, John Maynard Keynes demonstrated the futility of trying to balance the budget in the midst of an economic depression.
The IMF is tragically ignoring this logic in Argentina.
Argentina's widening budget deficit is mainly the result of its economic collapse since 1999, not the cause of it.
The deficit was relatively mild until 1999, when the economy went into recession.
Yes, budgetary waste exists, but it is not the cause of an extreme macroeconomic crisis.
The recession was mainly caused not by budgetary spending, but rather by Brazil's sharp devaluation of its currency in February 1999, a step which made Argentina's own Peso uncompetitive and led investors (rightly, it turned out) to expect a similar devaluation in Argentina.
As investors fled the country because of fear of devaluation (in a period in which the Argentine Government was promising never to devalue the peso, fixed at one-to-one with the US dollar), interest rates rose and bank deposits fell. This deepened the recession in 2000 and 2001 and led to a rising budget deficit because of declining tax revenues.
Argentina's Government of the time (under President de la Rua) and the IMF tried the Depression-era false "cure" of budget cuts, but there was no way that austerity could keep up with falling tax revenues.
The budget deficit continued to widen as the economy collapsed.
The correct approach to solving Argentina's problems in 2001, and now, would have been to end speculation over devaluation.
I favored the approach of "dollarization", or replacing the Peso by the US dollar and thereby ending the fear of a future change of the exchange rate.
Instead, the government closed down the banking system, so that depositors could no longer convert their pesos into dollars!
Closure of the banking system led to a full collapse of confidence in the country.
Now, Argentines are emigrating to Europe and the US in large numbers and are trying to convert Pesos to dollars at any opportunity.
The Peso is collapsing in value, and the bank system remains frozen.
The economy is "dead in the water."
The correct move now is to restore confidence in the banking system and the currency.
This can best be accomplished by dollarizing the economy, just as Argentina should have done last fall.
In addition, the international community should offer emergency funding to help provide deposit insurance for the banking system, thereby re-establishing a modicum of confidence in financial institutions.
International banks in Argentina should work with the Government to restore banking functions within days, not months.
Argentina should be given a year's full suspension of payments on its foreign debts, to be followed by a deep reduction in overall indebtedness.
With banks reopened, a currency that works, and suspension of debt servicing, some short-term IMF loans could boost confidence and help the country overcome its crisis of confidence.
Only then should the Government pledge a responsible path of budget spending, but not extreme cuts.
Instead, the IMF recommends antiquated and phony solutions.
By focusing on the budget deficit, it is chasing symptoms, not causes.
It is putting forward economically and politically impossible recommendations, telling Argentina to cut public services to the extreme, when schools and hospitals are already on the verge of collapse.
For centuries, doctors weakened or killed their patients in large numbers through bleeding, until medicine became a science.
It is high time that the IMF approach its mission scientifically and recognize that it is on the wrong track in Argentina.
As a result, the IMF must increasingly share responsibility and blame for Argentina's havoc.
The IMF’s America Problem
The IMF’s meeting this spring was lauded as a breakthrough, with officials given a new mandate for “surveillance” of the trade imbalances that contribute significantly to global instability.
The new mission is crucially important, both for the health of the global economy and the IMF’s own legitimacy.
But is the Fund up to the job?
There is obviously something peculiar about a global financial system in which the richest country in the world, the United States, borrows more than $2 billion a day from poorer countries – even as it lectures them on principles of good governance and fiscal responsibility.
So the stakes for the IMF, which is charged with ensuring global financial stability, are high: if other countries eventually lose confidence in an increasingly indebted US, the potential disturbances in the world’s financial markets would be massive.
The task facing the IMF is formidable.
It will, of course, be important for the Fund to focus on global imbalances, not bilateral imbalances.
In a multilateral trading system, large bilateral trade deficits are often balanced by bilateral surpluses with other countries.
China might want oil from the Middle East, but those in the Middle East – with so much wealth concentrated in so few hands – might be more interested in Gucci handbags than in China’s mass-produced goods.
So China can have a trade deficit with the Middle East and a trade surplus with the US, but these bilateral balances indicate nothing about China’s overall contribution to global imbalances.
The US is jubilant about its success in expanding the IMF’s role, because it thought that doing so would ratchet up pressure on China.
But America’s glee is shortsighted.
If one looks at multilateral trade imbalances, the US stands head and shoulders above all others.
In 2005, the US trade deficit was $805 billion, while the sum of the surpluses of Europe, Japan, and China was only $325 billion.
Any focus on trade imbalances thus should center on the major global imbalance: that of the US.
The task of assessing trade imbalances – whom to blame and what should be done – involves both economics and politics.
Trade imbalances are the result, for instance, of household decisions about how much to save and how much – and what – to consume.
They are also the result of government decisions: how much to tax and spend (which determines the amount of government savings or deficits), investment regulations, exchange-rate policies, and so forth.
All of these decisions are interdependent.
For example, America’s huge agriculture subsidies contribute to its fiscal deficit, which translates into a larger trade deficit.
But agricultural subsidies have consequences for China and other developing countries.
Were China to revalue its currency, its farmers would be worse off; but in a world of free(r) trade, US farm subsidies translate into lower global agricultural prices, and thus lower prices for Chinese farmers.
By extending its largesse to rich corporate farms, the US may not have intended to harm the world’s poor, but that is the predictable result.
This poses a dilemma for Chinese policymakers.
Subsidizing their own farmers would divert money from education, health, and urgently needed development projects.
Or China can try to maintain an exchange rate that is slightly lower than it would be otherwise.
If the IMF is to be evenhanded, should it criticize America’s farm policies or China’s exchange-rate policies?
Ascertaining whether a country’s trade imbalances are the result of misguided policies or a natural consequence of its circumstances is also no easy task.
A country’s trade deficit equals the difference between domestic investment and savings, and developing countries are normally encouraged to save as much as they can.
Evidently, China’s population has more than responded to such admonitions.
Stronger safety net programs might reduce the need for precautionary savings in the future, but such reforms cannot be accomplished overnight.
Investment is high, but further investment growth risks misallocating money, so reductions in China’s trade imbalance may be hard to achieve.
Moreover, a change in China’s exchange rate would do little to alter the multilateral trade deficit in the US.
Americans might simply switch from buying Chinese textiles to imports from Bangladesh.
It is difficult to see how a change in China’s exchange rate would have a significant effect on either savings or investments in the US – and thus how it would redress global imbalances.
With the US trade deficit the major global imbalance, attention should focus on how to increase its national savings – a question that US governments have struggled with for decades, and one that was frequently debated when I was chair of President Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers.
While it’s true that tax preferences might yield slightly higher private savings, the loss of tax revenues would more than offset the gains, thereby actually reducing national savings.
We found only one solution: reduce the fiscal deficit.
In short, the US bears responsibility both for trade imbalances and the policies that might quickly be adopted to address them.
The IMF’s response to its new mission of assessing global imbalances will thus test its battered political legitimacy.
At its spring meeting, the Fund failed to commit itself to choosing its head on the basis of merit, regardless of nationality, and it did not ensure that voting rights are allocated on a more limited legitimate basis. Many of the emerging-market countries, for example, are still underrepresented.
If the IMF’s analysis of global imbalances is not balanced, if it does not identify the US as the major culprit, and if it does not direct its attention on America’s need to reduce its fiscal deficits – through higher taxes for America’s richest and lower defense spending – the Fund’s relevance in the twenty-first century will inevitably decline.
The IMF’s Lending Overhaul
The International Monetary Fund should be an essential port of call for emerging-market and developing countries facing financing needs.
With its ability to mobilize large financial resources and buttress policy credibility, the IMF can help mitigate the large economic and social costs often associated with crises.
Against this background, the world has come together in the midst of the crisis to radically overhaul the framework for IMF lending. 
Now and in the future, the world needs the IMF to respond flexibly and effectively to its members’ needs.
First and foremost, our financing packages should be large enough relative to the size of the problem to make a difference.
In addition, the absence of an IMF insurance facility with acceptable terms has been a major gap in the global financial architecture, especially for the more dynamic emerging-market economies.
This is despite all the evidence of the value of early access to IMF financing, before a tough situation deteriorates into a crisis.
Moreover, while it remains essential to attach policy conditions to IMF-supported programs, they should be focused squarely on solving a country’s critical problems, so that the conditions will be relevant rather than intrusive.
With our members’ support, we are implementing important reforms to our lending policies that will encourage countries to approach the IMF early on, before crises become severe and almost intractable.
The reform comprises three core elements:
First, policy conditions associated with future IMF lending will be better tailored to country circumstances.
A new Flexible Credit Line makes high-volume financing available – even before a crisis has struck – without any ex post policy conditionality to qualifying countries with strong economic fundamentals and policy frameworks.
Some observers have dubbed the new facility “EZ loan,” though few countries meeting the qualifying criteria would consider their policy achievements – and their commitment to maintaining that record – anything but “easy.”
For others, conditionality will be more tightly focused on core areas, and “structural” conditions that require hard-to-time legislative measures will be judged in a less formalistic manner.
Second, for those not qualifying for the new instrument, the Fund’s workhorse lending facility, the Stand-By Arrangement, will be made more flexible along several dimensions. These include permitting high financial access even before a crisis materializes, and allowing disbursements to be more front-loaded.
Third, the amount of lending available from the IMF is being raised substantially.
Normal limits on access to IMF resources are being doubled – a development consistent with the growing consensus that the Fund’s lending capacity needs to be at least doubled given the severity of this crisis.
This is extremely important, since few things are as fatal to the credibility of a policy package as insufficient financing.
Taken together, these steps address the core problems – the stigma associated in the past with IMF conditionality, the availability of early pre-crisis financing, and the overall size of rescue packages – that have sometimes diminished the effectiveness of the Fund’s role as a crisis lender.
Emerging markets that approach the IMF early on for pre-crisis financing will find shelter from the winds of global deleveraging, which in turn will help contain the spread of the crisis.
The IMF has already moved quickly to help many of our member countries in this time of crisis, including by protecting social spending in order to cushion the impact of the crisis on the most vulnerable.
The lending reforms adopted this week will enable us to be even more flexible and responsive in assisting even more countries.
At the same time, these reforms are only a part of a much larger plan for IMF renewal.
Still in the pipeline are initiatives to increase concessional lending to low-income countries hit by the crisis, to strengthen the Fund’s surveillance and early warning capacity, and to improve its governance structure in ways that recognize the larger role of emerging-market countries in the world economy.
It is my hope that further action in all these areas will be taken in the coming months.
Together, they constitute a turning point in the way the IMF works, and will allow it to serve its global membership even better.
The IMF’s Half Step
BOSTON – “What used to be heresy is now endorsed as orthodox,” John Maynard Keynes remarked in 1944, after helping to convince world leaders that the newly established International Monetary Fund should allow the regulation of international financial flows to remain a core right of member states.
By the 1970’s, however, the IMF and Western powers began to dismantle the theory and practice of regulating global capital flows.
In the 1990’s, the Fund went so far as to try to change its Articles of Agreement to mandate deregulation of cross-border finance.
With much fanfare, the IMF recently embraced a new “institutional view” that seemingly endorses re-regulating global finance.
While the Fund remains wedded to eventual financial liberalization, it now acknowledges that free movement of capital rests on a much weaker intellectual foundation than does the case for free trade.
In particular, the IMF now recognizes that capital-account liberalization requires countries to reach a certain threshold with respect to financial and governance institutions, and that many emerging-market and developing countries have not.
More fundamentally, the Fund has accepted that there are risks as well as benefits to cross-border financial flows, particularly sharp inward surges followed by sudden stops, which can cause a great deal of economic instability.
What grabbed headlines was that the IMF now believes that countries could even use capital controls, renamed “capital flow management measures,” if implemented alongside monetary and fiscal measures, accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves, and macroprudential financial regulations.
Even under such circumstances, CFMMs should generally not discriminate on the basis of currency.
But has the IMF’s reconsideration of financial globalization gone far enough?
This month, the IMF’s Independent Evaluation Office released an assessment of the Fund’s policy on reserve accumulation that implies that a “one size fits all” approach to reserve accumulation continues to prevail within the organization.
Many emerging-market policymakers view accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves during the 2000’s as having insured their countries against exchange-rate volatility and loss of export competitiveness.
Yet the IMF pinned significant blame for global financial instability on this policy.
Not surprisingly, given their decades of experience with the management and mismanagement of capital flows, emerging-market policymakers have been watching the IMF’s “rethink” on these issues very closely.
From 2009 to 2011, with advanced economies pursuing near-zero interest rates and quantitative easing, yield-hungry investors flooded countries like South Korea and Brazil with hot money, fueling currency appreciation and inflating asset bubbles.
When the eurozone panic ensued in July 2011, inflows came to a halt and fled to the “safety” of the United States, Switzerland, and beyond.
Unlike in the past, however, emerging and developing countries avoided the worst, precisely because they had learned to accumulate foreign reserves and regulate cross-border capital flows, and to ease such measures to prevent or mitigate sudden stops.
And yet, despite abundant academic evidence and country experience to the contrary, the IMF remains stubbornly wedded to the idea of eventual capital-account liberalization.
In a new study that surveys and updates the economics literature, Arvind Subramanian, Olivier Jeanne, and John Williamson conclude that “the international community should not seek to promote totally free trade in assets –&#160;even over the long run – because…free capital mobility seems to have little benefit in terms of long-run growth.”
Thus, the IMF’s recommendation to use capital controls only after exhausting interest-rate adjustment, reserve accumulation, and prudential regulation is out of step with the profession.
Indeed, recent work in economic theory shows that capital controls can actually be the optimal policy choice.
For example, the new welfare economics of capital controls views unstable capital flows as negative externalities on recipient countries, which implies that regulations on cross-border flows are the optimal tools to address market failures, improve market functioning, and enhance growth, not worsen it.
Indeed, the IMF’s own research shows that countries that deployed capital controls first – or alongside a host of other macroprudential measures – were among the most resilient during the global financial crisis.
In many cases, the controls were neither market-based nor temporary.
The IMF also fails to appreciate fully that capital flows should be regulated at “both ends,” or at least that advanced-country regulations will not make matters worse.
IMF research over the last year has outlined circumstances in which industrialized countries should also take part in regulating global capital flows.
But the new view also highlights an important obstacle: many advanced countries’ trade and investment treaties prohibit the regulation of cross-border finance.
The good news is that Article VI of the IMF Articles of Agreement still stands: “Members may exercise such controls as are necessary to regulate international capital movements.”
The IMF is making strides in the right direction, but emerging markets will have to remain in the lead.
They have proven to be the best judges of their economic needs and priorities; as they consider the IMF’s new stance on financial globalization, they should continue to heed their own counsel.
The IMF’s Next Mission?
The world economy is increasingly threatened by volatile market reactions to global imbalances at a time when the IMF has largely lost its original raison d’être as the world’s central monetary institution.
These two developments should stimulate the Fund to claim a new purpose as the world’s reserve manager.
In the 1960’s, the IMF managed the problems of all the major economies, and in the 1980’s and 1990’s, it developed as a crisis manager for emerging markets.
But that job is much harder now, because of the size of some of the big emerging economies.
And, in any case, the focus of financial nervousness is shifting back to the world economy’s core countries, such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia, which are funding large current account deficits with surpluses from much poorer countries.
These surpluses reflect high savings rates, both in the private and the public sector, in oil-producing and emerging Asian economies, which have resulted in their rapid accumulation of foreign reserves.
But this is hardly a blessing for these countries.
Their reserves have become so large that even the announcement of a small shift in assets – say, from euros to dollars – can move markets and cause disruptions and panics.
Like past reserve regimes that offered a choice of assets (for example, the dollar, the pound, and gold in the interwar period), instability is inherent.
The new surplus countries’ attempts to find alternative reserve assets have been problematic.
Most of the attention has been fixed on China’s $1 trillion in reserves, and its efforts to maintain the value of those assets.
Diversification from US Treasury bills by investing some $3 billion in the Blackstone private equity fund this summer was swiftly followed by an embarrassing collapse in value.
On the receiving end, industrial countries’ governments are anxious that new sovereign wealth funds (SWF’s) are being used strategically, rather than simply following the logic of the market.
Even the successful model for SWF’s, Singapore’s Temasek, which for a long time went largely unnoticed, is now attracting a level of attention that its owners and managers never wanted.
The growing anxiety is understandable.
After all, given that emerging market economies’ central banks and SWF’s nowadays effectively dominate capital markets, outcomes no longer result from the interplay of millions of independent guesses, decisions, or strategies.
When entities of such a size make decisions, they are bound to act in a strategic way.
All the parties begin to suspect political manipulation.
But the resulting controversies can be resolved, and the political venom neutralized, through surveillance by multilateral institutions that are committed to achieving an overarching good.
That should be the IMF’s core function.
Today surveillance means, in effect, merely giving advice.
But in the 1960’s – when the IMF still supervised the rules of the Bretton Woods order’s par value system before its disintegration in 1971 – surveillance was linked to the Fund’s effectiveness as a major financial intermediary.
The IMF’s ability to give powerful advice to the most important countries, such as the UK, was enhanced by these countries’ dependence on IMF resources.
It was the IMF’s financial power that gave it its bite, and that power was enhanced by Fund borrowing, at first from the G-10, which established the General Arrangements to Borrow.
In the years after the collapse of Bretton Woods, the IMF reinvented itself as a principle vehicle for managing the surpluses that followed the oil price shocks of the 1970’s.
It borrowed from the new surplus countries, which thus partly managed their new assets through the intermediation of the IMF.
As a result, to the Fund could lend to those countries that suffered shocks from the increase in petroleum prices.
Indeed, a large financial actor can play a stabilizing role.
In the past, the counter-cyclical behavior of large private institutions stabilized market expectations during panics.
The house of Rothschild made the first half of the nineteenth century stable.
In the great panics of 1895-6 and 1907, J.P. Morgan calmed the US economy.
At the time of the Great Depression in the 1930’s, there was no equivalent power.
In 2007, there are some signs that Goldman Sachs feels obliged to lean against the wind in order to stabilize markets.
The IMF could be a powerful financial stabilizer if it managed a significant part of the new surplus countries’ reserve assets, for it would be well placed to take bets against speculators.
This would ultimately benefit the reserve assets’ owners, who, by virtue of accumulating large surpluses, have a similar interest in world economic and financial stability.
At the same time, the management of reserve assets by an internationally controlled asset manager would remove suspicions and doubts about the use of assets for strategic political purposes.
But, to carry out this completely new task, the IMF would need to regain the trust of its members.
The rise in reserves in many Asian countries was a deliberate response to the 1997 financial crisis, which fueled disillusion with the IMF.
So, before it could assume the role of global reserve manager, new surplus countries would need substantially more influence over the Fund’s governance.
Only then could they be confident that they would not be subject to politically motivated manipulation.
Global Capital Rules
CAMBRIDGE – It’s official.
The International Monetary Fund has put its stamp of approval on capital controls, thereby legitimizing the use of taxes and other restrictions on cross-border financial flows.
Not long ago, the IMF pushed hard for countries – rich or poor – to open up to foreign finance.
Now it has acknowledged the reality that financial globalization can be disruptive – inducing financial crises and economically adverse currency movements.
So here we are with yet another twist in the never-ending saga of our love/hate relationship with capital controls.
Under the classical Gold Standard that prevailed until 1914, free capital mobility had been sacrosanct.
But the turbulence of the interwar period convinced many – most famously John Maynard Keynes – that an open capital account is incompatible with macroeconomic stability.&#160; The new consensus was reflected in the Bretton Woods agreement of 1944, which enshrined capital controls in the IMF’s Articles of Agreement.
As Keynes said at the time, “what used to be heresy is now endorsed as orthodoxy.”
By the late 1980’s, however, policymakers had become re-enamored with capital mobility.
The European Union made capital controls illegal in 1992, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development enforced free finance on its new members, paving the way for financial crises in Mexico and South Korea in 1994 and 1997, respectively.
The IMF adopted the agenda wholeheartedly, and its leadership sought (unsuccessfully) to amend the Articles of Agreement to give the Fund formal powers over capital-account policies in its member states.
As long as it was developing countries that were whipsawed by global finance, it was fashionable to blame the victim.
The IMF and Western economists argued that governments in Mexico, South Korea, Brazil, Turkey, and elsewhere had not adopted the policies – prudential regulations, fiscal restraint, and monetary controls – needed to take advantage of capital flows and prevent crises.
The problem was with domestic policies, not with financial globalization, so the solution lay not in controls on cross-border financial flows, but in domestic reforms.
Once the advanced countries became victims of financial globalization, in 2008, it became harder to sustain this line of argument.
It became clearer that the problem lay with instability in the global financial system itself – the bouts of euphoria and bubbles, followed by the sudden stops and sharp reversals that are endemic to unsupervised and unregulated financial markets.
The IMF’s recognition that it is appropriate for countries to try to insulate themselves from these patterns is therefore welcome – and comes none too soon.
But we should not exaggerate the extent of the IMF’s change of heart.
The Fund still regards free capital mobility as an ideal toward which all countries will eventually converge.
This requires only that countries achieve the threshold conditions of adequate “financial and institutional development.”
The IMF treats capital controls as a last resort, to be deployed under a rather narrow set of circumstances – when other macro, financial, or prudential measures fail to stem the tide of inflows, the exchange rate is decidedly overvalued, the economy is overheating, and foreign reserves are already adequate.
So, while the Fund lays out an “integrated approach to capital flow liberalization,” and specifies a detailed sequence of reforms, there is nothing remotely comparable on capital controls and how to render them more effective.
This reflects over-optimism on two fronts: first, about how well policy can be fine-tuned to target directly the underlying failures that make global finance unsafe; and, second, about the extent to which convergence in domestic financial regulations will attenuate the need for cross-border management of flows.
The first point can be best seen using an analogy with gun controls.
Guns, like capital flows, have their legitimate uses, but they can also produce catastrophic consequences when used accidentally or placed in the wrong hands.
The IMF’s reluctant endorsement of capital controls resembles the attitude of gun-control opponents: policymakers should target the harmful behavior rather than bluntly restrict individual freedoms.
As America’s gun lobby puts it, “Guns don’t kill people; people kill people.”
The implication is that we should punish offenders rather than restrict gun circulation.
Similarly, policymakers should ensure that financial-market participants fully internalize the risks that they assume, rather than tax or restrict certain types of transactions.
But, as Princeton economist Avinash Dixit likes to say, the world is always second-best at best.&#160; An approach that presumes that we can identify and directly regulate problematic behavior is unrealistic.
Most societies control guns directly because we cannot monitor and discipline behavior perfectly, and the social costs of failure are high.
Similarly, caution dictates direct regulation of cross-border flows.
In both cases, regulating or prohibiting certain transactions is a second-best strategy in a world where the ideal may be unattainable.
The second complication is that, rather than converging, domestic models of financial regulation are multiplying, even among advanced countries with well-developed institutions.
Along the efficiency frontier of financial regulation, one needs to consider the tradeoff between financial innovation and financial stability.
The more of one we want, the less of the other we can have.
Some countries will opt for greater stability, imposing tough capital and liquidity requirements on their banks, while others may favor greater innovation and adopt a lighter regulatory touch.
Free capital mobility poses a severe difficulty here.
Borrowers and lenders can resort to cross-border financial flows to evade domestic controls and erode the integrity of regulatory standards at home.
To prevent such regulatory arbitrage, domestic regulators may be forced to take measures against financial transactions originating from jurisdictions with more lax regulations.
A world in which different sovereigns regulate finance in diverse ways requires traffic rules to manage the intersection of separate national policies.
The assumption that all countries will converge on the ideal of free capital mobility diverts us from the hard work of formulating those rules.
The Immigration Game
Green Papers, as they are called in Europe, or White Papers, as they are known in America and Britain, are often mere rhetorical essays – government-backed studies that state broad principles unlikely ever to be applied in practice.
The recent Green Paper released by the European Commission on international migration is no exception.
Indeed, the Paper is a hodgepodge of illogic and half-baked ideas that aims at “launching a public debate” on the issue, “choosing a bottom-up, rather than a top-down approach.”
But while the objective is to “harmonize policies towards economic migrants across the EU,” the Paper states at the outset that decisions on this matter should remain solely under the jurisdiction of national governments.
Some of the rules that it proposes are unenforceable – and thus merely a source of red tape for migrants and their employers that would require huge public bureaucracies to administer.
Co-ordination of national migration policies will remain a dream if decisions continue to be kept under the exclusive responsibility of national governments.
There is no sign in the EU that national regulations on economic migration are converging.
Policies on migrants are becoming increasingly tough, especially in those countries that already had the most restrictive provisions.
Since 1995, there were 26 reforms of migration policies in the EU-15: two-thirds tightened regulations by increasing procedural obstacles faced by visa applicants, reducing the duration of work permits, or making family reunification more difficult.
Countries are getting tougher because migration flows can be diverted across jurisdictions.
This raises concerns among public opinion that migrants rejected by some countries could flood those that do not impose tighter restrictions.
Cross-national policy spillovers are frequent.
Finland tightened its immigration regulations in 2004, following closely the restrictive stance taken by Denmark in 2002.
Portugal adopted more restrictive provisions in 2001, after Spain implemented a similar reform in 2000.
Ireland did the same in 1999, after the UK enacted two reforms in 1996 and 1998 designed to curb immigration.
This race to restrict pervaded decision-making on transitional arrangements following accession of 10 new members – eight of them postcommunist countries – to the EU last May.
Twelve of the 15 countries reneged on promises not to restrict worker flows from the new members as they realized that Austria and Germany were closing their borders to immigration from their eastern neighbors.
But tight national restrictions do not seem to prevent migration; they only alter the geographical orientation of flows and fuel increases in illegal immigration, thereby inflating the size of the informal economy.
Indeed, illegal immigration is larger when restrictions to legal migration are tight.
Illegal flows as a proportion of the population are about 25% larger in Europe than in the US; at the same time, legal flows are roughly 25% larger in the US than in Europe.
The US also has more realistic migration restrictions than most European countries.
It is unlikely that this would be possible even under central planning.
Migrants change jobs twice a year on average, as they “grease the wheels” of European labor markets with their mobility from less to more productive jobs.
Should we prevent them from doing so?
Similarly, the Paper proposes that the self-employed should be admitted after an evaluation of their business plans.
In Milan this year, more foreigners than Italians registered as self-employed.
Who will examine their business plans?
Even if the Paper’s suggestion were plausible, which it is not, it begs a larger question: should we prevent migrants from taking entrepreneurial risks?
If taken seriously, these rules will accomplish nothing, except to force migrants and their prospective employers to find other ways to each other.
The European Commission’s Green Paper on immigration looks like an invitation to join the underground economy.
The Arab Spring’s Crowd Psychology
ABU DHABI – In 1896, the social psychologist Gustave Le Bon warned his contemporaries of the dangers of crowds, writing that, “It is necessary to arrive at a solution to the problems offered by [crowds’] psychology, or to resign ourselves to being devoured by them.”
As spontaneous protest overtakes organized political movements across the Arab world, the leaders of Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya’s nascent democracies should heed Le Bon’s warning.