Chinese spokesmen denounced this as a throwback to the days when America thought it could, and should, try to “contain” the People’s Republic.
One way to interpret China’s elevated rhetoric – and its tough response to joint US-South Korean military maneuvers – is as another indication that Chinese leaders have grown supremely self-confident and are eager to throw their weight around.
The reality, though, is more complex. A closer look reveals that President Hu Jintao’s words and deeds are often shaped by a mixture of insecurity and cockiness, and that Chinese officials alternate between playing up and playing down the country’s rise.
Of course, there are moments when China’s leaders do seem like people who know that they are succeeding and want others to acknowledge it.
Even before the current diplomatic controversies, China’s leaders were gleefully drawing attention to how much more effective their stimulus package had been than Obama’s in countering the negative effects of the financial crisis.
And yet, when news broke last month that China had officially replaced Japan as the world’s second-largest economy, instead of crowing about surpassing a longtime rival and having the top spot, held by the US, in its sights, the government issued statements emphasizing that theirs remains a “poor, developing” country.
The self-confident side of the leadership’s split personality is often what worries China’s neighbors and the US alike.
Still, it is important to remember that there’s a positive aspect to the Party’s self-confidence.
As political scientist Kevin O’Brien has argued, China’s increased readiness to compromise with some domestic protesters, rather than treat all forms of collective action as subversive, can be seen as reflecting a growing sense of security.
Conversely, some of China’s most disturbing moves can be chalked up to exaggerated feelings of insecurity.
Consider the harsh treatment of the gadfly critic Liu Xiaobao, sentenced to 11 years in prison on trumped-up charges of “subversion” for launching an Internet petition drive championing civil liberties.
Would a truly self-confident ruling elite have been so skittish about his activism?
The confident side of the Chinese leadership’s split personality is easy to understand.
From the late 1980’s until 2000, many observers presented the Party as being on its last legs, certain to succumb to the “Leninist extinction” that began with communism’s collapse in Europe.
But the Party remains in charge today.
Airport bookstores that once displayed Gordon G. Chang’s The Coming Collapse of China now offer Martin Jacques’ When China Rules the World.
Why, then, do China’s rulers continue to backslide into doubt and fear, and why do they seek to avoid having China labeled a superpower?
For starters, downplaying China’s rise has practical benefits.
It helps to be seen as a “poor, developing” country, not as an economic giant, because “developed” nations are expected to do more to combat major global challenges, like climate change.
At the same time, China really is still a “poor” country in terms of per capita income.
And parts of the country are more similar to sections of troubled “developing” countries than to China’s showplace cities.
The Party is in a vulnerable position – and knows it.
That is no excuse for paranoia and repression, but just because the Party has outlasted predictions of its demise does not mean that it has no Achilles heel.
Most notably, the anger over corruption and nepotism that fueled the Tiananmen protests has never gone away.
China’s leaders thus continue to depend on a form of nationalism structured around tales of victimhood.
They now base their legitimacy on the notion that the Party, which rose to power as the nation fought foreign domination, is uniquely qualified to keep China from being bullied in a hostile international arena, and that only they can provide the stable environment needed for growth.
The Chinese leadership’s split personality explains a curious phenomenon that former US State Department adviser Susan Shirk noted in her book China: Fragile Superpower.
When she mentioned the book’s title to American friends, they wondered why she used the modifier “fragile,” whereas Chinese friends said calling their country a “superpower” was premature. 
Shirk’s title still captures a significant phenomenon that bedevils diplomatic affairs. Outsiders are increasingly convinced that China is a superpower, and that it needs to show that it can be a responsible one.
But China’s rulers only sometimes embrace the designation – and the Party still sometimes behaves as if it had only a tenuous hold on power.
Is China the New World Bank?
SINGAPORE – The Chinese are everywhere. Or, more accurately, Chinese money is everywhere, thanks particularly to the China Development Bank (CDB) and the China Export-Import Bank.
As the two institutions responsible for all Chinese overseas financing, they are making waves around the world.
According to The Financial Times, Chinese lending in 2008-2010 surpassed World Bank assistance by approximately $10 billion.
By the end of 2010, the CDB’s reach extended to more than 90 countries, whose total indebtedness reached $141.3 billion.
So, is China reshaping the landscape of development assistance?
In a nutshell, yes.
Consider the following: Chinese investment in Zambia’s rich copper and coal reserves accounts for 7.7% of the country’s GDP.
In Saudi Arabia, the state-owned China Railway Construction Corporation built the Al-Mashaaer Al-Mugadassah light-rail project to ease traffic pressure during the annual Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca.
There are even said to be plans for an Arctic highway to facilitate trade throughout the polar region.
Closer to home, a Himalayan railway project to link Tibet to Khasa, at the border with Nepal, is currently under construction, with plans to extend the line all the way to Kathmandu, the Nepalese capital.
In Cambodia, China contributed $260 million in assistance in 2009, replacing Japan as the country’s largest aid provider and overtaking both the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank’s lending portfolios.
Last year, China signed 14 bilateral agreements with Cambodia, totaling $1.2 billion, to finance every conceivable item, from irrigation canals to uniforms for the Cambodian military.
Recipient governments are reportedly pleased with China’s aid approach.
For one thing, there is a notable absence of expensive consultants folded into so-called “technical assistance” packages, a practice that has been a key focus of criticism directed at many funding agencies.
Second, Chinese aid does not require pre-project “missions” by bureaucrats who arrive from distant headquarters for a sort of development tourism that wreaks havoc on the routines of the local counterparts who must accompany them on their poverty excursions.
Third, Chinese aid is dispensed rather quickly and unceremoniously, lacking the burdensome fanfare of lengthy negotiations and voluminous project documents, a practice many scholars and practitioners term “checkbook diplomacy.”
Fourth, China dispenses aid without compliance conditions such as environmental protection measures or community-participation exercises.
Excruciatingly laborious “stakeholder” consultations – of the type that lasted nearly ten years to construct the World Bank-funded Nam Theun 2 hydroelectric power plant in Laos – are not required of Chinese aid.
China’s unique aid model is one of the main pillars of what the Chinese scholar Sheng Ding calls the country’s “soft power” strategy.
Beyond the provision of cheap credit and concessional loans is the global export of China’s way of doing business.
As economic relations deepen, cultural relationships develop.
Confucius Institutes are sprouting from Sri Lanka to Nigeria to promote the study of Mandarin.
Alongside these linguistic programs are seasonal performances by touring Chinese acrobats.
Call it global courtship by an avid Chinese suitor.
But worrying signs about China’s seemingly benign lending practices are emerging.
Chinese financial assistance is tied to the extraction of natural resources, particularly oil and minerals.  Environmentalists worry that without a more conscientious “green” component to Chinese lending, unchecked exploitation could lead to resource depletion.
Moreover, Chinese assistance packages often come with Chinese technology and laborers, implying limited employment opportunities and capacity-building for local people.
For example, 750 Chinese workers were shipped to Indonesia, along with 630,000 tons of steel, to construct the five-kilometer Suramadu bridge linking Surabaya to Madura.
The need for disclosure and transparency mechanisms has been emphasized time and again.
There is no Chinese counterpart to the Development Assistance Committee, which publishes annual reports on global aid flows from OECD member countries.
Nor is there an overarching mechanism, as called for in the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, that would align Chinese aid with national development strategies, or establish a forum for coordination with other bilateral and multilateral donors.
Fears abound that Chinese aid is beginning to run amok.
Concerns such as these are likely to increase as China emerges as a formidable development player.
Yet, by and large, Chinese assistance is welcomed rather than feared.
Those who promote equitable and inclusive development wish to see Chinese aid as part of an integrated international community of providers that is governed by responsible co-ownership.
This entails fair and open rules, mutual accountability practices, and sustainable development objectives, all of which require active Chinese participation.
In a world weary of the limited effectiveness of most development programs in curtailing endemic poverty, China’s growing role in countries around the world provides ample opportunity to reconstruct the landscape of economic aid and financing.
But reaching that goal requires a plan, and China must play its part in formulating it.
Is Cold War II Underway?
TOKYO – President Hu Jintao’s visit to Washington is coming at an increasingly tense moment in Sino/American relations.
Indeed, mesmerized by China’s vast military buildup, a new constellation of strategic partnerships among its neighbors, and America’s revitalized commitment to Asian security, many shrewd observers suggest that 2010 saw the first sparks of a new Cold War in Asia.  But is “Cold War II” really inevitable?
Although appeasing China’s drive for hegemony in Asia is unthinkable, every realistic effort must be made to avoid militarization of the region’s diplomacy.
After all, there was nothing very cold about the Cold War in Asia.
First in the Chinese civil war, and then in Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Indochina – particularly Vietnam – the Cold War raged not as an ideological/propaganda battle between rival superpowers, but in dogged, often fratricidal combat that cost millions of lives and retarded economic development and political democratization.
It is this grim history that makes China’s current disregard for Deng Xiaoping’s maxim that China “disguise its ambition and hide its claws” so worrying for Asian leaders from New Delhi to Seoul and from Tokyo to Jakarta.
From its refusal to condemn North Korea’s unprovoked sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan and shelling of South Korean islands, to its claims of sovereignty over various Japanese, Vietnamese, Malay, and Filipino archipelagos and newly conjured claims on India’s province of Arunachal Pradesh, China has revealed a neo-imperial swagger.
So it should surprise no one that “containment” is coming to dominate Asian diplomatic discourse.
But it is wrong – at least for now – to think that a formal structure of alliances to contain China is needed in the way that one was required to contain the Soviet Union.
Containment, it should be recalled, was organized against a Soviet totalitarian regime that was not only ideologically aggressive and in the process of consolidating its colonization of Eastern Europe (as well as Japan’s Northern Territories), but also deliberately sealed off from the wider world economy.
Today’s China is vastly different.
Overt military imperialism of the Soviet sort has, at least historically, rarely been the Chinese way.
Sun Tzu, the great Chinese theorist of warfare, focused on the weakening of an adversary psychologically, not in battle.
Until recently, much of China’s bid for regional hegemony reflected Sun’s concepts.
More importantly, China abandoned economic autarky three decades ago.  Today, its economic links in Asia are deep, and – it is to be hoped – permanent.
China’s export machine sucks in vast quantities of parts and components for final assembly from across Asia – Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Indonesia, as well as richer Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan.
Membership of the World Trade Organization has helped to bind China to highly sophisticated pan-Asian production networks.
Everybody has benefited from these ties.
Throughout China’s three-decade rise from poverty to economic juggernaut, trade within East Asia has grown even faster than the region’s trade with the rest of the world, suggesting deeper specialization and integration.
Indeed, China’s rise has profoundly altered the course of Asia’s trade flows.
Japan no longer focuses on exporting finished goods to Europe and North America, but on exporting parts and components for assembly in China.
In turn, Japan now imports from China finished goods (such as office machines and computers) that once came from America and Europe.
Given that as many as half of China’s 1.3 billion people remain mired in abject poverty, it is in China’s interest to ensure that these economic relationships continue to flourish.
In the past, China has recognized the vital need for good neighborly relations.
During the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998, Chinese officials did not engage in competitive devaluation of the renminbi.
Unfortunately, such clear-sighted and responsible policymaking is a far cry from what we are seeing today.
China’s dizzying increase in its military capacity is another obvious source of concern in Asia.
But, even according to the highest estimates, China’s military budget is only now about equal to that of Japan and, of course, much less than the combined military budgets of Japan, India, and Russia, all of which border China – not to mention Indonesia, South Korea, and a militarily modernizing Taiwan.
Moreover, Russia and India possess nuclear weapons, and Japan has the technological wherewithal to reconfigure its defense posture to meet any regional nuclear threat.
So the challenge that China poses today remains predominantly political and economic, not military.
The test of China’s intentions is whether its growing economic and, yes, military capacities will be used to seek to establish Asian hegemony by working to exclude America from the region and preventing regional partnerships from flourishing.
The alternative is a China that becomes part of a cooperative effort to bind Asia in a rules-based system similar to that which has underpinned long-term peace in Europe.
In this sense, Asia’s rise is also a test of US competitiveness and commitment in Asia.
America’s historical opposition to hegemony in Asia – included as a joint aim with China in the Shanghai Communiqué of 1972 – remains valid.
It will have to be pursued, however, primarily by political and economic means, albeit backed by US power.
Before 2010, most Asian countries would have preferred not to choose between China and the US.
But China’s assertiveness has provided enormous incentives to embrace an Asian multilateral system backed by America, rather than accept the exclusionary system that China seeks to lead.
In 2011 we may begin to see whether those incentives lead China’s rulers to re-appraise their diplomatic conduct, which has left them with only the corrupt, basket case economies of Burma and North Korea as reliable friends in Asia.
Is Democracy Possible in the Arab World?
With Iraq rapidly descending into bloody chaos, the prospects for holding successful democratic elections in January, as the US and the Iraqi interim government have promised, look bleak.
Some skeptics go further, arguing that the Iraq debacle proves that prospects for democracy throughout the Arab world are dim.
Are they right?
Half the world's countries are democracies, yet none of the 22 Arab countries is among them.
The United Nations' Arab Human Development Report is frank in its criticism of the region's economic and social progress.
Economic growth has been slow, approximately half of women are illiterate, and the region is not well integrated into the world economy.
Indeed, with a population of more than 300 million, Arab countries export less to the world, excluding oil and gas, than Finland.
An enormous "youth bulge" in the Arab world's demographic tables looms, with 45% of the population now under the age of 14, and the population as a whole set to double over the next quarter-century.
Yet the region has inadequate opportunities for young people to find meaningful work. Unemployment hovers at 20%.
At the same time, the Middle East is awash with modern communications, much of it with an anti-Western slant.
During the Cold War, America's approach to the Middle East was to foster stability in order to prevent the spread of Soviet influence, ensure the supply of oil, and provide security for Israel.
The American strategy was management through autocratic leaders, and a "don't rock the boat" approach.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Bush administration launched an ambitious new policy to encourage a democratic transformation of the Middle East.
Saddam Hussein's removal was intended as only the first step.
In August 2003, US National Security Advisor Condoleeza Rice argued that "much as a democratic Germany became a linchpin of a new Europe that is today whole, free, and at peace, so a transformed Iraq can become a key element in a very different Middle East in which the ideologies of hate will not flourish."
Germany and Japan were, indeed, postwar success stories.
But both were relatively homogeneous societies with significant middle classes and no organized resistance to American occupation.
Yet both transitions still took nearly a decade.
Moreover, Iraq's possession of oil is a mixed blessing, because few oil-based economies have proven hospitable to liberal democracy.
Moreover, cultural differences between the US and Germany were not as great as those between the US and the Middle East.
Of course, cultural barriers are not insurmountable: democracy has taken root in Japan, South Korea, and in other Muslim countries, such as Turkey, Indonesia, and Bangladesh.
But the time horizons required for a fundamental makeover are measured in decades, not years.
Democracy is, after all, more than mere voting.
Since the Middle East's autocratic regimes destroyed their liberal oppositions, in many countries radical Islamists represent the only dissent, feeding on widespread resentment of corrupt regimes, opposition to American policies, and popular fears of modernization and globalization.
At the same time, the global economy and modernization can also promise better education, more jobs and opportunities, and improved health care, and opinion polls indicate that a majority of the region's population desires these benefits.
Given ambivalence among Arab moderates, there remains a chance to isolate the extremists and gradually build stable polities with broader participation.
To achieve this will require policies that open up economies, reduce bureaucratic controls, speed economic growth, improve educational systems, and encourage the types of gradual political changes now seen in small countries like Bahrain, Oman, Jordan, Kuwait, and Morocco.
Japan and Korea demonstrated that democracy could be combined with indigenous values in Asia. The Arab world, too, can develop intellectuals, social groups, and eventually countries with liberal economies and societies that are consistent with local cultures.
But this will take time and patience - and it will need to be accompanied by policy changes on Iraq, Palestine-Israel, and the regional economy.
Equally important will be whether Western countries cooperate to create a long-term strategy of cultural and educational exchanges that can help develop a richer and more open civil society in Middle Eastern countries.
The most effective advocates for democratic change are not American or European officials, but citizens of the region who understand Western virtues as well as flaws - and can adapt them to indigenous conditions to press for social change.
Corporations, foundations, universities, and other non-profit organizations can promote much of this work.
Companies and foundations can offer technology to help modernize Arab educational systems and take them beyond rote learning.
Western universities can host more students and faculty.
Other organizations can support specific institutions in Arab countries, or programs that enhance the professionalism of journalists.
But governments also have an important role to play.
By supporting the teaching of foreign languages and financing student exchanges, they can help people in the region accomplish their own goals as spelled out in the Arab Human Development Report .
There are many strands to an effective long-term strategy to promote conditions for stability and broader political participation in the Arab world.
This is America's declared goal. But getting there requires American policies that are consistent with the comprehensive approach that democratic transformation requires.
Is Dialogue with Iran and Syria Worth It?
Despite frequent claims to the contrary, the fundamental problem in the Middle East is not intervention by the West.
On the contrary, the real problem is that, for all their dabbling, the Western powers seem capable of neither war nor dialogue.
This leaves everyone in the region at the mercy of the Middle East’s oppressive regimes and proliferating terrorists.
Advocates of the Iraq war lacked an understanding of the complexities on the ground to wage an effective war of liberation and democratization.
As a result, their policies merely ended up eliminating Iran’s two major regional rivals: the Taliban and Saddam Hussein’s regime.
This presented Iran with a golden opportunity to project itself as a regional hegemon, and Iran’s leaders are unlikely to let this opportunity slip away.
Advocates of dialogue with the Iranians and their Syrian allies, like former United States Secretary of State James Baker, labor under the delusion that they can actually reach an understanding that can enable a graceful US exit from Iraq and help stabilize that wounded country.
The delusion is based on two false assumptions: that the Iranians and the Syrians can succeed in Iraq where the US has failed, and that the international community can afford to pay the price of ensuring their cooperation.
True, Syria and Iran are playing a major role in supporting Iraqi insurgents, and Syria is still encouraging the trafficking of jihadists and weapons across its borders with Iraq.
But the idea that these activities can be halted at will is naïve.
For one thing, the interests of the Shia communities in Iraq and Iran are not the same.
Iraqi Shia have never accepted Iranian dictates, and many took part in Saddam’s war against Iran in the 1980’s.
After all, the Iraqi Shia are Arabs, and if they are now willing to coordinate their activities with their Persian counterparts, their main goal will always be to secure an independent course as soon as possible, even while they carry on with their internecine disputes within Iraq.
Iran is in no better position than the US to convince them to resolve their differences.
President Basher al-Assad of Syria faces a similar dilemma. Although he has opened Syria’s border to jihadists and has allowed Saddam’s supporters to operate freely there, that choice may not be entirely his.
Syria’s aid to Saddam in maneuvering around the United Nations’ oil-for food program brought Iraqi money to inhabitants of the border region, who have always been closer in customs, dialect, and outlook to their Iraqi neighbors than to their fellow Syrians.
In the absence of government investment, local inhabitants’ loyalty went to Iraqi Baathists who helped improve their lot. Indeed, even local security apparatuses have been unwilling to comply with dictates from Assad and his clique to seal the borders.
In these cirumstances, neither Syria nor Iran seems capable of delivering anything but mayhem in Iraq.
What, then, would the proposed dialogue between the US and these states achieve other than continue to empower their corrupt yet ambitious regimes?
The story gets more complicated when one considers the UN inquiry into the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri.
Assad wants nothing more than to see this affair forgotten – and the proponents of dialogue think that they can give him what he wants in the hope of breaking Syria’s alliance with Iran.
But that is merely another erroneous (not to mention amoral) assumption.
The alliance between Syria and Iran dates back more than two decades, and was explicitly reaffirmed by the two ruling regimes as recently as January 2005.
Indeed, the two regimes are now joined at the hip.
Assad’s recent refusal to attend a summit in Tehran with his Iranian and Iraqi counterparts was a mere tactical move designed to appeal to the proponents of dialogue.
In fact, Iran has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in Syria, and annual bilateral trade tops a billion dollars.
Irani’s growing influence over the Syrian security apparatus is well established, and Iran is funding an effort to create Syrian Shia militias to compensate for Assad’s sagging support in the army and in the minority Alawite community.
Assad cannot turn his back on all of this.
No deal would be sweet enough, even if it included the return of the Golan Heights.
For Assad and his supporters, survival is more important than sovereignty.
Still, to read the well-known names of commentators and policymakers who are recommending engaging Syria and/or Iran is a testament to how inconsequential and cut off the Western powers have become from the realities on the ground in the world’s most turbulent region.
That, it seems, is the price of their arrogance.
Is Doping Wrong?
There is now a regular season for discussing drugs in sports, one that arrives every year with the Tour de France.
This year, the overall leader, two other riders, and two teams were expelled or withdrew from the race as a result of failing, or missing, drug tests.
The eventual winner, Alberto Contador, is himself alleged to have had a positive test result last year.
So many leading cyclists have tested positive for drugs, or have admitted, from the safety of retirement, that they used them, that one can plausibly doubt that it is possible to be competitive in this event otherwise.
In the United States, the debate has been fueled by the baseball player Barry Bonds’ march towards the all-time record for home runs in a career.
Bonds is widely believed to have been helped by drugs and synthetic hormones.
He is frequently booed and mocked by fans, and many thought that baseball’s commissioner, Bud Selig, should not attend games at which Bonds might tie or break the record.
At the elite level, the difference between being a champion and an also-ran is so miniscule, and yet matters so much, that athletes are pressured to do whatever they can to gain the slightest edge over their competitors.
It is reasonable to suspect that gold medals now go not to those who are drug-free, but to those who most successfully refine their drug use for maximum enhancement without detection.
As events like the Tour de France turn farcical, bioethics professor Julian Savulescu has offered a radical solution.
Savulescu, who directs the Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics at Oxford University and holds degrees in both medicine and bioethics, says that we should drop the ban on performance-enhancing drugs, and allow athletes to take whatever they want, as long as it is safe for them to do so.
Savulescu proposes that instead of trying to detect whether an athlete has taken drugs, we should focus on measurable indications of whether an athlete is risking his or her health.
So, if an athlete has a dangerously high level of red blood cells as a result of taking erythropoietin (EPO), he or she should not be allowed to compete.
The issue is the red blood cell count, not the means used to elevate it.
To those who say that this will give drug users an unfair advantage, Savulescu replies that now, without drugs, those with the best genes have an unfair advantage.
They must still train, of course, but if their genes produce more EPO than ours, they are going to beat us in the Tour de France, no matter how hard we train.
Unless, that is, we take EPO to make up for our genetic deficiency.
Setting a maximum level of red blood cells actually levels the playing field by reducing the impact of the genetic lottery.
Effort then becomes more important than having the right genes.
Some argue that taking drugs is “against the spirit of sport.”
But it is difficult to defend the current line between what athletes can and cannot do in order to enhance their performance.
In the Tour de France, cyclists can even use overnight intravenous nutrition and hydration to restore their bodies.
Training at high altitude is permitted, though it gives those athletes who can do it an edge over competitors who must train at sea level.
The World Anti-Doping Code no longer prohibits caffeine.
In any case, performance-enhancement is, Savulescu says, the very spirit of sport.
We should allow athletes to pursue it by any safe means.
Moreover, I would argue that sport has no single “spirit.”
People play sports to socialize, for exercise, to keep fit, to earn money, to become famous, to prevent boredom, to find love, and for the sheer fun of it.
They may strive to improve their performance, but often they do so for its own sake, for the sense of achievement.
Popular participation in sport should be encouraged.
Physical exercise makes people not only healthier, but also happier.
To take drugs will usually be self-defeating.
I swim for exercise, and I time myself over a set distance to give myself a goal and encourage myself to work harder.
I am pleased when I swim fast, but I would get no sense of achievement from improving my time if the improvement came out of a bottle.
But elite sport, watched by millions but participated in by few, is different.
For the sake of fame and glory now, athletes will be tempted to risk their long-term health.
So, while Savulescu’s bold suggestion may reduce drug use, it will not end it.
The problem is not with the athletes, but with us.
We cheer them on.
We acclaim them when they win.
And no matter how blatant the drug use may be, we don’t stop watching the Tour de France.
Maybe we should just turn off the television and get on our own bikes.
Is “Eurabia” Inevitable?
What is it that makes young Muslims in the West susceptible to radicalism?
What is it about the experience of the West’s rising generation of Muslims that leads a small minority to see violence as a solution to their economic and political dilemmas, and suicide as their reward and salvation?
Britain, which will soon mark the anniversary of last year’s bombings in London, provides a test case for seeking answers to these questions.
For young British Muslims, our globalized world challenges key beliefs, destabilizing their identity and thus encouraging a defensive response.
British citizenship, of course, guarantees freedom of expression and minority rights, and young Muslims take full advantage of this.
Yet they are using this freedom to deepen family and cultural ties to the closed world of their inherited Muslim identity, particularly its politics.
In practice, this means that many young Muslims are utterly preoccupied with events in the Arab and Muslim world.
They see what we see: a region where autocratic countries seem corrupt and paralyzed.
But they also see an unprecedented level of hostility from the West, with regime after regime seeming to be either in peril or facing chaos.
Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine, and now Iran: all seem to be under attack as part of the “global war on terror.”
As a result, the West’s strategic choices appear inherently anti-Islamic to countless of its young Muslims.
This preoccupation with the Middle East is at the heart of young Muslims’ politics in British universities, mosques, and websites.
Although most do not support Pakistan’s Pervez Musharraf, Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak, or the al-Saud family, they see hypocrisy in Western criticism of these leaders that is designed to manipulate and marginalize – after all, the West does not really want to push these regimes too far.
Access to the Internet, satellite television, and travel is drawing these young Muslims into a community that shares their vision and their rage.
So technology is heightening the tensions that exist between the mechanics of a modern free society and the sense of a vast conspiracy against Muslims.
This has led to a schism between the hopes young Muslims have for successful lives in the West and their aspirations for their Muslim brothers and sisters, who have suffered so many terrible disappointments.
As young Muslims in Britain (and across the West) try to maneuver between the various, and often conflicting, aspects of their identity, three clear tendencies have emerged.
A secular and pragmatic response, which makes Islam a private matter; A conservative stance that reconciles cultural, religious, and familial ties with ‘Britishness’; A radical response to the perceived collision between the foreign policies of their new homelands and the welfare of the Islamic world.
Messianic waves from the Middle East, reaching both schools and mosques, help draw young Muslims into radicalism.
One such wave is created by the hardline Saudi/Wahhabi education system, which is based on the concept of al-wala’ wa al bara’ , loyalty to the system and hostility to the infidels.
This curriculum, exported Westward by fat Saudi subsidies, is heavily punctuated with denunciations of the infidels and calls to jihad.
Designed to secure the legitimacy of the Saudi monarchy at home, it is indoctrinating young Western Muslims with values antithetical to open and free societies.
Britain’s government is beginning to recognize the danger, and is trying to clamp down on schools and mosques that spread hate.
Unfortunately, such repression has been merely reactive and shortsighted, with no clear long-term vision about the nature of Islamic education in the West.
Thus, it merely feeds young Muslims’ fears that they are being singled out for persecution.
One difficulty with the British government’s response is that it classifies all Muslims as just that: Muslim.
By defining people on the basis of their religion, nuances – of national identity or of the degree of orthodoxy – are lost.
This plays into the hands of radicals, because it makes Islam the central element of identity.
This process, indeed, is echoed in the 22 Arab countries, where religious orthodoxy rules out any significant liberal political opposition.
In such circumstances, the Mosque becomes the sole public space in which people can voice political views.
Politicization of the mosque has, sadly, also become the norm in Britain.
Islamic radicalization and terror need not continue to flourish in the West.
Regardless of their disappointments with the Western countries’ foreign policy, young Muslims have been exposed to their undeniable democratic spirit.
They may now seek a deeper connection to their Muslim identity, but, having learned to question authority, they are unlikely to accept rigid parental or Islamic traditions.
Like other young people around them, they want to be the agents of their own destiny.
This desire is changing Islam, especially in the West.
The basic texts remain the same, but their interpretation, and the application of religion in people’s lives, has not.
Young Muslims, particularly in the West, are setting an example that is slowly being echoed in the Middle East, despite massive state repression.
The task for Western policymakers is to recognize the interconnection of foreign and domestic policies.
They must become serious about backing legitimate democratic representation in Muslim countries, for only then will Western policy seem less hypocritical.
They must also ensure that career choices are as open to their Muslim citizens as they are to everyone else.
In short, young Muslims in the West need to believe that democratic principles are respected abroad and applied equally at home.
Only when such a belief becomes general will despair stop fueling terrorism, and suicide bombing come to be viewed as an obscene calling.
Is Europe on a Cross of Gold?
ROME – Increasingly, one hears predictions that the euro will go the way of the gold standard in the 1930’s.
And, increasingly, the reasoning behind such forecasts seems persuasive.
But does that mean that the euro doomsayers are right?
Following the 1929 stock market crash, Europe was hit by a massive deflationary shock.
Output collapsed and unemployment soared.
Unable to agree on coordinated reflationary action, governments opted to move unilaterally.
One after another, they abandoned the gold standard, depreciating their currencies.
By loosening credit in this way, they recovered, one after another, from the Great Depression.
Today, Europe has been hit again by a massive deflationary shock.
This time, the constraint on reflationary action is the euro.
Governments lack a national currency to depreciate, and lack the power to relax credit, having delegated monetary policy to the European Central Bank.
As unemployment again rises to catastrophic heights, they will have no alternative, it is said, but to abandon the euro unilaterally.
I wrote the book on Europe and the gold standard.
Literally. In Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, published in 1992, I argued that the deflationary engine that was the gold standard was a key cause of the 1930’s depression, and that abandoning it opened the door to recovery.
Yet I am reluctant to believe that things will turn out the same way this time.
Four differences lead me to believe that maybe – just maybe – the euro will survive.
First, mounting an appropriate monetary response is easier when you have a single central bank.
Under the gold standard, it still would have been possible for central banks to reflate their depressed economies had they moved together.
Unfortunately, getting central banks to move together is easier said than done.
Central bankers speak different languages.
They view economic prospects through different lenses.
By contrast, were the ECB to adopt decisive measures, it could reflate the entire eurozone and obviate the need for countries to act unilaterally.
But, while the ECB has the capacity, the question remains whether it is has the will.
A second difference is that, notwithstanding recent cuts in social programs, the unemployed receive more extensive public support than in the 1930’s.
This makes populist pressure to abandon the euro correspondingly less severe – the key questions, of course, being how much less severe, and whether the political center can hold.&nbsp;
A third difference is that the political preconditions for a cooperative response are better today.
In 1931, France refused to help stem the Central European financial crisis because it believed that Germany was rearming, in violation of the Treaty of Versailles, signed at the end of World War I. Political tensions between France and Germany may very well grow in the coming months and years, following François Hollande’s victory in the French presidential election, but they will not begin to rise to that level.
Moreover, European countries today are prepared to go to great lengths to save the euro, fearing that its collapse would jeopardize their single market.
By contrast, when countries started abandoning the gold standard in 1931, tariff barriers had already gone up.
There was no longer a single market to protect.
Finally, abandoning the gold standard was less disruptive than abandoning the euro would be.
Reintroducing national currencies today would take weeks, at a minimum, whereas Britain in 1931 could take sterling off gold while the markets were closed for the weekend.
Back then, countries still had their national currencies; they could simply stop supporting them.
Bank deposits, along with most other private and public debts, were denominated in that national currency.
Today, these assets and liabilities are all in euros.
Reintroducing the national currency in order to depreciate it, but leaving the euro value of other financial instruments untouched, would destroy balance sheets and wreak financial havoc.
The alternative – converting those other instruments into the new national currency – would tie up the offending country in litigation for years.
Each of these differences casts doubt on the notion that the euro will go the way of the gold standard.
But a fifth difference points in the other direction.
In the 1930’s, countries could not act together because they could not agree on a diagnosis of the problem.
Each attributed the Great Depression to different causes, leading them to prescribe different remedies, which they administered unilaterally.
Agreement today on the diagnosis facilitates mounting a common response.
Unfortunately, there is growing evidence that the medicine on which European countries have agreed – austerity – is killing the patient.
There is now talk of adjusting the dosage, but talk has not yet given way to action.
Will things turn out differently this time?
There is no question that the greater scope for cooperation that exists today bodes well for the euro.
But it is the precise policies on which European governments cooperate that will tell the tale.
Is Europe’s Financial Crisis Over?
LONDON – The European Central Bank’s recently announced policy of bond buying, what it calls “outright monetary transactions” (OMTs) marks a convergence of European central banks with their Anglo-Saxon counterparts.
While the ECB’s actions represent the best chance yet to put an end to a crisis that has been playing out since 2010, the Bank has markedly raised the stakes for governments.
The ECB’s policy framework is well suited to fighting systemic blazes, but poorly suited to local fires, which thus can spread uncontrollably.
The OMT program, which allows the ECB to buy sovereign bonds of countries that have agreed to reform their economies, significantly levels the playing field between the Bank and its advanced-economy peers.
Spain has the same fiscal and structural problems that it had prior to the OMT program’s launch, but now it has an external lender of last resort.
That is a game-changer.
Under the pre-OMT regime, a capital outflow from Spain, whether through the sale of government bonds or the liquidation of private claims, resulted in tighter monetary conditions.
The sale of sovereign bonds under the fixed exchange-rate regime put direct upward pressure on their yields, while sales of private securities by foreigners had a similar effect, but through indirect channels.
Monetary tightening was forestalled only to the extent that another source of foreign capital (either private or ECB) could replace the outflow.
The point at which credit risk becomes exchange-rate/redenomination risk is ambiguous.
But the metamorphosis tends to go hand in hand with localized monetary contractions that exacerbate the correlated risk of sovereign default and bank failures.
In Spain, as in Greece before it, the monetary squeeze has become chronic as banks run short of ECB-eligible collateral.
Under the OMT program, the ECB can replace foreign outflows from sovereign-bond markets through direct purchases, putting Spain on par with non-eurozone countries like the United Kingdom.
And, to the extent that there is even an informal price target associated with the ECB’s commitment to purchase bonds, foreign outflows, at least from the sovereign-bond market, are automatically replaced, in full, with ECB cash.
Without the ECB’s willingness to buy a potentially unlimited volume of sovereign bonds to achieve its very imprecise objective of mitigating redenomination risk, the eurozone would have been doomed to recurring episodes of internal funding stress.
The OMT program breaks the volatile liquidity cycle that stems from chronic shortages of bank collateral and a limited fiscal transfer mechanism.
More broadly, the ECB’s marginal lending facility is an indirect means of monetizing sovereign debt.
It is an even less direct way to address the private, related-debt overhang.
But it works.
That said, much can still go wrong.
The ECB has bought time, but it has also raised the stakes.
The credibility of its pledge depends as much on what it will do (buy unlimited quantities of government bonds) as on what it will not do (buy them from countries that do not fulfill conditionality).
Without a credible threat to cut off wayward sovereigns, the ECB’s pledge provides a free lunch to investors and governments alike.
The OMT program will cause credit conditions to ease, but without necessarily reversing the financial balkanization of the eurozone that has occurred over the last three years.
Reversal of that process will likely not occur until the three key elements of banking union – common supervision, common deposit insurance, and a common resolution fund – are within tangible reach.
Indeed, if Spanish savers become truly afraid of redenomination risk in the interim, the OMT will not matter: they will just take their cash and deposit it as quickly as possible in, say, a German bank.
The eurozone is still prone to bad equilibria as long as growth on its periphery remains weak.
Even with OMTs, there remain crucial differences between the eurozone and the Anglo-Saxon economies.
Fixed exchange rates within the eurozone impose a constraint that simply does not exist in the UK or the United States, and quantitative easing by the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve is unconditional in nature.
With OMTs, the ECB has converged toward the Fed in its ability to backstop each of its individual parts.
Whether that hastens or hinders political progress toward fiscal and banking federalism is the next big question.
In the interim, OMTs enable financial markets to start breathing again.
The acute crisis is over, at least for now.
But the existential challenge – political agreement on the key elements of banking and fiscal union – is only just beginning.
Unless it is met, the eurozone’s financial disintegration will eventually resume.
Is Europe’s Housing Market Next?
A bubble in the American housing market – fueled in part by so-called “sub-prime” mortgages – was the catalyst for today’s financial market turbulence.
But the bubble was not confined to the United States.
Recent research suggests that the global housing boom was closely linked to the unprecedented increase in the supply of liquidity by major central banks.
To be sure, financial innovation, like lending to buyers who would not normally have qualified for mortgage loans (sub-prime borrowers) also played a role.
But sub-prime mortgages would probably not have been supplied on the same scale if central banks had not created an environment of ample liquidity and persistently low interest rates.
The sub-prime crisis has so far affected mainly financial markets in the US and Europe.
This is not surprising if one considers that on both sides of the Atlantic prices have reached historical peaks and, until recently, had accelerated.&#160; 
This is no mere coincidence.
There has always been a correlation between American and European house prices.
Over the last three decades, prices in the US and Europe have tended to follow three slow-moving, related boom-bust cycles.
All previous peaks were followed by several years of declining prices (in real terms).
There is no reason to assume that this cycle will be any different.
Since last year, prices have declined in the US.
Because data for the euro area will become available only much later, it is not yet possible to determine whether prices have already turned on the Continent as well.
But if the past pattern holds, house prices should start to fall very soon in (continental) Europe as well. 
In both the US and Europe it seems that prices went 20-30% above their longer-term average values.
Such a large overshooting is likely to be followed by some undershooting.
This would imply that prices will probably have to fall at least by 20-30 %, but possibly considerably more before they find a bottom.
European policy makers thus have cause for concern.
While there is little evidence in the euro area of large-scale sub-prime lending, there is considerable evidence to suggest that house prices have an important impact on domestic demand, albeit with wide variations among individual countries. &#160;
Almost everywhere, higher house prices have been associated with strong consumption.
Lower house prices throughout Europe are thus likely to be accompanied by weaker consumption demand, as in the US.
In Germany, for example, house prices have remained relatively low and consumption weak.
The impact of house prices on construction activity has been more varied.
In Spain and Ireland, construction investment has increased to a level (18-20% of GDP) far above that of the US and not seen in any other OECD country except Japan before its bubble burst in 1989.
In these two countries, lower housing prices are likely to be associated with a sharp and prolonged drop in domestic demand, which should be stronger even than what can be expected in the US.
By contrast, in France and Italy, where house prices have increased almost as much as in the US, there is no evidence of a housing overhang.
The negative impact of a downturn in housing prices in these two countries should thus be limited to a drop in consumption.
Germany should be affected the least, because both house prices and construction activity have been below trend for some time.
In short, the downturn in house prices will not be limited to the US.
And, on both sides of the Atlantic, that decline is likely to undermine consumer spending.
Is Evidence-Based Medicine Broken?
LONDON – Evidence-based medicine, as David Sackett and his colleagues wrote in 1996, is “the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients.”
At first glance, this seems entirely logical; indeed, many would say that this simply could be called “medicine.”
But the approach is generating considerable controversy, with many asserting that it is “broken.”
Last month, when the British Medical Journal asked its readers whether evidence-based medicine is malfunctioning, the responses were almost evenly split: 51% answered positively, and 49% negatively.
The controversy stems from the kind of evidence that is used.
Sackett implies, but does not stipulate, that epidemiological evidence (findings from randomized controlled trials and large-cohort studies carried out over many years) should underpin doctors’ decisions about patients – and, one hopes, in consultation with them.
Epidemiological research studies address questions like, “If 1,000 people with type 2 diabetes were randomly allocated to four groups of 250 people that each received either no treatment (or a placebo), drug A, drug B, or drug C for ten years, how would it impact survival rates, and what, if any, complications and side effects would there be?”
If the trial is conducted properly – it is large enough; people are allocated in a truly random way; and “blind” assessments of the outcomes are conducted – the results should be reliable.
Consider the following scenario: Ten-year survival rates for the four groups are 70%, 71%, 80%, and 82%, respectively, and the proportion of people developing troublesome side effects is 1%, 2%, 5%, and 50%.
Most people trade a small reduction in the chance of survival for a large reduction in the chance of adverse effects; in other words, they would opt for drug B.
In short, evidence-based medicine uses the science of epidemiology to create a clear and structured set of decisions about tests and treatments for individual patients, with the evidence often – and increasingly – being summarized in the form of clinical guidelines.
This is problematic for two main reasons.
For starters, the emphasis on randomized controlled trials as the “gold standard” of evidence has meant that any drug that has outperformed a competitor in a trial may now be classified as “evidence-based.”
Look no further than the glossy ads in medical journals to discover drugs you did not know you needed for diseases that you never knew existed, such as “female sexual arousal disorder” and “adult attention deficit disorder.”
And how many drugs are tested against more natural non-drug therapies – yoga for high blood pressure, for example, or brisk walking for diabetes – before being licensed?
In a sense, evidence-based medicine has been a victim of its own success, having fueled an exponential increase in research trials in the 20 years since it began.
One does not need a PhD in cognitive psychology to recognize that overloading doctors working in a high-stress, time-constrained environment with a mass of guidelines and research results will lead to errors.
And the attempted solution – hard-wiring the guidelines into computerized “decision support tools” – has been largely a flop, given computer models’ inability to accommodate messy, real-world clinical practice.
For example, generations of medical students have memorized the textbook features of celiac disease for their examinations.
But your Aunt Nora’s celiac disease has not read the textbook.
Indeed, only Aunt Nora can tell you how her celiac disease behaves.
She also happens to be opposed to taking blue-colored pills.
And she insists that, years ago, when she took drug x, it made her feel like a new woman – despite the fact that, in 1,000 patients, drug x has demonstrated, on average, no effect.
The computer model’s treatment recommendations would probably not work for Aunt Nora.
But this does not mean that evidence-based medicine is broken; it simply lacks the needed maturity.
High-quality randomized trials are as important now as they were at the time of the evidence-based movement’s founding.
But the system must be shaped by the doctor’s judgment and the patient’s individual experience.
It is time to stop overloading doctors with evidence and deploying fast-talking industry salespeople to manipulate them with clever marketing pitches.
Instead, researchers must optimize the presentation, summarization, processing, and application of epidemiological evidence, using good visualization techniques that improve doctors’ understanding of complex statistics.
At the same time, research-derived facts about the average patient must not outweigh individual patients’ observations of their own bodies and illnesses.
New processes for capturing and accommodating patients’ personal experiences – which are typically idiosyncratic, subjective, and impossible to standardize – would go a long way toward ensuring that each patient receives the right treatment.
The medical community must develop the science of shared decision-making, in which epidemiological evidence informs conversations about what matters to the patient and how best to achieve those goals.
In doing so, we can take evidence-based medicine beyond its current limits and develop a holistic approach that accounts for patients’ experience of illness and promotes good clinical practice.
Is Export Led Growth Passé?
CAMBRIDGE – For five decades, developing countries that managed to develop competitive export industries have been rewarded with astonishing growth rates: Taiwan and South Korea in the 1960’s, Southeast Asian countries like Malaysia, Thailand, and Singapore in the 1970’s, China in the 1980’s, and eventually India in the 1990’s.
In all these cases, and a few others – also mostly in Asia – domestic reforms would surely have produced growth regardless of international trade.
But it is difficult to see how the resulting growth could have been as high – reaching an unprecedented 10% or more annually in per-capita terms – without a global economy able to absorb these countries’ exports.
Many countries are trying to emulate this growth model, but rarely as successfully because the domestic preconditions often remain unfulfilled.
Turn to world markets without pro-active policies to ensure competence in some modern manufacturing or service industry, and you are likely to remain an impoverished exporter of natural resources and labor-intensive products such as garments.
Nevertheless, developing countries have been falling over each other to establish export zones and subsidize assembly operations of multinational enterprises.
The lesson is clear: export-led growth is the way to go.
But for how long?
While reading the economic tea leaves is always risky, there are signs that we are at the cusp of a transition to a new regime in which the rules of the game will not be nearly as accommodating for export-led strategies. 
The most immediate threat is the slowdown in the advanced economies.
Europe and the United States are both entering recession, and fears are mounting that the financial meltdown accompanying the sub-prime mortgage debacle has not worked itself out.
All this is happening at a time when inflationary pressures hamper the usual monetary and fiscal remedies.
The European Central Bank, tightly focused on price stability, has been raising interest rates, and the US Federal Reserve may soon follow suit.
So the advanced economies will suffer for a while, with obvious implications for the demand for exports from emerging markets.
On top of this is the almost certain unwinding of global current-account imbalances.
Emerging markets and developing countries ran a surplus of $631 billion in 2007, split roughly equally between Asian countries and the oil-exporting states.
This amounts to 4.2% of their collective GDP.
The US alone ran a current-account deficit of $739 billion (5.3% of its GDP).
Neither the economics nor the politics of this pattern of current-account balances is sustainable, especially in a recessionary environment. 
The politics is clear to see.
Nothing works as potently to inflame protectionist sentiment as large trade deficits.
According to a December 2007 NBC/Wall Street Journal poll, almost 60% of Americans think globalization is bad because it has subjected US firms and workers to unfair competition.
If globalization has acquired a lousy reputation in the US, the external deficit deserves much of the blame.
US trade policy has been remarkably resistant to protectionist pressure in recent years.
But, regardless of who wins America’s presidency, the world should expect closer scrutiny of imports from China and other low-cost countries as well as of outsourcing of services to places like India.
As the US and other advanced economies become less hospitable to developing-country exports, rapidly growing emerging markets, help as they may, are unlikely to take up the slack and thus provide ample fuel for export-led growth.
Import tariffs tend to be higher in developing countries, making it more difficult to gain access to them.
Moreover, developing countries compete in similar products – consumer goods of varying levels of sophistication – so that the politics of expanded South-South trade looks even worse than the politics of North-South trade.
Anti-dumping action against imports from China, Vietnam, and other Asian exporters is already commonplace in developing countries.          
So exporting will become an even tougher business.
Countries like China that have large surpluses will have to rely much more on domestic demand to fuel their economies.
This is not all bad, because China can certainly use more public investment in social sectors such as health and education.
But the impact will extend beyond the surplus countries.
If exporters from Brazil, Turkey, South Africa, and Mexico – all deficit economies – were already struggling to compete with China in third markets when those markets were wide open and expanding rapidly, imagine how they will fare under less hospitable conditions. 
The impact on growth will almost certainly be negative, even if domestic demand compensates fully for the decline in external demand.
The reason is microeconomic, not macroeconomic: you can sell only so much steel or auto parts at home, and labor productivity in service industries does not match that of export-oriented activities.
So shrinking export markets will slow down growth-promoting structural change at home.  
None of this implies a disaster for developing countries.
Long-term success still depends on what happens at home rather than abroad.
What is moderately bad news at the moment will become terrible news only if economic distress in the advanced countries – especially the US – is allowed to morph into xenophobia and all-out protectionism; if large emerging markets such as China, India, and Brazil fail to realize that they have become too important to free ride on global economic governance; and if, as a consequence, others overreact by turning their back on the world economy and pursue autarkic policies.
Absent these missteps, expect a tougher ride on the global economy, but not a calamity.
Is Fiscal Stimulus Pointless?
The Harvard economist Robert Barro, writing in The Wall Street Journal , recently made an intelligent argument against America’s fiscal stimulus.
After wading through the drivel of ethics-free Republican hacks and knowledge-free academic hacks who claim, one way or another, that the basic principles of economics make it impossible for government spending decisions to alter the flow of economic activity, reading Barro comes as a great relief.
That means that roughly 1.3 million more people will be employed in America in 2009, 1.9 million more in 2010, and 0.7 million people employed in 2011.
The long-term nominal and real Treasury rates continue to be absurdly low, so much so that I rub my eyes whenever I see them.
And the market inflation forecast – the spread between Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and normal Treasuries – remains extremely tame.
But we are not interested in what the multiplier is when the unemployment rate is 3% and the government is trying to diminish consumption and boost private savings via rationing and patriotism-based bond drives.
He characterizes the stimulus bill as a two-year $600 billion increase in government purchases.
To say that policymakers should rely only on their own personal research to formulate policy seems to me simply bizarre.
Finally, Barro assumes that higher spending in 2009-2010 will have to be offset by higher taxes later, claiming that “the timing of future taxes does not matter.”
But it matters very much.
At the moment, the United States Treasury can borrow at a real interest rate of zero for five years – and shove the entire five-year inflation risk onto the lender.
Time preference means that the $600 billion addition to the debt today, which Barro sees as the cost of stimulus, is not nearly as burdensome as a demand to pay $600 billion now would be.
And when taxes are levied to retire the added debt induced by the stimulus, they will be levied at some time at which nominal interest rates are not stuck at zero.
The Federal Reserve will thus be able to ease monetary policy then to offset the fiscal drag.
So Barro is simply wrong when he claims that although the stimulus boosts employment now, amortizing the stimulus must inevitably reduce employment at some point in the future.
Is France Unreformable?
It all began a year ago with the French “No” in the referendum on the European Constitution.
It continued last fall with the wave of violence in the suburbs.
Now, France has again brought itself to the world’s attention with weeks of street demonstrations against the “contract of first employment” (CFE) proposed by Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin to address high youth unemployment.
These three sets of events, different as they are, together illustrate several deep-seated characteristics of social life in France.
First, France has found it difficult to adjust to the demands of globalization.
Beyond ordinary dissatisfaction with economic problems, the failed referendum in May 2005 expressed the rejection by an important part of the French electorate of the discipline imposed by EU policies ensuring free movement of people, goods, and capital – and thus of the primacy of economic competition.
In a similar vein, last fall’s explosion of violence in the suburbs reflected the frustrations of disoriented young people facing the grim prospects that a modern economy offers to those who lack proper training and education.
The young are also at the center of the most recent protests, but this time, the disaffected include all strata of French youth, including university graduates.
In combating the CFE, they express their refusal to accept a precarious life outside the French model of job security that their parents enjoyed in the context of a profoundly different economy.
There is something very French about all this, because, while the economic rules of the game have changed throughout Europe in the last couple of decades, the need for greater labor-market flexibility seems to have been accepted more easily in most other countries.
In Spain, under a socialist government, roughly one-third of wage earners are working on temporary contracts; the percentage is even higher for the young.
In Italy, greater employment flexibility was introduced by the Prodi government in 1997, and further strengthened under the so-called Biagi Law of 2003.
In Germany too, the coalition agreement between the Social Democrats and the Christian Democrats includes a provision that extends from six months to two years the trial period during which an employee can be dismissed without explanation – the same duration contemplated in the Villepin’s CFE law.
In all these European countries, the new employment laws seem to be accepted as inevitable.
In France, by contrast, the statist tradition – which, as Tocqueville so aptly observed, harks back to the Ancien Régime, and which is equally shared today by both the Gaullist and socialist ideologies – is strongly linked to a marked distaste toward the strictures of economic liberalism.
Since the French Revolution, the imperative of equality has often triumphed over the concern for liberty.
As a result, the French are enamored with the welfare state in all its manifestations.
Not even the obvious failures of the French social model in today’s environment – mass unemployment (reaching 25% among the young), huge public deficits, the blockage of social mobility – have diminished its public prestige.
It would be much more logical to take inspiration instead from the Scandinavian model of “flexisecurity,” which combines employment flexibility and social security (albeit at the cost of a tax burden that France would not easily accept).
Add to all this the French preference for ideological confrontation and the absence of a culture of negotiation and compromise, to say nothing of consensus, and one can understand why so many reform projects in France end up being contested in the streets.
Indeed, quite significantly, most observers have automatically associated the recent disturbances with those of May 1968, which continues to hold a strange fascination for the French.
In truth, however, other than reflecting the French preference for the politics of the street, the two phenomena have nothing in common.
So is France unreformable?