Devolution would unshackle the economically more successful states.
And, by combating the culture of aid dependency in economically weaker states, India’s poorer regions might benefit in the long run as well.
As dysfunctional as a decentralized Europe seems to be these days, India might benefit from moving a few steps in that direction, even as Europe itself struggles to become more centralized.
Devolution might sound unrealistic, but once upon a time so did the European Union.
If Singh’s new reform agenda is again blocked, perhaps it will be time for a more radical assessment.
India’s Hillary Clinton?
As Americans debate their readiness to accept a woman such as Hillary Clinton as president, India has already done so, with the election of Pratibha Patil.
Although India’s presidency is primarily a ceremonial post that carries less weight than that of prime minister (the position once held by Indira Gandhi), it is symbolically significant.
Sonia Gandhi, the leader of the ruling Congress Party, who pushed hard to promote Patil’s candidacy primarily on gender grounds, calls this election “a special moment for women across the country.”
Moreover, India can claim a great deal of pride in the fact that the last two presidents were from minority populations – one from the lowest of castes (Harijan, formerly referred to as “untouchables”), and another one from the Muslim community.
As a daughter of a woman who fought for women’s rights during the independence movement and was instrumental in starting one of the first women’s institutions in India, I should feel a genuine sense of pride in the election of Patil.
But at best I have mixed emotions.
Both of India’s last two presidents had distinguished themselves in professional careers before being elected – one in the Foreign Service and the other in nuclear physics – and their reputations were above reproach.
Patil, on the other hand, is a controversial figure, with questionable qualifications.
Most of India’s major news outlets highlighted in their coverage of the story charges of corruption and ineptitude.
One well-respected publication even called Mrs. Patil’s selection “embarrassing.”
Women hear over and over that we have to be twice as good as men to be perceived as successful, deserving leaders.
Even if we disregard some of the accusations against Patil as baseless, it is hard to imagine a less powerful candidate for the highest ceremonial post in the largest democracy in the world.
All the same, I applaud Sonia Gandhi for her commitment to appointing a woman to this important position.
In a country full of contradictory attitudes toward women – ranging from the worship of the powerful goddess Durga to the killing of innocent young brides – such gestures can be very powerful.
But gestures cannot be a substitute for real action, or for the hard work that is necessary to empower all Indian women.
Indeed, one could argue that such symbolic acts may even create a blind euphoria that obscures the fact that, as a result of less education and lower pay, young females in India continue to have far fewer resources than their male counterparts.
While India’s president may be only a ceremonial head of state, during periods of political instability – especially in the current age of coalition governments – it is the president who makes crucial decisions about governing parties.
Many past presidents have also used the position to throw their intellectual weight behind such important issues as education and India’s cultural diversity.
So President Patil has large shoes to fill.
One can only hope that she will prove her critics wrong.
For those women in India who have proven themselves to be effective leaders in all segments of society, it would be wonderful if she can demonstrate early on that she has the intellectual and professional gravitas that befits the position.
India Shines On
MUMBAI – Every day, a small Japanese jet brings another 60 businessmen from Tokyo to sniff out new commercial opportunities in Mumbai and the heart of the Indian economy.
Naturally, there may be a touch of geopolitical calculation about this. As Japan grows increasingly nervous about China’s rise, the case for increasing investment in the other Asian giant strengthens.
But there is more about this than politics.
Japanese businessmen may be a little puzzled by the creative chaos of India; the argumentative culture can seem alien to them.
They know, however, a chance for making good profits in a rapidly expanding market when they see one. 
And they see one in India’s glorious Technicolor – the Bollywood version of Adam Smith.
When the Japanese company Daiichi Sankyo paid $4.6 billion for majority control of the Ranbury pharmaceutical group in 2008, they were placing a bet on continuing corporate success.
Given India’s growth rates, who would seriously question their decision?
So the lobby of Mumbai’s Taj hotel, just across the road from the gateway built to welcome Britain’s King George V and Queen Mary on their visit to India in 1911, is once again thronged with visitors, many of whom have arrived to see if India is living up to its image as the next great power.
The grand old Taj deserves all the business it is getting, after being the target of a terrorist attack in 2008. The bravery of the staff in trying to protect the hotel’s clients deserves the applause of every world traveler.
The business leaders you meet in Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Pune, and the other buzzing commercial centers of India demonstrate the challenge of building national and global brands and businesses.
No wonder they have started to crowd into the premier league table of the world’s rich.
There is also an uninhibited self-confidence about them. They take double-digit growth in their own companies for granted.
The task is to push sustainable growth much higher.
Of course, they know much better than any visitor the many problems India still must tackle – social, environmental and economic, with many accompanying issues in the security domain.
If you want a novelist’s view of this world in Mumbai, read Vikram Chandra’s Sacred Games, one of the best and most exciting novels written anywhere in the last few years.
What is interesting is that Indian businesspeople no longer dwell on what India’s government needs to do.
They do not expect much from the state and are not surprised when it fails to deliver.
A government initiative is something that they seem to regard as an oxymoron.
This does not mean that they criticize the macro-management of the Indian economy very much.
They support the almost two decades of reform that have stripped away much of the “license raj.” They recognize that India has the most economically literate leadership in the world.
They expect reforms to continue, albeit at a rather gentler pace. 
They note the infrastructure improvements – airports, for example – while sighing over what remains to be done and drawing invidious comparisons with China.
But there is no impatience for a bigger government role.
It is not that they have given up on government; they are just realistic about what it can achieve.
Indian society seems to have become more globalized than its government.
There is a marked difference in tone here from debates in much of the Western world.
In many rich OECD countries, the financial crisis and recession have made government intervention popular again.
Governments bail out banks, rush to the aid of manufacturers, and claim primacy in averting national catastrophe and personal hardship.
Although increasingly strapped for cash, governments offer the solace of public subsidy.
Gone for the moment are jokes about government being the problem, not the solution.
Tax collectors used to be Public Enemy Number One; now bankers have usurped that role.
In India, by contrast, even when you might think that government should be expected to deliver more, expectations are not high.
India needs better and much more education, as its young population grows.
But, with terrible figures for teacher truancy in state-run schools – as high as 25%, according to the World Bank – families increasingly turn to the private sector to educate their children.
Many successful businessmen are putting some of their wealth into foundations that run schools and colleges.
Two big issues remain for government, in addition to keeping reform moving forward.
First, as India’s middle class expands, more must be done to ensure that economic growth is inclusive.
This is bound to involve greater redistribution if the hundreds of millions of Indians who remain extremely poor are not to become alienated from their country’s success story and pulled toward populist extremism.
The second challenge is today’s violent manifestation of this alienation: the Naxalite insurrection in rural central and eastern India.
Interior Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram, a tough reformer, has this problem in his sights, but it cannot be solved by better policing alone.
Ending the insurrection will also require better government, whatever the low expectations of business leaders.
And, to be fair, Nitish Kumar, the chief minister of Bihar, a poor state that previously was a byword for corruption and incompetence, has shown what can be done by beginning a serious transformation of his state in just five years.
If India’s other states – and the central government – can follow this example, then the polish of India will not lose its shine.
India’s Illiterate Revolution
The United States has long been divided over what it calls “affirmative action,” a system of racial preferences intended to overcome the lingering consequences of slavery and discrimination against black Americans.
India is now becoming divided in much the same way, and for much the same reason – the emerging system of “reserved places” aimed at redressing centuries of caste discrimination.
But India’s good intentions, like America’s affirmative action policies, are misguided.
The underlying question is whether merit as a criterion for advancement is doomed when legacies of racial and caste discrimination exist.
Are those who agitate for affirmative action fighting for something that is more a quack remedy than a real solution?
In fact, India’s “reserved places” scheme operates as a deliberate smokescreen, for it allows the government cleverly to mask the real issue, which is access to primary education for India’s disadvantaged.
Were adequate primary education available to India’s poor – or, for that matter, to America’s poor urban blacks – there would be no need for reserved places in higher education and elsewhere.
Indeed, any Indian able to read this article should consider himself lucky, because India’s politicians have succeeded in keeping a majority of the country’s population thoroughly illiterate (as well as poor and unhealthy).
Instead of providing quality elementary education for all, our policymakers are more concerned with enacting caste-based measures aimed at short-term political gains.
Likewise, the Mumbai-based NGO Pratham’s Annual Status of Education Report 2005 , which was prepared after a survey in 28 states and union territories, reveals that 35% of children in the 7-14 age group are unable to read simple paragraphs, while 41% failed to solve a simple two-digit subtraction problem or a division problem.
Instead of preparing a pool of educated workers for the future, the government’s policies have given rise to an illiterate and innumerate population.
These findings raise damning suspicions about the literacy levels that successive Indian governments have claimed to achieve.
If the state of primary education is this bad, will the disadvantaged classes ever stand a chance?
Moreover, according to Vinod Raina, a member of the Central Advisory Board on Education (CABE), 80 million of India’s 200 million children between 6-14 years of age are not in school at all.
Of the remaining 120 million, only 20 million are expected to reach the tenth year of school, with the rest dropping out along the way.
Indeed, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh recently expressed dismay over the fact that “only 47 out of 100 children enrolled in class I reach class VIII.”
But Indian politicians’ interests appear to lie elsewhere.
After all, with the rate of functional literacy at only 37.5%, they can easily manipulate the votes of uneducated people with alcohol, pop slogans, and intimidation.
So the protests by highly educated Indians against “reserved places” is not only wrongheaded, but dangerous as well.
Unless India’s highly educated stand up for better schools for all, protests against caste preferences will only succeed in heightening tensions and selling newspapers, rather than improving the lives of India’s destitute.
The government is probably happy with these protests, for they divert attention from the real issue – the authorities’ utter failure to address the fundamental problem.
As in America, the issue is not racial and class reservations and preferences, but ensuring high-quality primary education for all, rich and poor alike.
As India’s educated revolt against preferences, they should not do so in a way that reinforces illiteracy.
India’s Israel Envy
NEW DELHI – As Israeli planes and tanks exact a heavy toll on Gaza, India’s leaders and strategic thinkers have been watching with an unusual degree of interest – and some empathy.
India’s government has, no surprise, joined the rest of the world in calling for an end to the military action, but its criticism of Israel has been muted.
For, as Israel demonstrates anew its determination to end attacks on its civilians by militants based in Hamas-controlled territory, many in India, still smarting from the horrors of the Mumbai attacks in November, have been asking: why can’t we do the same?
For many Indians, the temptation to identify with Israel was strengthened by the terrorists’ seizure of Mumbai’s Jewish Center (the Lubavitcher Chabad house) and the painful awareness that India and Israel share many of the same enemies.
India, with its 150-million strong Muslim population, has long been a strong supporter of the Palestinian cause and remains staunchly committed to an independent Palestinian state.
But the Mumbai attacks confirmed what has become apparent in recent years: the forces of global Islamist terror have added Indians to their target list of reviled “Jews and crusaders.”
Just as Israel has frequently been attacked by rockets fired from across its border with Gaza, India has suffered repeated assaults by killers trained, equipped, financed, and directed by elements based next door in Pakistan.
When President George W. Bush’s press secretary equated members of Hamas with the Mumbai killers, her comments were widely circulated in India.
Yet there the parallels end.
Israel is a small country living in a permanent state of siege, highly security-conscious and surrounded by forces hostile to it; India is a giant country whose borders are notoriously permeable, an open society known for its lax and easy-going ways.
Whereas many regard Israel’s toughness as its principal characteristic, India’s own citizens view it as a soft state, its underbelly easily penetrated by determined terrorists.
Whereas Israel notoriously exacts grim retribution for every attack on its soil, India has endured with numbing stoicism an endless series of bomb blasts, including at least six major assaults in different locations in 2008 alone.
Terrorism has taken more lives in India than in any country in the world after Iraq, and yet, unlike Israel, India has seemed unable to do anything about it.
Moreover, whereas Israel’s principal adversary is currently Hamas, India faces a slew of terrorist organizations – Lashkar-e-Toiba, Jaish-e-Mohammad, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, and more.
But, whereas Hamas operates without international recognition from Gaza – its legitimacy questioned even by the Palestinian Authority – India’s tormentors function from Pakistan, a sovereign member of the United Nations.
And that makes all the difference.
Hamas is in no position to repay Israel’s air and ground attacks in kind, whereas an Indian attack on Pakistani territory, even one targeting terrorist bases and training camps, would invite swift retaliation from the Pakistani army.
Israel can dictate the terms of its military incursion and end it at will, whereas an Indian military action would immediately spark a war with a well-armed neighbor that neither side could win.
And, at the end of the day, one chilling fact would prevent India from thinking that it could use Israel’s playbook: the country that condones, if not foments, the terror attacks on India is a nuclear power.
So India has gone to the international community with evidence to prove that the Mumbai attacks were planned in Pakistan and conducted by Pakistani citizens who maintained contact with handlers in Pakistan throughout the operation.
While India’s government had briefly hoped that the proof might enable Pakistan’s weak civilian government to rein in the malign elements in its society, the Pakistani authorities’ reaction has been one of denial.
Yet no one doubts that Pakistan’s all-powerful military intelligence has, over the last two decades, created and supported terror organizations as instruments of Pakistani policy in Afghanistan and India.
When India’s embassy in Kabul was hit by a suicide bomber last July, American intelligence sources revealed that not only was Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence behind the attack, but that it made little effort to cover its tracks.
The ISI knew perfectly well that India would not go to war with Pakistan to avenge the killing of its diplomatic personnel.
The fact is that India knows that war will accomplish nothing.
Indeed, it is just what the terrorists want – a cause that would rally all Pakistanis to the flag and provide Pakistan’s army an excuse to abandon the unpopular fight against the Taliban and Al-Qaeda in the west for the more familiar terrain of the Indian border in the east.
India’s government sees no reason to play into the hands of those who seek that outcome.
Yet, when Indians watch Israel take the fight to the enemy, killing those who launched rockets against it and dismantling many of the sites from which the rockets flew, some cannot resist wishing that they could do something similar in Pakistan.
India understands, though, that the collateral damage would be too high, the price in civilian lives unacceptable, and the risks of the conflict spiraling out of control too acute to contemplate such an option.
So Indians place their trust in international diplomacy and watch, with ill-disguised wistfulness, as Israel does what they could never permit themselves to do.
India’s New Path to Greatness
SINGAPORE – It is unwise to underestimate the near-metaphysical significance of the recent Indian elections.
The Indian electorate decisively pushed world history in the right direction with the re-election of the Manmohan Singh-Sonia Gandhi partnership.
They now have the mandate and power to press for greater economic reform and liberalization.
The incipient tiger in the Indian economy will be released.
The simultaneous rise of China and India will strengthen the forces of modernization and moderation globally.
At a time of global crisis, the world should celebrate this new burst of energy.
Virtually no one predicted this spectacular outcome.
Most observers underestimated the Indian electorate, which understood the many benefits of the Singh-Gandhi partnership.
First, their Congress government revived the moderate secular traditions of Jawaharlal Nehru and brought India back firmly to the political center, wresting control from communal and ideological extremists.
Second, the electorate grasped the importance of re-electing a modest but wise and determined leader who understood the direction India needed to take.
Singh will open up India’s economy even more than he has so far.
As he once said, “Although India has a large domestic market, our experience with earlier relatively insular policies, as also the global experience in this regard, clearly bring out the growth potential of trade and economic cooperation with the global economy.”
Finally, Singh will continue to re-engage India’s Asian neighbors and push for greater regional cooperation.
As far back as 1995 he said, “It is this vision, of a resurgent India taking her rightful place as an economic powerhouse in Asia, which has inspired our economic policies.”
Just as China has signed a free-trade agreement with ASEAN, India will seek to do so.
A process of competitive economic liberalization will sweep across Asia, further guaranteeing the region’s continued resurgence.
All this will be propelled by India’s new cultural confidence.
In the 1950’s and 1960’s, few leading Indians believed that their country could compete with the industrialized economies.
Hence, the Mumbai industrialists’ club used to be inherently protectionist.
Today, the same industrialists, convinced that India can compete with the best, support Singh’s reforms.
Yet India continues to face many challenges: nearly 300 million people living in poverty, the spreading Naxalite insurgency, the danger of terrorist attacks ala Mumbai, and sprawling urban slums.
In addition, how will Singh balance the trade-off between pro-market and pro-poor policies?
How will he manage the growing middle class’s expectations of better infrastructure, expanded access to health care and education, uninterrupted electricity and water supplies, and more efficient transport facilities?
These problems will not be solved overnight.
But the growing conviction that tomorrow will be better will keep India’s polity stable.
This may well be the most important result of the Indian election: five more years of political stability and economic reform will create an irreversible and virtuous cycle of economic growth and political moderation.
The Indian middle class will grow rapidly, providing the country with valuable ballast that will keep it on an even keel in the next few decades.
One statistic is worth noting. At the current stage of development of many Asian economies, a 10% increase in the median income can lead to a doubling of the middle class.
And such an increase is eminently achievable.
It was purely coincidental that the extremist Tamil Tigers leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, was killed and his movement decimated at the same time as India was voting. But the significance should not be missed.
Prabhakaran, not Al Qaeda, invented suicide bombing. His elimination shows the futility of the river of terror that he unleashed on history.
But if Sri Lanka’s President Mahinda Rajapaksa wants to eliminate the spirit of Tamil separatism, he must emulate Singh’s culture of political moderation.
Rajapaksa was wise to speak a few words in Tamil while announcing the victory over the Tigers.
He must now follow up by creating an open, inclusive environment, like India’s, that will enable both Sinhalese and Tamils to thrive.
Pakistan remains India’s single biggest challenge.
There can be no doubt that Singh has the right instincts.
He wants Pakistan to succeed as a moderate, modernizing country.
He wants no more wars.
But these instincts can be bolstered by wise long-term policies.
India could take a leaf from China’s success in handling the Taiwan problem.
At the height of tensions, when China found the governments of Lee Teng-hui and Chen Shui-bian intolerable, it never ceased its policy of embracing the Taiwanese people and Taiwanese businessmen.
Over time, this created a rich web of economic interdependence, which promotes stability.
It would be equally easy for India’s people to embrace Pakistan’s people.
They are the same people.
As an ethnic Sindhi, I feel an affinity to both.
When I attend international gatherings, I am amazed how easily and naturally Indians and Pakistanis gravitate toward each other.
The political divisions are artificial.
The cultural unity is natural.
The Pakistani population can easily work with the political moderation of Singh’s government.
Indeed, the open spirit of both President Barack Obama and Singh toward the Islamic world has probably provided the best political opportunity to find a lasting political solution for the India-Pakistan problem.
In short, the re-election of the Singh government has made the world a less dangerous place and has opened up many political opportunities.
It is hard to imagine India with a better prime minister.
Singh is one of the best economists in the world.
At the same time, he demonstrated that he has a spine of steel when he refused to buckle under to severe pressures to renounce the India-United States nuclear deal.
Singh stood his ground and achieved victory.
The benefits of his resolve will now be enjoyed by India and the world.
India’s New Ruling Caste
CAMBRIDGE – The largest election in history, involving more than 700 million voters, has resulted in the victory of India’s ruling alliance, led by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of the Indian National Congress.
The verdict disproved gloomy predictions of a hung parliament and the further strengthening of regional parties.
The new government will be far more stable than many of its predecessors, so the election results have elicited profound relief.
But the fact remains that, like previous governments, the new administration will consist mostly of politicians unfit to hold ministerial office.
While several provincial satraps have been cut down to size, new, aspiring ones have garnered significant support.
Despite the manifest success of Indian democracy, its parliamentary system is not succeeding in giving India good governance.
Obviously, India is not a failed state.
Lant Pritchett of the Harvard Kennedy School has coined a new name for India: a “flailing state” – a state where the government’s extremely competent upper echelons are unable to control its inefficient lower levels, resulting in poor performance.
But this analysis gives credit where none is due: India’s problem is its top political leadership’s lack of competence.
The inability of India’s current political system to provide effective government places the country in a different category: a non-performing state.
The idealism of India’s freedom movement quickly evaporated after independence in the face of the opportunities for patronage that came with power.
The way India’s political system evolved has made politics the surest path to wealth.
The money spent to win elections (often including the purchase of a party’s nomination) is recouped many times over once the winner is in office.
Half of India’s legislators who stood for reelection this time around had tripled their assets in the last five years.
Increasing corruption within governments run by the Congress party, which led India to independence and monopolized political power for decades, showed what a lucrative career politics had become.
Given India’s religious, caste, and linguistic divides, politicians saw how easily they could leverage even a small following into votes.
Soon, Indian political parties began to break up, giving rise to a large number of regional and caste-based parties.
Most of these parties are led by political dynasties that prize loyalty over merit.
Because of the splintering of political parties, India has had only one single-party government and eight coalition governments in the last two decades.
Members of the coalition governments have treated the ministries allocated to them as fiefdoms, to be milked for their benefit.
Over time, India’s government has become primarily a tool for advancing the personal interests of politicians rather than the entity responsible for running the country.
The opportunity for personal gains through public office has made electoral politics an automatic career choice for Indian politicians’ progeny.
Record numbers of sons and daughters of political leaders and millionaires (and people with criminal backgrounds) contested this election.
We are seeing the formation of a new Indian caste – a caste of rulers different from India’s traditional Kshatriya caste – before our very eyes.
Like existing castes, the new caste specializes in one occupation: political office.
Just as someone became a carpenter or a trader in an earlier era merely through birth, members of India’s ruling caste now become leaders of parties, members of legislatures, and cabinet ministers solely because of their parentage.
And, as with the older castes, there is no need for any qualification for the vocation; birth alone is sufficient.
Lack of vocational competence never barred Indians from remaining in their caste, and how well one performs in political office is, likewise, not a criterion for politicians to continue in positions of power.
India’s parliamentary system requires ministers to be members of the legislature.
Party leaders select family members and other loyal followers as candidates for elections, with absolutely no consideration of their abilities to fulfill ministerial responsibilities, resulting in cabinets that are simply not capable of managing the problems confronting the country’s national and state governments.
Even with the best political leadership, governing India is no easy task.
Successive governments staffed with unqualified politicians have failed dismally to carry out the core governmental functions of maintaining law and order, providing the basic services expected of modern societies, and promoting economic growth.
India’s high-performing private sector has so far masked the failure of the Indian state.
In its current form, India’s parliamentary system can produce only non-performing, corrupt governments.
It rewards ambition, promotes office-at-any-cost politics, and devalues merit.
Taking away the prize of ministerial office from elected representatives might discourage wealth-maximizing politicians from entering politics.
It is time, therefore, for India to consider introducing a presidential system of government, which would reduce the scope for “horse trading” and allow the country’s leader to select competent people for cabinet positions.
India’s Nuclear Conundrum
NEW DELHI – Japan’s nuclear disaster has fueled fear and uncertainty among all of the world’s producers of nuclear power.
For India, an energy-starved country, much is at stake.
That fear factor has two main causes.
Although nuclear power ranks as a “clean” source of energy, it is accompanied by the terrible shadow of nuclear war, which emerged from Japan’s last reckoning with nuclear catastrophe, 65 years ago at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and which lends it an automatic association with mass destruction and death.
Moreover, the secrecy that attends all things “nuclear” has left people not knowing enough to feel confident.
The fear inspired by the Fukushima Daiichi disaster will be reflected in soaring costs for nuclear power worldwide, largely owing to demands for improved safety and the need to pay more to insure the potential risks.
Indeed, nuclear plants are prone to a form of “panic transference.”
Should a reactor of one design go wrong, all reactors of that type will be shut down instantly around the world.
India’s dilemma is this: it has 20 nuclear plants in operation, with an additional 23 on order.
With the country desperately short of power, and requiring energy to grow, concerned citizens are asking if nuclear is still the answer for India.
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has cautiously announced that a “special safety review” of all plants will be undertaken.
“Not enough,” say roughly 50 eminent Indians, who at the end of March demanded a “radical review” of the country’s entire nuclear-power policy for “appropriateness, safety, costs, and public acceptance.”
The group also called for an “independent, transparent safety audit” of all nuclear facilities, to be undertaken with the “involvement of civil-society organizations and experts outside the Department of Atomic Energy.”
Until then, there should be “a moratorium on all…nuclear activity” and “revocation of recent clearances.”
This is as explicit as opposition can get.
How have other countries reacted?
France, which is around 80% dependent on nuclear energy, and is a big exporter of nuclear-plant technology, initially avoided most of the global anti-nuclear concerns.
But now it, too, is promising to draw the necessary lessons from the Japanese experience and upgrade its safety procedures, including a reassessment of the potential effects of natural disasters on nuclear-plant operations, conceding that the occurrence of more than one natural disaster simultaneously had not been considered previously.
China, which has 77 nuclear reactors at various stages of construction, planning, and discussion, has said that it will “review its program.”
Though Russia has formally announced that it will go ahead with its program, former President Mikhail Gorbachev – on whose watch the Chernobyl meltdown occurred 25 years ago – is not so sanguine.
While the US is the principal exporter of reactors, it currently has just two under construction on its own territory.
Denmark, Greece, Ireland, and Portugal are strongly anti-nuclear, and Switzerland has stopped all nuclear-power projects. 
All of this will lead to cost evaluation and escalation.
According to a study conducted by the former Indian government minister Arun Shourie, the price of uranium could rise to $140 per pound, close to its record high.
A change of much greater consequence concerns the price of reactors.
Pre-Fukushima, a report from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), “The Future of Nuclear Power, 2003,” as well as a study by researchers at the University of Chicago, established that nuclear energy was 50-100% more expensive than energy from coal or gas.
The report of the Working Group on Power of the Planning Commission of India puts the cost of energy from the country’s coal-based plants at about one-third lower than nuclear power, with gas 50% cheaper.
Energy security and public safety should be of equal importance in determining future policy on nuclear power.
Indeed, experts like C. M. A. Nayar have said that the Fukushima accident “could have happened even if there was no tsunami.”
Nayar suggests that it has long been known that the reactor’s design contained basic flaws, though only the Japanese authorities can verify this.
So, what is to be done?
Clean energy at a time of global warming is obviously necessary.  But so is the safety and security of humans, animals, and plants.
India has set itself on a path of virtually doubling its nuclear-power output.
This is deeply troubling, for India’s supply of nuclear fuel, technology, and reactors is almost entirely dependent on imports from manufacturers who refuse liability for any malfunction.
There is, of course, no single correct response that would simultaneously and uniformly deal with resource scarcity, fossil-fuel depletion, climate change, and the risks of nuclear power.
A choice will ultimately need to be made about how to meet India’s energy demands.
At a minimum, a thorough reexamination and full public debate must precede the construction of any new nuclear plant.
But the current emphasis on nuclear power must be objectively reassessed, and dependence on it thereafter reduced.
With nuclear safety suddenly becoming a global imperative, the costs are simply too high to do otherwise.
India’s Olympic Also-Rans
NEW DELHI – As the world awaits the Beijing Olympics, many wonder whether China’s grand coming-out party will also mark the occasion when it wrests dominance of the medal tally from the United States.
China’s dedicated athletes are widely assumed to have dozens of gold and silver medals in their grasp.
Whether or not they overtake the US, however, one thing is certain: China’s neighbor and regional geopolitical rival, India, will be lucky to win even a single medal.
International sport is, of course, an exercise in national chauvinism by other means.
At some level, we all pretend to tune into the Olympics to admire human athleticism.
But none of us can deny the attraction of the flags under which those athletes compete, the anthem that is played for the winners, and, ultimately, that impossible-to-ignore, regularly-updated medal tally, listing the gold, silver, and bronze medals awarded to each country, the Games’ real honor roll.
Every Indian who follows the Olympics has cringed scanning the daily list of medal winners, eyes traveling down past dozens of nations big and small before alighting on a solitary Indian bronze in tennis or wrestling.
Worse yet, we have all known the shame of waiting day after day for India to appear on the list at all, as countries a hundredth our size record gold upon gold and Indian athletes are barely mentioned among the also-rans.
Indians like to think we can hold our own against the best in the world in any field: our Kalidasa can stand up to their Shakespeare, our Ramanujan to their Einstein, our Bollywood to their Hollywood and, these days, our Infosys to their Microsoft.
In sport, however, it is a different story.
Our cricketers have come close to being considered the best in the world, but cricket is not an Olympic sport.
Our sole world champion in any sport is the chess grandmaster Vishwanathan Anand – in another non-Olympic sport, and one that calls for brain, not brawn.
In fact, in the Olympics, India’s record has declined over time.
The one gold medal we had become used to winning since the 1920’s, in field hockey, has proved elusive in recent Games, as our players have stumbled on Astroturf.
This year, India’s hockey players failed even to qualify for the Games.
In everything where simple human prowess is at stake – running, jumping, swimming, lifting, throwing - Indians simply don’t have what it takes.
An Indian beauty queen, Madhu Sapre, once became an unwitting victim of Indians’ sense of national shame at our sporting insignificance.
She was unjustly denied a Miss World title in 1992 because of her answer to the final-round question, “What is the first thing you would do if you became the ruler of your country?” Her response – “I would build a sports stadium” – was considered stupid by the judges, and the almost-certain crown (she was the overwhelming favorite) slipped from her grasp.
Sapre’s answer might not have been the brightest, but if the judges had any idea of how desperate Indians are for sporting success, they would have understood that she was not expressing such an absurd priority.
Why do Indian athletes perform so badly?
The explanations range from the anthropological to the borderline racist: Indians don’t have the genes, the build, the stamina, the climate, whatever.
There are structural and infrastructural explanations: lack of training facilities, gymnasiums, running tracks, equipment, financial resources.
We are a developing country, it is said; after all, it is not just your eye against his, your legs against hers, but what you can do against their trainer, their running shoe, their ergodynamic costume, their titanium archer’s bow.
But those rationales won’t do: other developing countries, from Jamaica to Ethiopia, regularly rake in the medals.
Our talent pool isn’t really a billion, some argue; it’s only the well off and middle class, maybe 300 million strong, who can afford to play sports.
But even that is a larger population base than a hundred countries that do better than India at the Olympics.
On the other hand, the incentives for success are not great; the years of sacrifice and effort it takes to become a world-class athlete are simply not a realistic option to an Indian who needs to make a living, and sponsors are few and far between (and they are all spending their sponsorship money on cricket).
Finally, there’s the usual Indian problem: sports administrative bodies and government departments are ridden with patronage and petty bossism, with officials more interested in protecting their turf (and enjoying paid vacations to sporting events) than in promoting athletes.
With all these factors, failure in the Olympics, it is suggested, is encoded in our national DNA.
Yet success or failure still depends on the individual athlete.
Indian genes in a developing country did not prevent Vijay Singh emerging from Fiji to rival Tiger Woods as the best golfer in the world.
And if Indians can be better than white and black sportsmen on the cricket field, why can’t they beat them in an Olympic stadium?
The newly globalized India can no longer content itself with mediocrity in this global competition.
For a land with world-class computer scientists, mathematicians, biotech researchers, filmmakers, and novelists, sporting excellence is the last unconquered frontier.
But 2008 won’t be the year in which that frontier is breached.
India’s Second Wind
NEW DELHI – The Indian economy is coming back.
After several years of disappointing performance, the authorities are shifting to policies aimed at boosting the annual growth rate closer to the roughly 9% level that India achieved from 2004 to 2008.
That won’t be easy.
India has many handicaps and lacks many of the things that are needed to sustain rapid growth.
Although India has outstanding universities and technological institutes, the primary-education system is disastrously poor.
The caste system and labor laws prevent an efficient labor market.
The policy of quotas for lower castes and for members of certain “scheduled” tribes affects educational institutions, government employment, and even private firms.
Populist policies that transfer scarce budget funds to hundreds of millions of rural men and women end up encouraging them to withdraw their labor services, driving up wages and undermining international competitiveness.
True, bureaucratic rules are not nearly as constraining as they were during the pre-1991 “license raj.”
But business activity remains bogged down by myriad restrictions and a frustratingly slow judicial system, which, together with a complex system of price subsidies, encourage widespread corruption at every level of government.
Moreover, India’s infrastructure is inadequate for a modern economy.
With too little electricity, blackouts are common.
Ports are inefficient, roads are congested, and traffic is astonishingly chaotic.
And, while India urgently needs to reform its tax system, spending policies, and regulation, political change is difficult in a multiparty federalist democracy of 1.2 billion people spread over a large subcontinent.
The current government is a fragile multiparty coalition.
The Congress party leads the government, but lacks a majority in both chambers of Parliament.
Coalition infighting and the prospect of a national election in 2014 further complicate efforts to enact reform legislation.
And yet, despite everything, India’s economy did record roughly 9% growth for several years, and even now is growing by nearly 6% annually, behind only China and Indonesia among major economies.
One key to India’s economic success is a large population of technically educated entrepreneurs, who are creating new companies and building a modern middle class.
A high rate of private saving and strong inflows of capital from abroad have supported investment in plant and equipment.
The Indian states have substantial policy discretion and often compete to attract businesses and achieve rapid economic growth.
The main ingredient needed to achieve faster sustained growth is increased investment.
Reducing the budget deficit – by limiting government spending and combating a culture of tax avoidance – will increase total domestic savings available to invest.
Convincing foreign direct investors that India is a reliable destination will increase the inflow of long-term funds.
Fortunately, the recent threat of a downgrade of Inda’s sovereign credit rating – which would have made it difficult to finance the current-account deficit – has led to a government reshuffle and a shift in policies.
The key political change was the appointment of a new finance minister, Palaniappan Chidambaram, whose selection by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Congress party leader Sonia Gandhi sent a strong positive signal to the Indian business community and to financial markets.
Chidambaram, a Harvard-trained lawyer who has held the finance portfolio twice before, is committed to increasing growth and to adopting pro-market policies.
He knows what needs to be done – and is pushing his political colleagues to do it.
One sign of progress is that a new cabinet committee, chaired by Singh, will review large private investment projects that have been held up by regulatory issues or other legal barriers.
Breaking this logjam will be important, both in itself and for the message that it conveys to domestic and foreign investors.
Likewise, India’s recent decision to allow large foreign retailers like Wal-Mart to enter the market reflects an encouraging change of attitude that is important beyond the specifics of the particular firms that will now come to India.
And legislation will soon create the opportunity for expanded foreign ownership in the financial sector.
On the fiscal front, the shift from a complex system of state-level indirect taxes to a national goods and services tax (a type of value-added tax) will improve efficiency and raise revenue.
Lowering the subsidy for diesel fuel was politically difficult, but will reduce both the fiscal deficit and excessive use of diesel products.
Government investment in infrastructure, both alone and in partnership with private firms, will also directly benefit growth and attract larger inflows of foreign investment.
Finally, a remarkable plan to enroll every Indian adult in a program using fingerprint identification as a substitute for bank debit cards will allow more efficient distribution of funds to poor villagers and the urban poor.
More than three hundred million Indians have already been enrolled.
All of this is an enormous undertaking – one that confronts innumerable potential impediments, both economic and political.
But I am betting that India is rising again: millions more will be lifted out of poverty in the coming years, while the increasingly prosperous Indian middle class will expand further.
India Stops Turning the Other Cheek
NEW DELHI – For two and a half decades, Pakistan has pursued a policy of inflicting on India “death by a thousand cuts” – bleeding the country through repeated terrorist attacks, rather than attempting an open military confrontation which it cannot win against India’s superior conventional forces.
The logic is that India’s response to this tactic would always be tempered by its desire not to derail its ambitious economic development plans, as well as the Indian government’s unwillingness to face the risk of a nuclear war.
But this predictable and repetitive pattern of India-Pakistan relations was suddenly disrupted on September 29, when India’s Director-General of Military Operations (DGMO), Lieutenant-General Ranbir Singh, announced that Indian commandos had conducted “surgical strikes” across the Line of Control (LoC) in Kashmir, the de facto international border between the two countries.
The DGMO stated that the strikes, in the early hours of that morning, had destroyed terrorist “launch pads” and eliminated significant numbers of militants poised to cross over for attacks on the Indian side, as well as some who were protecting them (presumably a reference to Pakistani soldiers).
The Indian public and the country’s notoriously fractious political class reacted with great pride to the news, unanimously hailing the decisive action as long overdue.
For the preceding quarter-century, Indians had watched helplessly as their attempts at peace-making with their belligerent, military-dominated neighbor had collapsed repeatedly, thanks to terrorist attacks from Pakistan that the government in Islamabad seemed unable or unwilling to prevent.
The most horrific of these attacks, the assaults on multiple locations in Mumbai, starting on November 26, 2008, killed 166 innocent civilians.
But India confined its response to diplomatic action.
This exercise of “strategic restraint” in the face of repeated Pakistani assaults – partly in order to avoid provoking a full-fledged war with its nuclear-armed neighbor – had left many Indians seething in impotent fury.
It seemed to them that Pakistani terrorists could strike at will in India, with the government’s reluctance to hit back guaranteeing the killers’ impunity.
In January, militants struck across the frontier at the Indian base in Pathankot.
As usual, India tempered its response, even inviting Pakistan to join in an official investigation of the attack.
The Pakistanis sent over a team of military and intelligence experts, which examined the site of the assaults, went home, and proclaimed it a false-flag operation intended to inculpate an innocent Pakistan.
Indians, sickened by this perfidy, found themselves mourning again in September, when another cross-border assault killed 18 soldiers at an Army base in Uri.
Still, there seemed little Indians could do – until the DGMO’s statement announcing a decisive military response.
Pakistani reactions were a curious mixture, ranging from dismissive declarations (backed by orchestrated bus tours of journalists to selected parts of the LoC) that no surgical strikes had even occurred, to angry statements declaring that irresponsible Indian firing across the LoC had killed two Pakistani soldiers.
For once, the Pakistani military appeared to have been caught off guard by Indian action.
Indians braced themselves for the international community’s disapproval – the fear of nuclear war between the sub-continental neighbors usually dominates world opinion whenever bilateral tensions flare.
But this time, thanks in part to the DGMO’s measured and precise statement and an absence of military triumphalism in India’s official tone (the braggadocio of the ruling party’s publicists came later), the world seemed to consider India’s response justifiable.
Pakistani attempts to seek support against India were widely rebuffed, with Pakistan’s usual supporters, China and the US, mildly calling for both sides to defuse the tensions.
In the days following the strikes, fears of further military escalation have subsided.
India also tightened the diplomatic screws on its recalcitrant neighbor, persuading other members of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) to call off a planned summit in Islamabad as punishment for Pakistan’s bad behavior.
India’s government also announced that it was undertaking a review of the Indus Waters Treaty, under which India has conceded to Pakistan, on generous terms, the waters of the Indus River, which originates in India, not even using the share to which it is entitled.
It has since emerged that the operation announced by Singh was not India’s first military strike across the LoC; several had occurred under the previous government as well, in response to military raids on Indian territory.
But the strikes were the first to be announced publicly, providing a clear signal of intent and a bold statement that business as usual – Pakistani pinpricks followed by Indian inaction – is no longer to be expected.
With its calibrated and targeted strikes, India has made clear that inaction is not the only possible response to terrorist provocations.
It is a brave and slightly risky strategy, because it obliges India to pursue a similar course of action when the next significant terrorist strike occurs.
Still, a country that refuses to suffer repeated body blows earns more respect than one whose restraint can be interpreted as weakness.
If this determination, and Pakistan’s ensuing diplomatic isolation, prompts Pakistani generals to rethink their policy of sponsoring terrorism as an instrument of state policy, peace between the neighbors could once again become a possibility.
But, for India, such hopes have been betrayed too often in the recent past for it to continue to turn the other cheek.
India’s Wounded State
NEW DELHI – The September 7 bomb blast at the entrance to the High Court in New Delhi was a macabre finale to a summer of crisis.
Previously, weeks of anti-corruption protests launched by Anna Harare, and supported by the country’s rising middle class, had brought India’s government to a virtual standstill.
This was followed by an embarrassing surrender to the demand of protestors that a powerful new anti-corruption agency be established.
For some people, the protests that paralyzed large swathes of the capital were akin to a festival.
Others, following the government’s retreat, grandiosely thought the events amounted to a revolution.
To be sure, a large part of urban “middle India” has revolted against the tyranny of daily corruption.
But will the Harare-led protests deliver real change or merely media hyperbole?
Whichever side one takes, the consequences are disturbing: Indian society, the core of Indian nationhood, is now questioning the very legitimacy of the Indian state. 
India’s nationhood resides in a non-territorial civilizational entity.
The Indian state, on the other hand, is a historical variable that has periodically governed parts of the subcontinent.
Following independence in 1947, a centralized Indian state emerged for the first time.
For citizens, the Indian state is the great provider – mai-baap, literally “mother and father.”
The strength of Indian nationhood, however, lies not in this state but in Indian society.
This idea was at the core of Gandhi’s beliefs; he emphasized “reform of society,” because only that, he believed, could correct the state’s ills.
Herein lies the central disconnect, and also the source of discontent, for today’s India: if and when an Indian citizen now approaches this state, for even the most routine of needs, the state inflicts pain rather than providing succor.
The Indian state’s fundamental inability to redress grievances, correct mistakes, and attend to its citizens’ most basic needs has given rise to a ruinous level of corruption, as citizens, despairing of obtaining their due fairly, try to buy it instead.
The state then turns into a monopoly seller, and thus an enemy of its own society.
For Anna Harare and his followers, the only solution is another state agency – a vast and all-powerful anti-corruption watchdog with the power to coerce and intimidate.
Others call for a spiritual revival within Indian society.
It is no surprise, of course, that large crowds cheered for Harare and his anti-corruption movement, by which they assumed a vicarious role in slaying the demon of corruption.
Their abuse was reserved for “evil parliamentarians” – or any politicians – as vile agents of a crooked state.
Unfortunately, India’s government misunderstood the anti-corruption protests from the start.
At first, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh stood firm against Harare’s demands on technical grounds.
But this proved insufficient to halt a growing sense of drift and decay concerning his Congress Party-led coalition.
This sense of malaise was highlighted on India’s Independence Day (August 15).
Confronted by multiple charges of corruption against his government, the prime minister’s address to the nation partly sought to divert attention from the scandals by focusing, bizarrely, on a litany of other problems, from high inflation and the Naxalite rebellion to persistent malnutrition and terrorist attacks.
Yet the overriding theme remained corruption.
And what else could it be?
After all, the current government is possibly the most corrupt, in every sense, that India has ever experienced.
Were periodic elections the only yardstick of democracy, India would have achieved what US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton calls the “gold standard.”
But that is far removed from reality and the nature of its ruling party.
The Congress Party, to paraphrase Brown University’s Richard Snyder, resembles a “neo-patrilineal dictatorship,” in which “[p]eople get goodies for being close to the ruler.”
Proximity to the Gandhi family is everything.
Congress, at its core, pursues a form of dynastic democracy with the characteristics of a “Sultanistic regime” – a regime with no purpose or function apart from maintaining the “leader’s personal authority.”
But, though such leaders perhaps have more personal authority than even medieval monarchs, their authority is brittle.
Moreover, societies lose their cohesion under such regimes; they begin to lack a shared set of values, for they become relegated to living in “a belief vacuum.”
There is another depressing aspect to the corruption debate.
Both Singh and the US State Department helped spread the canard that foreign influence was at work behind the scenes.
“External forces,” Singh declared in Parliament, are trying to prevent India from taking “its true place” in the comity of nations.
“We must not play into their hands,” he intoned gravely.
Meanwhile, a State Department spokesperson urged India’s authorities to act with “appropriate democratic restraint” in response to the crisis provoked by Harare’s protests.
This was an egregious bit of meddling.
After all, non-violent protests are an Indian specialty
But Gandhi’s yardstick for non-violent protest was satyagraha – “the protest of truth.”
By contrast, India’s current anti-corruption protests may be missing the point, for the central challenge in fighting corruption is to establish a freedom born of righteous conduct, not to authorize a new source of state coercion.
Indian society must regain its strength – and its proper role.
Only when India, as the great poet Rabindranath Tagore put it, is a place “where the head is held high and the mind is without fear” will it be able to act with the confidence, honesty, and generosity its citizens demand and deserve.
India’s Year of Living Stagnantly
NEW DELHI – Will 2012 prove to be a year of renewal for India, or another annus horribilis?
No country progresses unerringly, but India cannot afford another politically and economically torpid year like 2011.
For India, last year is a year best forgotten.
India has been so deeply mired in political paralysis that the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen recently said that the country has “fallen from being the second best to the second worst” South Asian country, and that it is currently “no match for China” on social indicators.
This is a damning comment on a country that held such promise just a short time ago.
In early January, the American social critic James Howard Kunstler described India as “a nation with one foot in the modern age and the other in a colorful hallucinatory dreamtime.”
Kunstler’s view is harsh, but perhaps prophetic: India’s “climate-change-related problems are doing heavy damage to the food supply.
Their groundwater is almost gone.
The troubles of the wobbling global economy will take a lot of pep out of their burgeoning tech and manufacturing sectors.”
Indeed, suddenly, India’s economy has begun spinning out of control.
Last year, the country’s GDP growth slowed, manufacturing plummeted, and inflation and corruption grew uncontrollably.
Elected and unelected government officials alike, including cabinet ministers, members of parliament, and civil servants, were implicated in corruption scandals.
The situation triggered recollections of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s fraudulent call for a state of emergency in 1975, when she ruled by decree for 21 months, suspending elections and civil liberties.
The population’s outraged response to these events was visceral, and previously unknown figures such as the anti-corruption activist Anna Hazare rallied thousands of Indians in meetings across the country to protest against government corruption.
As Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s government floundered, the opposition vainly sought to gain the upper hand.
But, to ordinary Indians, this political gamesmanship appeared to be merely a farce – the blind pretending to lead the unsighted.
Perhaps for the first time ever, India’s government failed to enact even a single piece of legislation, much less undertake any economic reforms, restore price stability, or address widespread civil disorder.
As the Indian business analyst Virendra Parekh has observed:&nbsp; “The second fastest-growing economy in the world now has the unenviable distinction of having the fastest falling financial markets in Asia.”
Moreover, “the fortunes of the rupee are….tightly linked with the euro, which is in the throes of an existential crisis...” This has resulted in another, albeit unintended, consequence: “Unscrupulous politicians, bureaucrats and businessmen, who have stashed their illicit wealth abroad, are bringing some of it back,” passing off the money as export earnings.
Where corruption has been absent, incompetence has replaced it.
Furthermore, weaknesses in agriculture, energy, infrastructure, and governance have all contributed to India’s current crisis.
For example, approximately a quarter-million Indian farmers have allegedly committed suicide over the last 16 years, despite unprecedented economic growth.
This statistic begs the question of why India continues to import foods and oils that could be produced domestically.
Solutions offered by organizations such as the US-India Business Council or USAID do not address the problem’s roots, and the crisis will most likely continue in 2012.
It is imperative that India invest in its agriculture, not only for economic reasons, but also because it is central to the country’s culture.
Another concern is nuclear power.
In 2008, the United States and India agreed to a civil nuclear deal that would allow India to expand its nuclear-power capability.
In 2010, India’s parliament passed the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Bill, a precondition for activating that agreement.
But, following Japan’s Fukushima nuclear disaster in March 2011, safety concerns surrounding nuclear power are large and mounting.
Local farmers, fishermen, and environmentalists have spent months protesting a planned six-reactor nuclear-power complex on the plains of Jaitapur, south of Mumbai.
In April, the protests turned violent, leaving one man dead and dozens injured.
India will certainly see more anti-nuclear clashes in 2012.
At the heart of India’s current malaise is a paradox: rapid growth in real income has not been matched by genuine advances in living standards.
If the country’s fundamental problems are to be addressed, India needs a government with the determination, integrity, and intelligence to meet the complex demands of modern governance in the twenty-first century.
India Takes the Lead
A decisive blow against poverty was struck when India's new Finance Minister Chidambaram tabled the 2004/2005 budget.
India is a country on the move, with rapid economic development and dazzling dynamism in the information technology sector. Yet it is also home to 300 million of the world's poorest people.
In last May's national elections, India's rural voters unseated the ruling coalition.
The lesson was clear: attend to rural poverty.
The new government has listened, putting forward a program that is dazzling in its implications, for India and the developing world.
India's new government is led by a veritable "dream team" of international development.
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is one of the world's leading development economists.
It was Singh, serving in mid-1991 as India's Finance Minister, who began India's market reforms.
He dismantled decades of inefficient and ineffective government restraints on trade, investment, and entrepreneurship, unleashing more than a decade of the fastest economic growth in India's history.
Upon returning to office this spring as Prime Minister, Singh brought into government an experienced and internationally renowned team, including Finance Minister Chidambaram, who served successfully as Finance Minister in the mid-1990's, and Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia, who heads the Planning Commission, the key body assessing India's medium-term public investment strategies.
When the former government lost the vote this past May, and Singh's government came into office, there were fears that Singh would be hamstrung by left-wing coalition partners, who would demand that market reforms be dismantled as the price of their participation in the new ruling coalition.
Chidambaram's 2004/2005 budget puts those fears to rest.
The document is a brilliant lesson in development economics: it shows how to combine a full-speed ahead approach to market reforms with urgently needed attention to poverty.
In short, the budget is a model for all developing countries.
At the heart of the budget is the realization that reducing poverty requires both rapid economic growth and targeted investments aimed at the poorest of the poor.
Rapid economic growth is to be based on the private sector, including foreign direct investment.
Thus, the budget supports critical areas of market reform and growth promotion, including measures aimed at deepening the financial sector, promoting exports, and liberalizing foreign direct investment.
The key, however, is that the budget does not rely simply on "trickle-down" economics to raise living standards.
The second pillar of poverty reduction is targeted investments for the poor, particularly for the rural poor.
This approach commits India's national government and state governments to ensuring that all Indians, including the poorest, have access to basic social investments, including health, nutrition, and schooling, and to basic infrastructure, including electricity, information and communications technology, safe drinking water, and inputs for modern agriculture. Every village is to be lifted up in the next few years, empowered with the basic tools to become economically productive.
The scale of the challenge is immense.
There are an estimated 600,000 villages in this vast country of one billion citizens.
Villages that are far from major ports and cities tend to be poorer and less invigorated by the recent economic growth.
The government proposes to equip these villages with the basic infrastructure and services they need to take off economically.
The government's programs are not mere populist promises. They reflect sensible investments that the government intends to pursue.
The budget calls for a surtax on incomes to help pay for increased social expenditures.
The lesson for other developing countries is that spending on the poor for health, education, safe drinking water, electricity, and the like, is not simply pandering; it is a serious and productive investment.
It may be expensive to educate a child, but it is far more expensive to a society to leave a child without education.
Uneducated children will be burdens on their societies for decades to come.
It is far more rational to spend a little extra income now for a few years of schooling than face decades of social costs resulting from masses of uneducated adult workers!
But even India, with its growing economy, cannot afford to make these investments out of national resources.
India will need some help, at least temporarily, from richer countries and international institutions like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
The rich world should not be grudging in its help to India.
By providing a few billion dollars per year in assistance now, the donor world would ensure a prosperous, democratic, and stable partner in India for decades to come.
In other words, it is time for donors to step up to help reform-minded yet poor countries like India, and, even more urgently, those in Africa that are similarly committed to economic development.
Демонетизация ережелері
КЕМБРИДЖ – 8 қараша күні кешкі сағат 20:15-те, Үндістан премьер-министрі Нарендра Моди басқарған үкімет дәл түн ортасы кезінде, қолданыстағы барлық 500 және 1000 рупий банкноттары айналымнан алып тасталынып және жаңа 500 және 2000 рупий банкноталарына айырбасталуы қажет деп хабарлады.  Модидің «демонетизация»  бойынша шешімі Үндістанда айналыстағы ақшаның 85% -на әсер етті.
Үндістанда немесе дерлік дүниежүзінде бұл теңдессіз қадам болды, және ол бүгінгі күнге дейін Модидің ең батыл саяси шешімі болып табылады.
Моди үкіметі олардың шешімі салық төлеуден жалтару, сыбайлас жемқорлық, жалған ақша жасауға байланысты «қара ақшамен» және, осылайша, есірткі, контрабандалық қызметпен айналысатындар мен террористермен күресуге бағытталған.
Үндістанның салық төлейтін, жалдамалы жұмысшылар табы және тіпті кедейлер бастапқыда шынайы ынтамен бұл саясатты құптады, себебі олар мұны арам жолмен пайда жиып, салықтан жалтарғандардан тәтті кек алу ретінде көрді; олар қуанып тұрып, қолма-қол ақша сөмкелерін өртеген немесе Үндістанның өзендеріне ақша лақтырған жемқор шенеуніктер туралы әңгімелерді таратты.
Бірақ күн өткен сайын, бұл бастапқы қуаныш та азайды.
Үкімет жаңа банкноталарға сұранысты қанағаттандыра алмады, сондықтан қоғам наразылығы қазірде өсіп жатыр. Үндістанда сауда (қолма-қол ақша ЖІӨ-нің 10%-ын құрайды) - кассалық операцияларға қатты тәуелді, бейресми экономика және шағын бизнес операциялары енді  банктердегі үлкен кезектер, мардымсыз қолма-қол ақша алу лимиттері мен банкоматтардағы ақша тапшылығының арқасында тоқтап қалды.
Жақын мерзімдегі әсер экономиканы «анти-ынталандыру» саясатының салдарындай болады, және бұдан кейінгі сұраныстың тежелуі елеулі болмақ.
Сонымен қатар, жылжымайтын мүлік бағасы төмендеген сайын, тұрмыстық ауқаттық деңгей де төмендейді.
Төмен тұрғын үй бағасы жаңа үйлерді алуды қолжетімді ете түседі, дегенмен, қолданыстағы үйлердің саны жаңа сатып алғандардан асып түсіп, п��йдадан гөрі молшылық жағдайына теріс әсері көбірек болады.
Осы үлкен шығындарға қарасақ, демонетизация салық төлеуден жалтару және сыбайлас жемқорлыққа қарсы күресте қаншалықты тиімді, және демонетизацияның ең шығыны аз жүзеге асыру жолы бар ма деген сұрақтар туындайды.
1976 жылы «Mафияна азаптау жолдары» атты мақаласында американдық экономист Джеймс Генри бұл тиімділікке қатысты мәселелерді зерттеп, демонетизацияны мафия операцияларымен қарсы күресте тиімді шара ретінде көрсетті.