While the idea of redefining the status quo may sound crazy, it may be, to paraphrase the physicist Niels Bohr, just crazy enough to be right.
Egypt after Morsi
BERLIN – Egypt lies at the heart of the Arab revolution, even if the original spark occurred in Tunisia.
But Egypt – with its strategic location, stable borders, large population, and ancient history – has been the principal power of the Arab world for centuries, defining the movement of history there like no other.
This implies that the overthrow of Egypt’s democratically elected president, Mohamed Morsi, will have much broader repercussions.
Was Morsi’s ouster a classic counterrevolution in the guise of a military coup?
Or did the coup prevent a total takeover of power by the Muslim Brotherhood, and thus avert Egypt’s economic collapse and chaotic descent into religious dictatorship?
No one should deny that what happened in Egypt was a military coup, or that forces from former President Hosni Mubarak’s regime have returned to power.
But, unlike in 2011, when the few pro-Western liberals and huge numbers of urban, middle-class youth rallied against Mubarak, now the same groups support the coup, lending it a certain (democratic?) legitimacy.
Nonetheless, the overthrow of a democratically elected government by the military cannot be glossed over.
So what options does Egypt now have?
Will it repeat the Algerian tragedy, in which the military canceled an election to prevent Islamists from assuming power, leading to an eight-year civil war that claimed up to 200,000 lives?
Will the country return to military dictatorship?
Or will Egypt end up with something like a Kemalist “democracy” of the type that long prevailed in Turkey, with a civilian government but the military pulling the strings?
All three alternatives are possible, though it is impossible to predict which one will come to pass.
But one thing already can be said for certain: the basic distribution of power within Egyptian society has not changed.
The military and the Muslim Brotherhood divide power between themselves. The Western-oriented liberals do not have any real power and stand, as we are seeing now, on the army���s shoulders.
We should not forget that Morsi’s opponent in the presidential election in 2012 was Ahmed Shafik, a former general and the last Mubarak-era prime minister – certainly no liberal.
A victory by either the Brotherhood or the military would not be a victory for democracy.
Hamas, which has ruled Gaza since 2006, may serve as an example of what the Brotherhood wants: undivided power, including over the military.
Likewise, the Egyptian army’s hold on power, beginning in the 1950’s, resulted in a decades-long military dictatorship.
But there is a third and new factor now in play, one that does not measure power in the same way as the military and the Brotherhood.
Through their leadership of the protests for two years, urban middle-class youth have gained their own legitimacy, and, with their technological and linguistic capacities, are able to dominate global debate about Egypt.
These young people want progress, not power; they want the future to resemble the life that they see on the Internet and in the West.
If this movement were channeled into institutional politics, it would significantly affect Egypt’s internal distribution of power.
Egypt’s unfolding drama will be framed by the triangle of contradictions and demands among these three groups.
And it should not be forgotten that, along with young people’s sense that they lacked a future under the nationalistic military dictatorships of the past, mass poverty was the second trigger of the 2011 revolution.
Underlying the contradiction between the military and the Muslim Brotherhood is not only the question of religion, but also all of the social problems, including inequality, that riddle Arab societies.
The Brotherhood has effectively assumed a role similar to that of left-wing European political parties in the nineteenth century.
Whoever wants to weaken the Brotherhood has to address the urgent social issues that it raises and try to solve them.
This means that whatever solution ultimately prevails will be measured according to whether it can solve the economic crisis (particularly the lack of job opportunities for the young) and deepening mass poverty.
The chances of this are slim.
Throughout the Arab world, nationalism constricts societies and retards cooperation, the dismantling of tariffs, and the creation of an economic community.
And yet the economies of the Arab countries in crisis are too small to succeed on their own; even if everything goes well, they cannot offer their large and young populations hope of a positive future.
They need enhanced cooperation, which, given a common language, would rest on a stronger foundation than it does in Europe.
In Egypt, the West should work with all three leading political forces – the military, the Brotherhood, and the urban young – because no short-term solution will come in the form of one option.
The worst approach would be to marginalize or even persecute the Muslim Brotherhood and political Islam again.
More broadly, with Syria’s civil war destabilizing Lebanon and threatening to do the same in Jordan, and with Iraq plagued by similar sectarian violence, the military coup in Egypt appears to herald the end of the Arab revolutions, at least for the time being.
Everywhere, the signs are pointing backwards.
But we should not be deceived.
Even if the struggle for power seems decided, this does not mean a return to the former status quo.
When the revolutions of 1848 in Europe were rolled back the following year, everything was nonetheless different, as we now know.
The monarchies remained in power for decades, but the Industrial Revolution and the advent of democracy had become unstoppable.
We also know, however, that this led Europe to a future that was anything but serene.
The Arab world might not be so deeply affected, but the near future there will certainly be neither peaceful nor stable.
The Arab Wars of Religion
MADRID – Throughout the Arab world, a struggle between two major historical forces, religion and secularism, is now unfolding.
It is the type of battle between Caesar and God that took Europe centuries to resolve.
The future of the Arab Middle East will be decided in the fight between Syria’s Sunni insurgents, supported throughout the region by the Saudi Wahhabis – the patrons of religious fundamentalism – and its secular Baath regime; between the fundamentalist Hamas and the secular PLO in Palestine; and between Egypt’s young secular opposition, forged in the protests of Tahrir Square, and the Muslim Brotherhood and radical Salafists.
The consequences of the Egyptian coup have still to unfold.
The secular opposition’s accession to power on the back of a tank might feed the Islamists’ rage for years to come.
The Muslim Brotherhood’s loss of trust in the democratic process would be bad news for Egypt and a boost to Al Qaeda and other jihadists who believe that power can be obtained only through blood and terror.
The concept of separation of church and state is alien to Islam – former Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini once famously declared that “Islam is politics or it is nothing” – and Islamists have still to prove that they are amenable to democratic governance.
Indeed, Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s deposed president, has only himself to blame for his political demise.
His sectarian, authoritarian behavior polarized his country to such a degree that even the army’s chief, General Abdul Fattah al-Sisi, known for his Islamist sympathies, withdrew his support from the man who had appointed him.
Likewise, the revival of the Shia-Sunni civil war in Iraq largely reflects the sectarian rule of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki.
Nor has Hamas’s rise to power in Gaza ushered in inclusive, democratic governance.
After having failed to reverse Hamas’s electoral victory by military means, the PLO agreed with its Islamist rivals on a plan for national reconciliation; but this pact remains a dead letter.
As for Syria, the revolt against one of the most secular autocracies in the Arab world has degenerated into a fight to the death between Sunnis and Shia that is spilling over to other countries in the region.
A Sunni jihad has now been launched against the Baath regime and its Shia allies, Iran and Hezbollah.
Neighboring Lebanon, with its fierce Sunni-Shia divide, is already being directly affected.
The struggle between religion and state in the Maghreb is less violent, but potentially explosive nonetheless.
Tunisia, where the Arab Spring began, is now caught between secularists and religious fundamentalists.
The Islamist Ennahda party leads the government, but it faces a serious challenge from the ultra-conservative Salafists of Hizb Ut-Tahrir.
In Morocco, King Mohammed VI did not conceal his support for the Egyptian coup, but the Islamist Justice and Development Party, which leads his government, denounced it.
Indeed, Istiqlal, a secular center-right party, left the government in the wake of the Egyptian coup, accusing the JDP, under Prime Minister Abdelilah Benkirane, of trying to “Egyptianize” Morocco by monopolizing power, as Morsi did in Egypt.
Even in Turkey, a non-Arab Muslim country with strong aspirations to reconcile Islam with democracy, the agreement between Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Islamist government and the urban middle class to limit official encroachment on secular lifestyles is unraveling.
Erdoğan now promises to “reconstruct Turkey” in his own authoritarian and religious image.
The Arabs’ march to freedom is bound to be a long and tortuous process – perhaps the main geopolitical test of the twenty-first century.
Yet the battle between secularism and religion in the Arab world does not have to last centuries, as it did in Europe, if only because contemporary generations can benefit from the long process of social and scientific progress that enabled the West to pave the way to modern democracy.
But adapting this Western legacy for the contemporary Arab world, while recovering Arabs’ own medieval heritage of tolerance and scientific excellence, will be difficult.
One hopes that Egypt’s defeated Islamists will move from the politics of vengeance to a soul-searching process that leads to the recognition that democracy is not a zero-sum game in which the winner takes all.
The Leninist “democratic centralism” to which Morsi seemed to have subscribed, if maintained, will be a standing provocation to the new generations and their allies in the old state apparatus to rise up, even at the price of civil war.
Showdown in Egypt
LONDON – With massive anti-government protests across Egypt on June 30 – a year to the day after Egyptians elected their first-ever civilian president – a diverse and decentralized movement has challenged President Mohammad Morsi’s hold on power as never before.
Hundreds of thousands were mobilized to take to the streets, with many storming and burning down the Cairo headquarters of the ruling Muslim Brotherhood.
At the end of the day, the president was given an ultimatum.
The first “revolutionary” statement of Egypt’s new grassroots Tamarod (rebel) movement demanded that Morsi leave within two days or face a march on the presidential palace.
“In the name of 22 million citizens, we declare that Mohammad Morsi is no longer the legitimate President of Egypt.”
The protesters then appealed to “the institutions of the state, the army, the police, and the judiciary to side with the popular will.”
The army has spoken, issuing an ultimatum of its own to Morsi: Address the protesters’ demands or face a military solution to the crisis.
As the day ended, Morsi’s office declared that it had not been consulted prior to the army’s statement, and tens of thousands of the president’s supporters demonstrated in several cities simultaneously at midnight.
So what will happen next?
And what impact will the Tamarod movement and the army intervention have on Egypt’s precarious democratization process?
The path to today’s crisis was predictable.
Morsi won the presidential election with only 51.7% of the vote, while the other 48.3% included very powerful forces, including figures from the Mubarak regime and their supporters.
Opposition to Morsi hardened following the annulled November 2012 constitutional declaration, by which he had sought sweeping powers – allegedly to protect the country’s infant elected institutions against a politicized judiciary.
The lack of tangible material gains for ordinary Egyptians also fueled public anger.
All of the presidential candidates had made wild promises; but the absence of significant achievement, such as resolving the country’s chronic shortages of gas and electricity, helped to fuel the massive anti-Morsi mobilization.
Incompetence during a political transition has a high price.
But Morsi is not entirely without accomplishments or supporters.
Last August, he culled the leaders of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF).
On the economic front, the Egyptian Central Bank’s report for the period of July 2012 to March 2013 indicates that the balance-of-payments deficit fell from $11.2 billion to $2.1 billion, owing to rising tourism revenues and debt forgiveness.
This improvement did not trickle down to ordinary citizens, and there was no effective media and communication strategy to capitalize on it.
But Morsi’s core supporters remain committed.
Whereas only a few hundred showed up to support the fraudulently elected Mubarak during the revolution, hundreds of thousands of Egyptians rallied for two consecutive weeks in Rab‘a al-‘Adawiyya square, near the presidential palace, to express their solidarity with Morsi.
If Morsi survives in office, he will have to rely on the army to guarantee his government’s safety.
He will also need a massive show of strength from his supporters.
But this would mean returning the army to the center of politics – and thus sacrificing the gains from Morsi’s imposition last August of greater civilian control.
And the army’s ultimatum indicates that the military is moving in the direction of a coup.
Mobilization of Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamist supporters is also risky.
Indeed, the revolutionary step of steering once-armed Islamists toward electoral and constitutional politics could be reversed in ongoing power struggle.
If Morsi does not remain in power, much will depend on how he is removed.
Reliance on street mobilization and army intervention to bring down an elected leader who has support on the ground is unlikely to lead to a positive outcome.
On the contrary, that pattern – seen in Spain in 1936, Iran in 1953, Chile in 1973, Turkey in 1980, Sudan in 1989, and Algeria and Tajikistan in 1992 – usually leads to military dictatorships, civil wars, or both.
But there is also Charles de Gaulle’s precedent of a peaceful exit by an elected president.
The massive protests in France in 1968 led to an early parliamentary election, which de Gaulle’s supporters won decisively.
But de Gaulle later resigned of his own volition, over an issue of minor importance.
The problem with this precedent is that Morsi does not have de Gaulle’s background, and Egypt’s chaotic political transition of 2013 is far from France’s consolidated democracy of 1968.
French Gaullists did not face persecution; several Egyptian opposition figures have already vowed that Morsi and the Muslim Brothers will.
That raises the stakes of political survival considerably, especially given the absence of any credible guarantor of constitutional norms and behavior.
Moreover, a possible replacement for Morsi is not very clear.
Parts of the opposition speak of a transitional “presidential council.”
But that idea failed once already, during the SCAF’s rule (February 2011-June 2012), owing partly to the lack of popular mobilization behind a uniting figure(s), but mostly because of the egos – indeed, megalomania – of the politicians involved.
Morsi will almost certainly not be removed without the involvement of the army and the security establishment.
And the winners will probably try their best to block the Islamist forces from a comeback, implying another cycle of no-holds-barred political – and perhaps physical – combat, in which democracy serves as a mask to legitimize the exclusion, and possibly the destruction, of one’s political opponents.
Egypt’s Dead Men Walking
CAIRO – Mass death sentences are usually associated with regimes like those of Adolf Hitler’s Nazis or Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge.
But Egypt’s military rulers have now joined the ranks of such regimes, staging circus-like trials in which the outcome is foreordained.
One such trial, in March 2014, produced 529 death sentences; another, in April, yielded 683 death sentences.
And the trend shows no signs of slowing.
Last month, 107 people – including Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s first freely elected president – were handed death sentences for their alleged role in a mass “prison break” during the January 2011 uprising against former President Hosni Mubarak.
Morsi was also accused of “colluding with foreign militants” – that is, Hezbollah and Hamas – in order to free political prisoners in Egypt.
Soon after, the six defendants in the so-called “Arab Sharkas” case – who were handed death sentences in October 2014 for allegedly attacking security posts – were executed, despite a local and international outcry against the flawed trial.
According to Ahmed Helmi, a lawyer for four of the six men, the government wanted to “send a message following Morsi’s verdict” that it would carry out such sentences.
His clients and the others, he concluded, were just “scapegoats.”
Overall, civilian courts have handed down more than 1,000 death sentences since Egypt’s military overthrew Morsi in July 2013.
The profiles of the “convicts” raise eyebrows: Emad Shahin, for example, is a world-renowned academic who has taught at Harvard and the American University in Cairo; Sondos Asem is a promising young scholar and political activist.
Making matters worse, extra-judicial killings by the security services and elements in the military are rampant.
The most dramatic of these episodes accompanied the coup in July 2013, when Egyptian police and army opened fire on crowds protesting Morsi’s ouster in Cairo’s Rab’a Square, killing more than 1,000 protesters in less than ten hours.
More recently, Islam Atito, an engineering student at Cairo’s Ain Shams University who supported the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, was found dead in the desert on the outskirts of Cairo.
Egypt’s interior ministry claimed that Atito had been involved in the “assassination” of a police officer and was killed in a firefight with security forces during a raid on his “hideout.”
But according to the student union of the university’s engineering faculty – whose members collectively resigned in protest against the killing – Atito was arrested during a final exam on the university campus.
The government, it is claimed, had Atito abducted and murdered in response to his activism.
As a human-rights lawyer monitoring the case notes, this is just one of several such cases – none of which is being seriously investigated.
These judicial and extra-judicial killings reflect the depth of Egypt’s current crisis.
The “hawks” who control the security and military establishments seem intent on restoring a Mubarak-style regime, but with one key difference: they believe that Mubarak did too little to repress the opposition.
For Egypt’s current leadership, the brutal tactics employed by the likes of Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi and Syria’s Bashar al-Assad are more likely to work in the Egyptian context than in those countries.
After all, the probability of international intervention (as in Libya) is nil, and the likelihood of a full-fledged armed revolution (as in Syria) is extremely limited.
But relying on force to subdue dissent in a country where 70% of the population is under the age of 30 will be a major challenge, if not resulting in a bloodbath.
The brutal policies of Egypt’s hawks have also transformed the opposition.
At a 2013 sit-in protesting Morsi’s ouster, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Supreme Guide, Mohamed Badie, declared, in what became a rallying cry for the movement, “Our peacefulness is stronger than their bullets.”
But, with Badie having since been sentenced to death in multiple cases (including one related to attacks on police stations in the southern province of Minya), the phrase has become the subject of bitter mockery among young political activists, including Brotherhood members.
Rassd, a Brotherhood-affiliated news website, recently published a letter (link in Arabic) by the group’s former secretary-general, Mahmoud Ghozlan, asserting that the “revolution” will continue to be non-violent.
But it also published harsh criticism of Ghozlan’s position by young Brotherhood activists – a notable development for an organization in which dissent is rarely publicized.
In fact, anger among younger members has become so acute that the Brotherhood has allegedly changed some 65% of its leadership, according to Ahmed Abdel-Rahman, the head of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood Administrative Office Abroad (a new body that organizes the thousands of Brotherhood members now in exile).
The organization has also adopted a harsher line, having publicly stated that the “reformist” approach that its government took after winning parliamentary and presidential elections in 2011 and 2012 was “wrong”, and that excluding non-Islamist revolutionary youth groups was a “major mistake.”
Given Egypt’s mass death sentences, extrajudicial violence, and the dominance of hawks in the security and the military establishments, together with the rhetorical, behavioral, and organizational changes within the Muslim Brotherhood, the chances of reconciliation are fading by the day.
In an environment in which “compromise” is regarded as a dirty word, Egypt’s future appears to be far from bright.
Egypt Needs a President, Not a Pharaoh
Egypt is undergoing a heated nationwide debate over political reform. The central issue is a demand by all opposition parties and civil society groups to amend the 1971 constitution and abolish the 23-year-old State of Emergency that was imposed following Anwar Sadat's assassination in 1981.
Such demands are not new. But President Hosni Mubarak and the ruling National Democratic Party have been stonewalling since the mid-1980's.
What makes the demands for reform more pressing this time are ominous developments in Egypt, the region, and in the wider world.
At home, concern about Mubarak's age (76) and deteriorating health has grown.
Mubarak's ill health, widely rumored for years, was never officially acknowledged until November 2003, when it could no longer be covered up.
While speaking to Parliament, Mubarak fainted before millions of TV viewers.
Although he returned an hour later and delivered the rest of his speech, Egyptians began to demand greater transparency regarding the president's health as well as other state affairs.
Meanwhile, Egypt's sagging economy, high unemployment rate, and rampant corruption have driven many Egyptian youngsters to despair.
More than one half of living Egyptians were born since Mubarak assumed office.
According to a recent report by the UN Development Program, roughly half of those between 15 and 30 years old dream of emigrating to Europe, North America, or Australia.
There are weekly reports of would-be illegal Egyptian immigrants drowning in the Mediterranean.
A few weeks ago, several youngsters suffocated to death while being deported back to Egypt across the Libyan desert in overloaded trucks.
The incident caused an uproar that compelled the authorities to arrest, interrogate, and try the Egyptian police officers in charge.
Regional and international events have also emboldened the Egyptian opposition, not only to press for reform, but to focus on amending the constitution's articles that pertain to the presidency.
Mubarak has been re-elected four times, and rumors have persisted that he will either seek a fifth six-year term or establish a "hereditary republic" and groom his 41-year old son, Gamal, to succeed him, like Syria's Hafez al-Assad and son, Bashar.
The opposition battle cry is "No" to Mubarak's re-election and "No" to passing the presidency to Gamal.
Many Egyptians may not have major misgivings about Gamal Mubarak per se, but they find it mortifying that, after 24 years of the father, they might be stuck with another 24 or more years of the son.
The current constitution was adopted in October 1971, and has 211 articles, 30 of which concern the presidency.
The president is nominated by two-thirds of the People's Assembly, and endorsed in a plebiscite that allows only for a simple "Yes" or "No."
A simple majority of the ballots is required to win a six-year term, which is renewable indefinitely by the same process.
These lax procedures contrast jarringly with the president's powers.
The president is the head of state and commander-in-chief; officiates over the Supreme Judiciary Council, the Supreme Police Council, and the Cabinet of Ministers; and can appoint and recall one or more vice-presidents at his sole discretion.
He also appoints the prime minister and senior ministers, and must approve all other ministers, ambassadors, and state representatives.
He can call general elections, declare war, impose a state of emergency, and issue decrees that have the force of law.
There are no checks and balances on these powers.
A single article stipulates that, "Accusation of the President of committing grand treason or any other criminal act may be made upon a motion submitted by at least one-third of members of the People's Assembly and approved by two-thirds."
The president is then suspended from carrying out his duties, and the vice-president fills in until the accusation is resolved.
But Mubarak has never enacted the law essential to implementing this article or appointed a vice-president, despite repeated popular demands to do so.
The result has been a de facto "imperial presidency," with Mubarak likened to the god-king Pharaohs of ancient Egypt.
No other head of state in modern times enjoys as much power.
A more apt analogy popular in Egypt compares Mubarak to Leonid Brezhnev, who for two decades presided over the Soviet Union's stagnation and decline.
Egypt's status as a regional power under Mubarak has similarly weakened steadily.
On the economic front, annual foreign investment inflows have plummeted from $3 billion in the mid-1990's to a minuscule $300 million in 2003.
Demands for reform are now focused on introducing direct presidential elections with two or more contenders, and limiting presidents to two consecutive terms in office.
It is no less important to reduce the presidency's sweeping powers and formulate viable mechanisms for enforcing the accountability of all public officials without exception.
Should Mubarak and his government fail to recommend constitutional amendments that satisfy these demands, ever more Egyptians will desert the regime and risk their lives in search of salvation in other lands.
Egypt on Jordan’s Mind
AMMAN – The behavior of Jordan’s Royal Court in the days following the official announcement of the victory of the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi in Egypt’s presidential election tells an intriguing story.
At first, Jordan’s King Abdullah II hesitated to sign a long-sought-after election law.
This was followed by approval of the law, a request for its revision, and a surprise official meeting with the leader of Hamas.
During the past year, King Abdullah has been adamant that Jordanians should vote in free and fair elections no later than the end of 2012.
Constitutional changes were adopted.
An independent election commission was created by law.
And a respected Jordanian jurist who had been a judge at the International Court of Justice was reprimanded for dragging his feet in getting the election law passed.
So why did the king wait four days after both houses of parliament passed the law to sign it, and why did he immediately ask for changes?
The law, which establishes a largely majoritarian system based on single-member districts, with only 17 of the parliament’s 140 seats to be elected according to national party lists, was approved by Jordan’s Senate just hours before Egypt’s independent election commission declared Morsi the winner.
People to whom I spoke in Jordan’s government and palace say that they were led to believe that the post would go to Mubarak’s last prime minister, Ahmed Shafiq.
Morsi’s victory changed everything.
Jordan’s Muslim Brotherhood boycotted the country’s parliamentary election in 2010, arguing that the government “did not provide any guarantees of its integrity.”
In the 2007 election, the Brotherhood accused the government of “fraud,” and opposed the majoritarian electoral system.
Senior officials in Jordan have been slowly walking back from the comprehensive political reforms that were promised in the initial euphoria of the Arab Spring.
Many, including former Prime Minister Awn Khasawneh, believe that this reflects a belief among senior Jordanian officials that the Arab Spring has run its course in Jordan and the region.
After all, popular protests have failed to gather steam; Bashar al-Assad’s regime has held firm in Syria; and Egypt, with neither a constitution nor a parliament, has apparently veered from democracy, if not descended into chaos.
But Khasawneh, who had encouraged Islamists to join the political process, and forged a rapprochement with the Palestinian Islamic movement Hamas, warns that it is a mistake to write off the Arab Spring.
In May, shortly after his resignation, he warned Jordanian leaders of complacency in the reform process.
His last word after being replaced by a conservative was to remind Jordan’s leaders that spring is a season that always returns.
With the announcement of Morsi’s victory in Egypt, spring seems to have returned to Jordan more quickly than even Khasawneh had expected.
The Islamic Action Front, the Brotherhood’s political party in Jordan, continued to reject the majoritarian electoral system, which favors tribes over political parties and other important social groups.
In particular, owing to the relative insignificance of national party lists, Jordanians of Palestinian origin, who comprise nearly half the electorate, receive only a small percentage of elected officials.
The King’s approval of the law will allow the newly established election commission to begin its work.
But now he wants the parliament to make the law more representative as well.
Indeed, he welcomed Hamas leader Khaled Mashal in an official meeting that included a royal lunch, meetings with Prime Minister Fayez Tarawneh, and, most important, talks with the head of Jordan’s intelligence service, which in 1999 had recommended the expulsion from Jordan of Mashal and four other senior Hamas officials.
The decisions to improve the election law and receive Mashal are not aimed solely at persuading Jordan’s own Islamists to join the political process.
Like other Arab countries, Jordan, with seven million people, looks up to Egypt, its most populous and powerful Arab neighbor.
And, economically, Jordan is still dependent on Egypt for natural gas, which is delivered at reduced rates.
Jordan seems to have read the political tea leaves and concluded that it makes more sense to improve relations with Egypt’s rising leaders than it does to fight them.
And better relations with Egypt presuppose closer ties with Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood.
Egypt’s Broken Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Egyptians’ political aspirations have dominated the country’s public life since the fall of President Hosni Mubarak last year.
Unfortunately, as those aspirations are addressed, the economy has entered a steep decline, jeopardizing one of the revolution’s main goals, namely improvement in Egyptians’ living standards and welfare.
Indeed, the populist rhetoric of Egyptian politicians threatens to undo the economic reforms undertaken by the Mubarak regime.
In 2004, a major reform program was launched under former Prime Minister Ahmed Nazif.
It was aimed at removing bureaucratic constraints to growth by restructuring the financial sector, streamlining business regulations, liberalizing foreign trade, and reducing the government’s role in the economy.
The 2004 reforms, with their elimination of restrictions on access to foreign exchange and reduction of import tariffs, gradually improved the business and investment climate.
Coupled with favorable international conditions, Egypt’s annual GDP growth rate rose to 7.2% in 2008, from 4.1% in 2004, and remained at 5% in 2009-2010, despite the global recession.
The new measures also helped to attract large capital inflows and foreign direct investment, underpinning a dramatic rise in foreign-currency reserves, from $14.8 billion in 2004 to more than $36 billion by the end of 2010.
In 2011, the situation worsened on virtually all fronts.
Annual growth fell to about 0.5%, and inflation remained in double digits.
The unemployment rate reached 12.4% in the fourth quarter, up from 8.9% in the same period of 2010.
The current-account balance deteriorated rapidly, owing to the loss of more than $4 billion in tourism revenues and a sharp fall in remittances by Egyptian workers abroad.
The fiscal deficit widened to 10% of GDP, causing government debt (including external debt), which had been falling steadily, to rise to 76% of GDP.
The most striking development, however, was the loss of international reserves in the year following the Tahrir Square revolution.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that foreign-currency reserves fell by half, to $18 billion, by December 2011, owing partly to the worsening current-account balance, but, more importantly, to withdrawal from Egypt by foreign and domestic investors alike.
In the face of large and growing external imbalances, the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) chose to defend the Egyptian pound during last year’s political and economic turmoil.
The CBE allowed the exchange rate, which is formally defined as a “managed float,” to depreciate by only 3%.
Keeping the currency relatively stable was considered a higher priority than preventing the loss of foreign reserves.
Today, Egypt not only remains vulnerable to unstable domestic politics; owing to the depletion of its international reserves – at a rate of roughly $2 billion a month since last October – the country now also faces the threat of a currency crisis.
Moreover, this almost certainly underestimates the extent of the losses, because it does not exclude inflows of $3.5 billion since November of last year from auctions of US-dollar-denominated treasury bills.
In addition, the Egyptian military gave a $1 billion loan to the government, and another $1 billion was received through grants from Saudi Arabia and Qatar, bringing the loss of reserves since December 2010 closer to $22 billion.
The other source of international reserves, tourism, brought in only $8 billion, down sharply from $12 billion in 2010.
Egypt continues to import almost double what it exports, resulting in a trade deficit of over $10 billion by the end of 2011.
As a result, Egypt’s financing must continue to grow: the country now needs to borrow about $14-15 billion to plug its estimated financing gap of $24 billion.
Much depends on when, or whether, external aid materializes, which is contingent on approval of Egypt’s renegotiated $3.2 billion IMF loan.
If finalized, the IMF program could trigger further aid packages by the World Bank and other international donors.
If the aid arrives, Egypt could begin to address some of its financing problems, but it is still in need of a long-term strategy to spur sustainable growth.
Egypt’s economy is facing continued risks, owing to capital flight, rising inflation, unemployment, and populist policies.
Even with the availability of external finance, Egyptian leaders must look for ways to engage the private sector in reviving the country’s economy.
Unfortunately, the latest political incident involving the democracy-promoting activities of American NGOs has cooled bilateral relations and threatens the $1.3 billion in military assistance that Egypt receives annually from the United States.
This may have an impact on other donors, as well as the international financial institutions, particularly the IMF and the World Bank.
Egypt’s transition from populist economic policies to anti-American populism exemplifies the impact that political uncertainty can have on economic developments.
The upcoming presidential election in May and the formation of a democratically elected government, one hopes, will calm the political turmoil and lead to economic stabilization and revival.
Otherwise, Egyptians’ hard-won political gains may well be lost.
Egypt the Peacemaker?
TEL AVIV – Before the current fighting between Israel and Hamas in Gaza escalates further, a ceasefire must be negotiated.
Of course, like previous ceasefires, any truce is likely to be temporary, inevitably undermined by the forces that perpetuate Israel’s armed conflict with Hamas.
Nonetheless, with Syria consumed in civil war and the wider Middle East already unsteady, a ceasefire is essential both for saving lives and preserving today’s uneasy regional peace.
Much depends on Egypt, which is best placed to broker an agreement.
But assessing the prospects of any diplomatic effort requires understanding the protagonists’ perspectives and agendas.
Israel does not have a comprehensive policy toward Gaza.
Former Prime Minister Ariel Sharon took a courageous step by withdrawing unilaterally from Gaza and dismantling the Israeli settlements there.
But he fell ill before these measures could be fitted into a larger effort to address the Palestinian issue.
His successor, Ehud Olmert, began negotiating a final-status agreement with the Palestinian Authority’s president, Mahmoud Abbas.
But this did nothing to end the violence emanating from Gaza, which has effectively seceded from the Palestinian Authority and become a Hamas-controlled proto-state.
Israel’s Operation Cast Lead in the winter of 2008-2009 re-established deterrence and brought a period of relative calm; but it has been clear since the start of 2012 that the parties were once again on a collision course.
During his first term as Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu refused to continue to negotiate with the Palestinian Authority on Olmert’s terms, and never considered holding talks with Hamas.
He agreed to swap Palestinian prisoners for an abducted soldier, Gilad Shalit; but, for Netanyahu, as for most Israelis, negotiating with an organization whose blatantly anti-Semitic charter rejects Israel’s right to exist is pointless.
From Netanyahu’s point of view, the Gaza problem has no satisfactory solution.
His aim is to obtain and maintain calm along the border.
Israel provides electricity, water, and passage to Gaza, but also maintains a siege intended to prevent imports of larger, more lethal weapons.
Israeli leaders were aware of Hamas’s buildup of medium-range missiles, mostly smuggled through Sinai in underground tunnels, but continue to argue that, absent the siege, Iran and others would supply more (and more sophisticated) weapons.
In fact, Israel discovered over the last few years that Gaza contained enough rockets and missiles to paralyze its south.
Major Israeli cities were hit several times.
During Operation Cast Lead, rockets struck perilously close to Tel Aviv and Ben Gurion Airport.
For Israeli leaders, it was only a matter of time before Tel Aviv could and would be hit.
For its part, Hamas, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Palestinian branch, seeks to consolidate its control over Gaza and use it as a base from which to take control of the West Bank and the Palestinian national movement.
This outcome would be comparable to the Brotherhood’s takeover in Egypt, further establishing its ascendancy in the region.
Recent events appear to have emboldened Hamas.
Although the conflict between Iran and its Sunni rivals and the Syrian civil war forced it to loosen ties with Iran and Syria and move into the Sunni fold, in many respects this has been a comfortable shift.
Hamas feels more confident next to an Egypt dominated by its parent movement.
The Emir of Qatar paid a visit to Gaza as a reward for Hamas’s break with Iran and left a check.
But Hamas is not alone in Gaza.
Its hegemony is challenged by the more radical Islamic Jihad (which remains allied with Iran) and a host of Salafi and jihadi groups, some connected to radical elements in Sinai, which complicates Hamas’s relations with Egypt.
Moreover, these groups have frequently initiated attacks on Israel from Gaza or through Sinai, generating cycles of violence that have embarrassed Hamas.
At the same time, pressure from these more radical groups may have forced Hamas itself to become more aggressive in recent months, perhaps bolstered by the knowledge that its arsenal of dozens of Fajr-5 rockets could hit the Tel Aviv area should Israel retaliate on a larger scale.
The change in Egypt’s politics and policies had a similar effect: Hamas calculated that Israel would not jeopardize its fragile relationship with Egypt by launching another ground operation in Gaza.
Hamas was taken by surprise when Israel attacked, killing its military leader, Ahmed al-Jabari, and destroying most of its Fajr-5 arsenal.
It responded with massive shelling of southern Israel, and managed to send several missiles toward Tel Aviv and one toward Jerusalem.
Air raid sirens were finally heard in Israel’s two largest cities.
In response, Israel is visibly preparing for a large-scale ground operation.
There is no appetite in Israel for a second Operation Cast Lead; but nothing less than a stable, long-lasting ceasefire is acceptable.
Such a truce is possible.
Israel’s assault scored impressive initial successes, while Hamas can take pride in having reached Tel Aviv with its missiles, an achievement that eluded Hezbollah in the 2006 Lebanon War.
Moreover, Egypt, Hamas’s patron and senior ally, maintains a relationship and channels of communication with Israel, and does not want to sever all ties – not least because to do so would provoke a confrontation with the United States, which underwrites the Egyptian army.
In fact, Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi is seeking more financial aid from the US and the International Monetary Fund, and wants his coming visit to Washington, DC, to be a success.
He also wants to restore Egypt’s position as a major regional force.
Playing the peacemaker would serve him well on all counts.
So Morsi is juggling.
He has denounced and warned Israel, recalled Egypt’s ambassador to Tel Aviv, and sent his prime minister to Gaza.
But, so far, he has not crossed a single red line.
There is little time to act.
More fighting will bring additional actors into the picture (including Turkey).
If the US and Europe choose to remain inactive, they must at least encourage Egypt to play its role.
Egypt’s major obstacle is Hamas’s insistence on an end to the Israeli siege and targeted killings as part of a ceasefire agreement.
The challenge for Egyptian leaders is to persuade Hamas to settle on lesser terms without further fighting.
Egypt’s Innocent Murderers
CAIRO – “Bashar should abandon power and retire safely in Egypt.
The general-prosecutor is murder-friendly,” a friend, referring to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, told me as we watched former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s trial in the Police Academy’s criminal court.
Although Mubarak and his interior (security) minister, Habib al-Adly, were handed life sentences at the conclusion of their trials, the generals who ran Egypt’s apparatus of repression as deputy interior ministers were acquitted.
Hasan Abd al-Rahman, head of the notorious, Stasi-like State Security Investigations (SSI); Ahmad Ramzi, head of the Central Security Forces (CSF); Adly Fayyid, the head of Public Security; Ismail al-Shaer, who led the Cairo Security Directorate (CSD); Osama Youssef, the head of the Giza Security Directorate; and Omar Faramawy, who oversaw of the 6th of October Security Directorate, were all cleared of any wrongdoing.
Lawyers for Mubarak and al-Adly will appeal their life-sentences, and many Egyptians believe that they will receive lighter sentences.
The verdicts sent an unmistakable message, one with serious consequences for Egypt’s political transition.
A spontaneous cry was heard from the lawyers and the families of victims when they were announced: “The people want to cleanse the judiciary.”
Indeed, many Egyptians – including senior judges – do not view the judiciary as an independent institution.
“This is a major professional mistake.
Those generals should have been handed life-sentences like Mubarak,” said Zakaria Abd al-Aziz, the former elected head of the Judges Club. “The killing went on for days, and they did not order anyone to stop it.
The Ministry of Interior (MOI) is not the only place that should be cleansed.
The judiciary needs that” as well.
The verdicts certainly reinforce a culture of impunity within the security services.
The SSI and its departments were responsible for many human-rights violations, including mass-torture and extra-judicial killings, throughout Mubarak’s 30-year rule.
When protestors stormed the SSI headquarters and other governorates in March 2011, torture rooms and equipment were found in every building.
Unlawful detentions, kidnappings, disappearances, systematic torture, rape, and inhuman prison conditions have all been documented since the 1980’s by human-rights organizations and a few Egyptian courts.
Acquitting the heads of the SSI and the CSF (the 300,000-strong institution that acted as the “muscle” of Mubarak’s regime), after a revolution sparked by police brutality, led directly to renewed protests in Tahrir Square.
“We either get the rights of the martyrs, or die like them,” chanted hundreds of thousands in Tahrir and other Egyptian squares.
Sit-ins, reminiscent of the 18 days of January and February 2011 that ended Mubarak’s rule, have already started.
A third consequence of the verdicts concerns the empowerment of an anti-reform faction within the MOI.
Based on my year-long research on Egyptian security-sector reform, this faction is already the most powerful.
Following the revolution, factional struggle within the MOI became public.
“We have to save face,” said General Abd al-Latif Badiny, a deputy interior minister who was fired under al-Adly.
“[M]any officers and commanders refused to torture detainees and were against corruption, but we need a revolutionary president to empower us and clean the ministry.”
Badiny was reappointed after the revolution, but then reprimanded in November 2011, following clashes between demonstrators and police that left more than 40 protesters dead.
“He was advocating dialogue with protesters, whereas al-Adly’s men wanted a harsh crackdown.
They got their way in the end,” says Major Ahmad Ragab, the spokesperson of the reformist General Coalition of Police Officers (GCPO), which seeks to establish an official police syndicate and reform the security services along apolitical, professional lines.
MPs have already called on the three figures to come to the parliament and negotiate a coalition.
The verdicts are likely to boost support in the runoff for Morsi, who split the Islamist vote with two other candidates in the election’s first round.
Moreover, a significant share of the non-Islamist revolutionary vote will go to Morsi, owing to the absence of other revolutionary alternatives.
The common saying in Tahrir is: “We’ve got differences with Morsi, but we’ve got blood with [Ahmed] Shafiq,” Mubarak’s last prime minister and Morsi’s opponent in the runoff.
Pro-revolution, non-Islamist, and non-MB candidates received almost 9.7 million votes in the first round of the presidential election.
The majority of these voters will probably now support Morsi, as opposed to staying home (the general drift before the verdicts).
The MB must still decide for inclusiveness if it wants to attract the support of Aboul Fotouh and Sabahi voters in the runoff against Shafiq.
But, for now, Tahrir and other squares are once again uniting the pro-change forces, whether Islamist or not.
The key challenge for Egyptian revolutionaries is to sustain that unity, establish a leadership coalition, translate their chants into concrete demands, and maintain the pressure during implementation.
Egypt’s revolution continues.
Egypt’s New Old Government
CAIRO – Egypt’s first-ever freely elected president, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi, has appointed his first cabinet, and guess what?
It is crammed with officials from the old regime.
Morsi’s government clearly reflects the balance of power between the president and the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF). But it also reflects the strategy of the Muslim Brothers to shift that balance.
Thirty-five ministers were chosen by the new prime minister, Hisham Qandil, seven of whom (including Qandil) were ministers in the previous SCAF-appointed government.
Five ministries – information, higher education, youth, labor, and housing – were given to the Muslim Brothers’ Freedom and Justice Party (FJP).
Other pro-revolution figures secured several cabinet portfolios as well: education, legal and parliamentary affairs, industry and foreign trade, and most importantly, the justice ministry.
The “power” ministries – interior and defense – were kept under the control of figures associated with the former regime.
Field Marshal (and SCAF leader) Hussein Tantawy retained his post as Defense Minister, and General Ahmed Gamal al-Din was appointed to head the interior ministry, whose brutal behavior sparked the revolution.
Gamal al-Din’s uncle, Abd al-Ahad Gamal al-Din, was the ruling National Democratic Party’s parliamentary majority leader during the 2000’s.
His nephew was a hardliner during negotiations to release political prisoners, as well as during talks to end the street clashes of November 2011.
He was also a witness in the “Giza Officers Trial,” in which 17 policemen were accused of killing and injuring protesters in January 2011.
He defended the policemen, claiming that the victims had been killed in “self-defense.”
Nonetheless, Ashraf al-Banna, a co-founder of the reformist General Coalition for Police Officers (GCPO), remains hopeful: “He was an effective deputy [minister of interior]...[so] we expect some reforms.
The situation in the ministry is unsustainable.”
But others, like the members of the more revolutionary Officers but Honorable Coalition, accuse Gamal al-Din of being a member of a powerful anti-reform faction in the ministry, dubbed “al-Adly’s men” (after former Interior Minister Habib al-Adly).
As for the pro-change forces, Minister of Information Salah Abd al-Maqsud, a leading figure in the Muslim Brothers’ media wing, will control a sector that continues to attack the group and Morsi, even after his electoral victory.
The new youth minister, Osama Yassin, another leading Muslim Brother, was the de facto “security chief” in Tahrir Square during the 18 days that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak.
He belongs to the so-called “iron organization,” a strong, committed faction led by Khairat al-Shater, the Brotherhood’s first deputy chairman (deputy general guide).
Likewise, higher education went to Mostafa Mossad, an FJP member who was in charge of the education portfolio during Morsi’s campaign.
The labor ministry went to Khaled al-Azhary, a Brother who was deputy head of the Workers Union and a victim of police brutality in 2010.
For the Brothers, of course, everything could change if the government is dissolved after the upcoming parliamentary election.
But, even if that happens, the experience, data, and knowledge gained will be of immense value to the Brotherhood.
Four other ministries went to pro-revolution and Islamist figures.
Mohamed Mahsoob, a leading figure in the moderate Islamist al-Wasat Party who campaigned against the return of Mubarak-era officials, became Minister of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.
Hatem Saleh, the deputy chairman of the Civilization Party, which joined the Muslim Brotherhood’s electoral coalition in the last parliamentary election, was named Minister of Industry and Foreign Trade.
The religious endowment ministry, which influences the country’s main Islamic institution, al-Azhar, went to another of the Brothers’ allies, Talaat Afifi, the deputy head of the Islamic Legal Body for Rights and Reform, which comprises more than a hundred of Egypt’s leading Islamist scholars and activists.
Finally, Ahmed Mekki, the former deputy head of the Court of Cassation, Egypt’s highest appeals court, will lead the justice ministry, which is in need of real change.
Mekki is a strong proponent of judicial independence, and was dubbed “the revolution’s representative” in Qandil’s government.
Overall, only ten of the 35 ministries went to pro-change forces, with the other ministers a combination of old-regime figures and technocrats without any publicly declared political affiliation.
But the choice of the ten ministries was strategically clever, given the Muslim Brotherhood’s coming battles with SCAF.
All of these ministries represent low-cost, soft power: official institutions that can enhance pro-change forces’ capacity to mobilize, give them religious legitimacy, and remove the threat of judicial repression as they strengthen unofficial networks on the ground.
But the SCAF side is applying a similar strategy: strengthening its hold over the key power ministries.
For example, in last week’s annual personnel changes at the interior ministry, many of those expected to be removed, owing to accusations of corruption, complicity in repression, or both, were not.
A few were even promoted.
The struggle for Egypt thus continues.
The “Second Republic” is yet to be born.
Egypt and Tunisia’s Divergent Paths
CAMBRIDGE – It has been five years since Egypt and Tunisia underwent regime change, and both countries are still suffering from low economic growth, large fiscal deficits, high unemployment, and rising public debts.
Having failed to institute reforms on their own, both have turned to the International Monetary Fund, which entered into an arrangement with Tunisia in 2013 and has just approved a $12 billion loan program for Egypt – the country’s first since 1991, and the largest ever for a Middle Eastern country.
On the face of it, countries moving toward democracy seem as likely to experience poor economic performance as countries moving toward renewed dictatorship, because political instability and uncertainty of any kind naturally hurt investment and growth.
But Tunisia has embraced political inclusion, and could soon find itself back on the path toward healthy economic growth, while Egypt’s closing society positions its economy for a downward spiral.
Until recently, both countries’ governments showed a surprising lack of interest in economic reform.
Instead, they engaged with identity issues and security challenges in ways that reflect their diverging political paths.
In Tunisia, electoral contests between the Islamist Ennahda Party and the secular Nidaa Tounes Party have allowed for a productive debate about the role of religion in politics and society; in Egypt, by contrast, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s autocratic government has violently repressed the Muslim Brotherhood.
Meanwhile, governments in both countries could not resist increasing public spending.
In Egypt, subsidies were still above 10% of GDP in mid-2016, suggesting a return to the old authoritarian bargain whereby citizens abstain from political participation in exchange for government economic support.
Now, to qualify for the IMF’s assistance, Egypt has committed to reducing its subsidies and instituting a value-added tax.
In Tunisia, labor unions have managed to push civil-servant wages – which now equal 15% of GDP, up from 10% of GDP in 2011 – well above IMF targets.
And macroeconomic instability has impeded growth in both countries.
Egypt’s low credit rating has forced the government to borrow domestically, which has crowded out other borrowers to the point that private investment amounts to just 11% of GDP.
Tunisia’s external state borrowing has not crowded out the private sector; nonetheless, private investment has fallen to 18% of GDP.
Both countries’ current-account deficits have widened as a result of falling tourism revenues and disrupted export activities, and neither country has taken measures to improve private-sector competitiveness.
Sisi, like former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, is wary of allowing private-sector players to gain political clout, and has instead propped up cronies whom he can trust, such as army corporations and some of the firms previously connected to the Mubarak regime.
In Tunisia, the state bureaucracy has hindered private-sector activity, and there are reports of increased corruption by politically connected firms since the Nidaa Tounes government assumed power in 2015.
Tunisia has allowed its currency to adjust over time, and the dinar has lost a third of its value against the US dollar since 2014.
Egypt, for its part, has disastrously mismanaged its exchange rate.
But over time, this frustration will probably help Tunisia’s economy, while hurting Egypt’s.
For starters, political inclusiveness in Tunisia fosters healthy dialogue about potential solutions.
For example, the new Tunisian cabinet formed in August includes ex-union leaders, who can now shape broad economic policies, not just press for higher wages.
This has already made public-policy debates more constructive, because policymakers are focusing on how labor and business can fairly share the burden of economic adjustment.
Egypt’s closed political system, by contrast, has left the government constantly in fear of the street.
With no channels for constructive political debate, the government’s best option has been to postpone necessary economic adjustments until they become unavoidable.
This is not only economically inefficient (reflected in the absence of net foreign portfolio investment in Egypt in recent years); it is also politically risky.
Egyptian politicians can do little but cross their fingers and hope that the street does not rise up in response to the recent currency devaluation.
Political inclusiveness creates a more informed – and possibly more forgiving – public.
In Tunisia, members of civil society and the media may freely scrutinize the government and call for change.
While reforms have been slow in coming, the government cannot ignore growing public criticism forever.
In fact, the 2017 draft budget law already includes urgent measures to fight corruption, trim the bureaucracy, and reduce tax evasion.
In Egypt, on the other hand, the currency devaluation has come as a shock to ordinary citizens.
There was very little public understanding about the state of the economy, because the mainstream media, having become a regime mouthpiece, has been painting a rosy picture of Egypt’s return to glory.
At the same time, freedom of expression and association are severely limited; criticizing government policies is deemed tantamount to high treason.
Tunisia has made political progress by shoring up its democratic processes, creating institutional space for all stakeholders, and allowing for free expression and assembly.
This bodes well for the Tunisian economy’s long-term prospects.
Egypt, for its part, may benefit from short-term gains as a result of the IMF package.
Its “fierce but weak” rulers, however, cannot hope to make long-term progress by doubling down on despotism.
If they do not take the long and winding road toward political inclusion, sooner or later they will face the wrath of those they have excluded.
One Hundred Years of Relativity
STOCKHOLM – This year marks the centenary of Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity, his masterwork describing gravity as the curvature of space and time.
Yet, as is often true in science, Einstein's insights have provided physicists with as many questions as they have answered.
Finding solutions that fulfill Einstein's equations – space-times that describe the curvature of our universe – is difficult, so his theory was slow to catch on.
Scientists carrying out early studies and the first crucial tests were forced to use approximations.
It took decades to develop techniques to classify and derive new solutions.
Today, however, many solutions are known, and other thorny problems, such as the gravitational field of two colliding stars, can be explored using computers to carry out the numerical calculations.
Einstein's theory not only describes our universe, from the Big Bang to black holes; it has also taught physicists the relevance of geometry and symmetry – lessons that spread from particle physics to crystallography.
But, despite the similarities that Einstein's theory has with other theories in physics, it stands apart by its refusal to fit together with quantum mechanics, the theory that explains the dominant behavior of matter at the atomic and subatomic scale.
According to Einstein's theory, gravity, unlike all other physical forces known to man, is not quantized.
It is not subject to Heisenberg's famed uncertainty principle.
The electromagnetic field of a particle that passes through a double slit can pass through both slits at once.
Its gravitational equivalent cannot.
This mismatch between our understanding of gravity and the quantum theories of matter poses a huge conundrum for theoretical physicists, because it leads to mathematical contradictions.
Clearly, there is something about the combination of quantum theory and gravity that remains unknown, and our understanding of space, time, and matter hinges on unraveling this connection.
Finding a description of gravity that is compatible with our understanding of quantum physics would revolutionize cosmology, yield new insights into the first moments of our universe, and provide a deeper understanding of the theories on which all of modern physics is based.
But, despite the enormous potential impact of such a breakthrough and the efforts of generations of physicists to achieve it, we still do not know which theory is the right one.
Contrary to how it may feel when you try to get out of bed in the morning, gravity is by far the weakest fundamental force of all we have identified.
It takes only the static repulsion of a few electrons to make your hair stand up, overcoming the gravitational pull of the entire planet.
In the atomic and subatomic world, gravity is irrelevant compared to what else is going on, all of which can be described by quantum theories.
Gravity's weakness makes it very difficult to measure its quantum effects; as a result, we have no experimental data to guide theoretical physicists in the development of the missing theory.
Detecting a “graviton" – the hypothetical particle making up part of a gravitational field – would require a particle collider the size of the Milky Way or a detector with a mass of the planet Jupiter.
These experiments are so detached from our technological capabilities that physicists have focused on trying to remove the mathematical contradictions first, developing approaches like string theory, loop quantum gravity, and asymptotically safe gravity.
But to know which theory describes physical reality, experimental tests must eventually be developed.
That is why, over the last decade, physicists have begun to look for indirect evidence of quantum gravity.
Rather than seeking to detect a quantum of the gravitational field, researchers are looking for other effects that would imply that gravity is quantized.
These tests work much like those that use the stability of atoms as indirect evidence for the quantization of the electromagnetic force.
For example, some scientists are searching for evidence of quantum fluctuations of space-time that could blur images of distant stars or lead to systematic distortions.
Others are looking for violations of certain symmetries that could enable normally forbidden particle decays, unexplained noise in gravitational wave detectors, or inexplicable loss of quantum coherence.
So far, these attempts have failed to detect the sought-after evidence.
Nonetheless, they have led to important developments, because the negative results have ruled out some plausible hypotheses.
And, though researchers may not have found results supporting any one theory, they have advanced the cause of science by better defining the observational criteria any quantum theory of gravity will have to take into account.
As we commemorate Einstein's achievement, we should also seize the opportunity to celebrate the unrelenting spirit of those who are pushing ahead and trying to answer the questions his theory left us.
That quest has blossomed into astonishingly fruitful research areas like cosmology, numerical general relativity, and quantum gravity.
General Relativity has brought us wormholes, evaporating black holes, and the Big Bang theory; it underlies the discovery that the universe is expanding and that so-called exoplanets are much more common than anybody thought; and it has utterly redefined the way we think of our own place in the universe, ultimately even calling into question whether this universe is the only one.
None of these advances would have been possible had researchers been operating according to the three-year plans that characterize much of current academia.
So this year is perhaps a good moment to appreciate the visionaries who have understood that sustainable progress relies on the development of new and better theories whose impact may not be fully grasped for decades – indeed, that may continue to ramify 100 years later.
Einstein the Realist
OXFORD – It was recently discovered that the universe’s expansion is accelerating, not slowing, as was previously thought.
Light from distant exploding stars revealed that an unknown force (dubbed “dark energy”) more than outweighs gravity on cosmological scales.
Unexpected by researchers, such a force had nevertheless been predicted in 1915 by a modification that Albert Einstein proposed to his own theory of gravity, the general theory of relativity.
But he later dropped the modification, known as the “cosmological term,” calling it the “biggest blunder” of his life.
So the headlines proclaim: “Einstein was right after all,” as though scientists should be compared as one would clairvoyants: Who is distinguished from the common herd by knowing the unknowable – such as the outcome of experiments that have yet to be conceived, let alone conducted?
Who, with hindsight, has prophesied correctly?
But science is not a competition between scientists; it is a contest of ideas – namely, explanations of what is out there in reality, how it behaves, and why.
These explanations are initially tested not by experiment but by criteria of reason, logic, applicability, and uniqueness at solving the mysteries of nature that they address.
Predictions are used to test only the tiny minority of explanations that survive these criteria.
The story of whyEinstein proposed the cosmological term, whyhe dropped it, and whycosmologists today have reintroduced it illustrates this process.
Einstein sought to avoid the implication of unmodified general relativity that the universe cannot be static – that it can expand (slowing down, against its own gravity), collapse, or be instantaneously at rest, but that it cannot hang unsupported.
This particular prediction cannot be tested (no observation could establish that the universe isat rest, even if it were), but it is impossible to change the equations of general relativity arbitrarily. They are tightly constrained by the explanatory substance of Einstein’s theory, which holds that gravity is due to the curvature of spacetime, that light has the same speed for all observers, and so on.
But Einstein realized that it is possible to add one particular term – the cosmological term – and adjust its magnitude to predict a static universe, without spoiling any other explanation.
All other predictions based on the previous theory of gravity – that of Isaac Newton – that were testable at the time were good approximations to those of unmodified general relativity, with that single exception: Newton’s space was an unmoving background against which objects move.
There was no evidence yet, contradicting Newton’s view – no mystery of expansion to explain.
Moreover, anything beyond that traditional conception of space required a considerable conceptual leap, while the cosmological term made no measurable difference to other predictions.
So Einstein added it.
Then, in 1929, Edwin Hubble discovered that the universe is expanding, consistently (within the observational accuracy of the day) with unmodified general relativity.
So Einstein dropped the cosmological term.
His doing so had nothing to do with Hubble being less blunder-prone; nor was Einstein deferring to Hubble’s superior prophetic abilities.
It was just that the problem that the term was intended to solve no longer existed.
The new observations did not refute the existence of a cosmological term. They merely made it a bad explanation.
Then, in 1998, came those new observations of a universe whose expansion is accelerating.
As a result, the cosmological term that has been “reinstated” to account for the new observations is not quite the one that Einstein proposed and retracted.
It is larger, for it now has to explain not just why the universe isn’t collapsing, but why its expansion is accelerating.
Einstein’s remark about having “blundered” is as misleading as the idea that he is “right after all.”
The cosmological term is not something that should never have been proposed.
Its introduction represented progress in understanding reality – as did its abandonment in light of Hubble’s discovery and its reinstatement in revised form to account for the new observations.
Likewise, the mid-twentieth century “Bohr-Einstein debate” about quantum theory is often misinterpreted as a personal clash between wizards.
So counter-intuitive are quantum theory’s predictions that, under the leadership of one of its pioneers, Neils Bohr, a myth grew that there is no underlying reality that explains them.
Particles get from A to B without passing through the intervening space, where they have insufficient energy to exist; they briefly “borrow” the energy, because we are “uncertain” about what their energy is.
Information gets from A to B without anything passing in between – what Einstein called “spooky action at a distance.”
And so on.
What these paradoxical interpretations have in common is that they abandon realism, the doctrine that a physical world, existing in reality, accounts for all of our experience.
Anti-realism remains popular and appears in various guises in textbooks and popular accounts of quantum theory.
But Einstein insisted that physical phenomena have explanations in terms of what he called “elements of reality.”
Fortunately, a minority of physicists, myself included, likewise side unequivocally with realism, by adopting Hugh Everett’s multiple-universes interpretation of quantum theory.
According to this view, no particles exist where they have insufficient energy to be; it is simply that in some universes they have more energy than average, and in others, less.
All alleged “paradoxes” of quantum theory are similarly resolved.
So, while most accounts say that Bohr won the debate, my view is that Einstein, as usual, was seeking an explanation of reality, while his rivals were advocating nonsense.
Everett’s interpretation doesn’t make Einstein a demigod. But it does make him right.
Diagnostics for Global Health
CORVALLIS, OREGON – In developed countries, most people take for granted that when they are sick, they will have access to timely diagnosis and treatment.