Immigration in Europe has been messy, and those who complained were too quickly dismissed as racists.
After endorsing a military coup to get rid of Thaksin, the yellow-shirts of Bangkok can hardly blame the red-shirts for using undemocratic tactics to force the current government to step down.
American liberals, too, are often guilty of sneering at the tastes and habits of their provincial countrymen.
There is, however, another way to look at the worldwide surge of populism.
The real problem of traditional elites may not be too much power, but too little.
The lack of trust in political elites is linked to a suspicion, which is not entirely irrational, that elected governments have little authority.
The real power, people suspect, is lodged elsewhere – on Wall Street, in the unelected EU bureaucracy, in the Royal Thai Army and the Royal Palace.
What people crave in uncertain times is strong leadership from charismatic figures who promise to sweep the stables, get rid of corruption, and stand up for the little man against selfish politicians and against foreigners who threaten us with strange habits and religions.
Such times are dangerous for democracy, because they endanger popular consent to democratic governments.
To regain respect, our elected politicians will have to show more authority, not less.
US President Barack Obama is right to call for more regulation of financial markets.
In Europe, either the EU must become more democratic, which will take a long time, or national governments must delegate less to the bureaucrats in Brussels.
Thailand might face the hardest problems.
Reliance on a self-promoting tycoon like Thaksin is not the best way to boost democracy, but nor is reliance on military coups and kingly intervention.
Most Thais would agree about the military. And it is illegal to even begin to discuss the role of the king.
But without discussion, democracy is surely doomed.
The Power of China’s Powerless
LONDON – No sooner had I finished reading an article that eulogized Václav Havel, the playwright turned dissident turned peaceful revolutionary turned president who had just died, than two subsequent news stories set Havel’s extraordinary career in context: the death of Kim Jong-il, North Korea’s pornography-addicted and nuclear-armed supreme leader, and the peaceful protests against land expropriation by the villagers of Wukan in Guandong province, southern China.
If Havel ever had any moments of doubt about his lasting positive impact on the world, I hope he was able to see reports from Wukan before he died.
In that fishing village of 6,000, the “power of the powerless” that Havel promoted as a means to undermine totalitarian rule was demonstrated anew, and with such enormous dignity and discipline that it has galvanized China like no protest since those in Tiananmen Square in the spring of 1989.
Kim, in a sense, was the anti-Havel, lacking not only moral scruples, but even the usual dictatorial concern for how a country is managed.
His death made me recall that of Mao Zedong, with all the mass hysteria – real and feigned – that accompanies the demise of a self-anointed god.
But Mao’s death did at least end the era of caesarism in China.
Because he had no son to succeed him, Mao appointed a five-person politburo to do the job.
Its members, which included his nephew, Mao Yuanxin, his mistress, Zhang Yufeng, and Jiang Qing, his last wife – were as incompetent at governing as Kim, but, following the disaster of the Cultural Revolution, antagonism to them in the military and other state institutions was too widespread for them to last.
They, and the Gang of Four (of which Jiang Qing was a member), were soon ousted.
China’s transit from caesarism to despotism, and then from Marxism to capitalism, has been fortunate for China’s citizens.
North Korea’s bad luck is that, despite his incompetence, Kim Jong-il seems to have managed to bequeath the dynasty he inherited to his youngest son, Kim Jong-un.
Given other North Korean institutions’ apparent indifference to the mess that the Kims have made of their country, there seems scant chance of any serious change of course being initiated from within.
A fight for power, however, might yet spell the end of the regime.
North Korea is a kind of looking-glass world to Havel’s dictum that, to survive under totalitarianism, one must live in truth.
Fortunately for Havel, Czechoslovakia’s small-minded communist rulers were also small-minded in their lies.
But when every aspect of society is built, as in North Korea, on a Big Lie, and then an Even Bigger Lie, it is probably hard to maintain one’s sanity, let alone the ability to live in truth.
In any case, Kim Jong-un’s reign is unlikely to last or be as certifiably crazed as those of his father and grandfather.
Communism, thanks to the lure of successful market economies and the example set by people like Havel, has put the system under such external strain that Kim III has nowhere to turn for effective help.
Indeed, even the two regimes most eager to maintain the Kim dynasty – China’s and Russia’s – are feeling pressure from their disaffected but, it now seems, not-so-powerless populations.
In Wukan, simple villagers were unafraid to challenge the might of the local party and police when officials stole their land for a development project.
In Henan, policemen have gone into the streets demanding that human rights be protected.
In Dalian, hundreds of thousands of people protested against the construction of petrochemical plant.Unlike what has happened so far in Wukan, the Dalian protest was crushed, but it – like the tens of thousands of other protests across China last year – signaled to the ruling party that ordinary Chinese are no longer interested only in the politically passive pursuit of material gain.
In Russia, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin’s situation is much the same.
Following the sham elections in early December, massive protests erupted in Moscow and Saint Petersburg.
And those marching were not the usual impoverished rabble-rousers, but Russia’s new middle classes.
Like the villagers of Wukan, they have simply had enough of official dishonesty.
North Koreans have suffered coercion for a long time, and although they are brainwashed to be docile and loyal to Kim’s dynasty, you just cannot imagine how they will remain at the beck and call of Kim Jong-un, who has no credentials, military or otherwise, to rule.
Given its increasingly isolated international position in Asia, if North Korea’s internal conflicts become acute, China may find it difficult to behave toward Kim Jong-un with anything but cold and anxiety-ridden indifference.
And recall that it was indifference to the non-reforming East European communist regimes on the part of Mikhail Gorbachev and the Soviet Union that ultimately sealed&#160; their fate and delivered Havel from a prison cell to Prague Castle.
Havel, of course, was a beneficiary of such indifference, but he never practiced it, remaining a fighter for truth and freedom throughout his life.
For Chinese concerned about how to live in truth, Havel remains our exemplar.
The Charter 77 movement that he founded provided the template for men like the imprisoned Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo, who helped to found Charter 08, which proclaimed that Chinese, too, could live in dignity and freedom.
Kim Jong-il’s demise reminds us that all people are equal before death.
Havel’s passing reminds us that the value of life will eventually gain respect.
The Power to End Poverty
NEW YORK – Growing up as a child during the Korean War, I knew poverty first hand.  I saw it around me every day; I lived it.
One of my earliest memories is walking up a muddy track into the mountains to escape the fighting, my village burning behind me and wondering what would happen to my family and me.
The answer was the United Nations and other international agencies.
With the help of many countries and friends, my country was able to get back on its feet and carry on after that terrible and devastating conflict.
Thanks to decades of hard work and sacrifice by millions of Koreans, the Republic of Korea rose from desperate poverty to prosperity in less than a half-century.
As Secretary-General of the UN, I am still living that story.
Every day, I work to help end the extreme poverty that traps nearly a billion of the world’s people.
You may imagine, then, the powerful memories that I felt when I visited the Mwandama Millennium Village in the deeply impoverished southern African country of Malawi.
As in my youth, I saw once again the challenges and hardship of rural poverty.
Yet I also saw, once again, the power of community spirit to overcome it – the same sense of solidarity and determination that launched Korea’s rural modernization five decades ago.
In 2000, the world’s leaders committed to achieve major reductions in poverty, hunger, and disease by 2015.
These targets, endorsed by all UN member countries, comprise the eight Millennium Development Goals.
The Millennium Village Project, a partnership of academia, business, and UN agencies, aims to show how these goals can be achieved in even the poorest communities in the world.
Like South Korea’s own experience in fighting poverty, Millennium Villages in Africa, and similar projects elsewhere, are now surging ahead in food production, children’s health, and in forging a sustainable pathway out of poverty itself.
At the same time, I was impressed with one crucial difference between Korea’s efforts in the 1960’s and what is possible today.
Touring the Mwandama Village, I saw the potential of modern technologies – smart phones and mobile broadband, improved seed varieties, the latest in drip irrigation, modern diagnostic tests for malaria, and low-cost solar-energy grids – to advance human well-being in ways that simply were not feasible even a few years ago.
In a community that once could not feed itself, a giant warehouse was almost bursting with tons of surplus grain.
By using high-yield seeds, better soil management, and proper row planting, the community has more than tripled its crop production, and villagers who previously were hungry grain buyers are now food-secure grain sellers.
That surplus, in turn, has contributed directly to improved education, as families donate a portion of their surplus to the school’s mid-day meal program.
Now the students get a nutritious bowl of porridge and fruits, giving them the energy to pursue their studies throughout the school day.
As so many schools have discovered, mid-day meals lead to an end-of--year jump in performance on national exams.
This month, the Millennium Villages Project launches its second five-year stage on the way to the MDGs target date of 2015.
Around Africa, and now around the world, governments are scaling up the lessons from this particular project and others like it: empower communities, help them to invest in their futures using cutting-edge technologies, and thereby end extreme poverty.
The MDGs might once have seemed to be merely a set of hopes and aspirations.
Now we know that they are actually a practical roadmap out of poverty.
The world leaders who met at the UN in September for the annual General Debate all agreed on a central point: the importance of fighting poverty, hunger, and disease is crucial for our collective survival.
They know that extreme poverty threatens the lives of hundreds of millions of people who lack reliable access to adequate nutrition, potable water, health care, and education.
They also know that the dangers don’t stop at the edge of the village or slum; today’s hunger hotspots all too frequently become tomorrow’s violent hotspots.
Regardless of whether we are rich, poor, or in between, we share an overwhelming interest in the MDGs’ success, so that every region trapped in extreme poverty can break free, grow, and prosper.
Austere Illusions
LONDON – The doctrine of imposing present pain for future benefit has a long history – stretching all the way back to Adam Smith and his praise of “parsimony.”
It is particularly vociferous in “hard times.”
In 1930, US President Herbert Hoover was advised by his treasury secretary, Andrew Mellon: “Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate.
It will purge the rottenness out of the system...People will...live a more moral life...and enterprising people will pick up the wrecks from less competent people.”
To “liquidationists” of Mellon’s ilk, the pre-2008 economy was full of cancerous growths – in banking, in housing, in equities – which need to be cut out before health can be restored.
Their position is clear: the state is a parasite, sucking the lifeblood of free enterprise.
Economies gravitate naturally to a full-employment equilibrium, and, after a shock, do so fairly quickly if not impeded by misguided government action.
This is why they are fierce opponents of Keynesian interventionism.
Keynes’s heresy was to deny that there are any such natural forces, at least in the short term.
This was the point of his famous remark, “In the long run we are all dead.”
Economies, Keynes believed, can become stuck in prolonged periods of “under-employment equilibrium”; in such cases, an external stimulus of some kind is needed to jolt them back to higher employment.
Simply put, Keynes believed that we cannot all cut our way to growth at the same time.
To believe otherwise is to commit the “fallacy of composition.”
What is true of the parts is not true of the whole.
If all of Europe is cutting, the United Kingdom cannot grow; if the entire world is cutting, global growth will stop.
In these circumstances, austerity is exactly the opposite of what is needed.
A government cannot liquidate its deficit if the source of its revenues, the national income, is diminishing.
It is deficit reduction, not debt, that is profligate, because it implies wastage of available human and physical capital, quite apart from the resulting misery.
Austerity’s advocates rely on one – and only one – argument: If fiscal contraction is part of a credible “consolidation” program aimed at permanently reducing the share of government in GDP, business expectations will be so encouraged by the prospect of lower taxes and higher profits that the resulting economic expansion will more than offset the contraction in demand caused by cuts in public spending.
The economist Paul Krugman calls this the “confidence fairy.”
The pro-austerity argument is pure assertion, but it is meant to be a testable assertion, so econometricians have been busy trying to prove that the less the government spends, the faster the economy will grow.
Indeed, just a year or two ago, “expansionary fiscal contraction” was all the rage, and a massive research effort went into proving its existence.
Economists arrived at some striking correlations.
For example, “an increase in government size by ten percentage points is associated with a 0.5-1% lower annual growth rate.”
In April 2010, the leader of this school, Harvard University’s Alberto Alesina, assured European finance ministers that “even sharp reductions of budget deficits have been accompanied and immediately followed by sustained growth rather than recessions even in the very short run.”
But two fallacies vitiated the “proofs” offered by Alesina and others.
First, because the cuts had to be “credible” – that is, large and decisive – the continuing absence of growth could be blamed on the insufficiency of the cuts.
Thus, Europe’s failure to recover “immediately” has been due to a lack of austerity, even though public-sector retrenchment has been unprecedented.
Second, the researchers committed the arch-statistical mistake of confusing correlation with causation.
If you find a correlation between deficit reduction and growth, the reduction could be causing the growth or vice versa.
(Or both the deficit reduction and the growth could be due to something else – devaluation or higher exports, for example.)
An International Monetary Fund paper in 2012 brought Alesina’s hour of glory to an end.
Going through the same material as Alesina had, its authors pointed out that “while it is plausible to conjecture that confidence effects have been at play in our sample of consolidations, during downturns they do not seem to have ever been strong enough to make the consolidations expansionary.”
Fiscal contraction is contractionary, period.
An even more spectacular example of a statistical error and sleight of hand is the widely cited claim of Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff that countries’ growth slows sharply if their debt/GDP ratio exceeds 90%.
This finding reflected the massive overweighting of one country in their sample, and there was the same confusion between correlation and causation seen in Alesina’s work: high debt levels may cause a lack of growth, or a lack of growth may cause high debt levels.
On this foundation of zombie economics and slipshod research rests the case for austerity.
Second, austerity policies have hit those at the bottom of the income distribution far more severely than those at the top, simply because those at the top rely much less on government services.
So we will remain in a state of “under-employment equilibrium” until policy in the UK and the eurozone is changed (and assuming that policy in the US does not become worse).
In the face of clamor from the right to cut even more savagely, statesmen who are too timid to increase public spending would be wise to ignore their advice.
After Ahmadinejad
WASHINGTON, DC – Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s preferred successor, Esfandiar Rahim Mashai, will not be running in the June 14 election.
Neither will former President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani.
The disqualification of both sends a strong message from Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei.
Simply put, Khamenei will not tolerate any diminution of his power, and he is determined to avoid the type of friction that has characterized his relationships with previous presidents, particularly Ahmadinejad.
The disqualification of Mashai and Rafsanjani reveals, once again, the schism embedded at the heart of Iran’s political structure by the dual executive of Supreme Leader and President.
When Khamenei publicly supported Ahmadinejad’s controversial reelection in 2009, no one could have predicted the unprecedented tensions that would subsequently emerge between the country’s two main authorities.
But supporting Ahmadinejad turned out to be a costly decision for Khamenei – and for the Islamic Republic.
Instead of aligning himself with Khamenei, as expected, Ahmadinejad began to promote a nationalist, anti-clerical agenda, effectively using Khamenei’s resources to challenge the supreme leader’s authority and to establish his own economic network and sphere of influence.
Over the last four years, Ahmadinejad has repeatedly tried to undermine the ruling clerics’ control over political and policy decisions.
In 2011, he attempted to dismiss Heider Moslehi, an ally of Khamenei, from his position as intelligence chief, but was quickly overruled.
He has also reduced the resources channeled to certain religious institutions, helped those in his circle to establish private banks by easing regulations, and challenged Iran’s most powerful economic and military institution, the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC).
But, as the rift between Khamenei and Ahmadinejad has grown, support for the president has declined significantly, with even state-run media referring to Ahmadinejad’s loyalists as a “deviation circle.”
Moreover, unlike during Ahmadinejad’s first term, non-state media now publicly criticize his economic and political agenda.
With the end of Ahmadinejad’s second and final term fast approaching, it seems unlikely that the disgraced, unpopular president will abandon his efforts to destabilize Iran’s ruling establishment.
In fact, he had long promoted Mashai as his successor, but Khamenei curtailed his illegal efforts – and has now put a stop to Mashai’s candidacy altogether.
Mashai is among Iran’s most controversial figures, widely reviled among conservative leaders for his reformist, anti-clerical views.
In 2009, after Khamenei rejected Ahmadinejad’s decision to appoint Mashai as his first deputy, Ahmadinejad brazenly appointed him Chief of Staff, a move that infuriated Khamenei.
Ahmadinejad is not the first high-ranking official in Iran to challenge the supreme leader.
Grand Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, one of Iran’s most senior clerics, would have been Supreme Leader himself had he not fallen out with Grand Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Islamic Republic’s founder, a few months before Khomeini’s death.
One of the most influential figures in Iran during the Republic’s first decade, Montazeri provided an extensive justification for the supreme leader’s absolute authority, which many ayatollahs considered heretical.
But he soon began to challenge the Islamic Republic’s hardline leadership – and continued to do so until he died in 2009.
Montazeri, whose status as Grand Ayatollah (the most senior of Shia Muslim theologians) gave him more religious authority than Khamenei, challenged Khamenei’s qualifications to issue fatwas (Islamic religious rulings) or to succeed Khomeini as Supreme Leader.
Montazeri was placed under house arrest for six years; demonstrations of support for him were suppressed; and many of his disciples and close friends were imprisoned, tortured, killed, or forced to flee the country.
Likewise, Abulhassan Banisadr, the Islamic Republic’s first president, fell out with Khomeini over the division of authority.
He was impeached in 1981, after only a year in power, and fled to France, where he continues to reside.
Violent street clashes between Banisadr’s supporters and opponents resulted in deaths on both sides.
In many ways, Ahmadinejad’s story resembles that of Banisadr.
Both were relatively unknown before their presidencies; both depended on the supreme leader’s backing to gain power; and both gradually lost support as they attempted to reduce the influence of the clerical hierarchy and the IRGC.
Most important, both failed to create an external organization on which they could rely if their official protection failed.
The fact that Ahmadinejad has been allowed to serve out his entire second term – an outcome that the media often doubted – reflects the importance to Khamenei of maintaining an image of a stable Iran.
But achieving that goal will require Khamenei to account for Ahmadinejad’s unpredictability.
With nothing to lose, Ahmadinejad could decide to destabilize the Islamic Republic if he considers it necessary for his survival.
Indeed, now that the Guardian Council has disqualified Mashai from the presidential race, Ahmadinejad’s resentment will probably manifest itself in behavior before and after the election, such as releasing information on high-level corruption.
He might also oppose Khamenei directly, portraying himself as a patriotic anti-clerical figure.
But such an approach would be dangerous; indeed, it could cost Ahmadinejad his life.
After the election, the kind of factional disputes that have long paralyzed policymaking in Iran will likely persist.
But stalemate over Iran’s nuclear policy could have serious consequences.
Indeed, the lack of a strong, unified government capable of shaping a consensus could make it impossible even for Khamenei to change course, leaving Iran no choice but to persist in its diplomatic standoff with the West.
The Press versus Privacy
LONDON – Privacy has become a big issue in contemporary jurisprudence.
The “right to privacy” is enshrined in the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, and guaranteed by Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
But Article 8 is balanced by Article 10, which guarantees “free expression of opinion.”
So what right has priority when they conflict?
Under what circumstances, for example, is it right to curtail press freedom in order to protect the right to privacy, or vice versa?
The same balance is being sought between the right of citizens to data privacy and government demands for access to personal information to fight crime, terrorism, and so on.
Freedom of speech is a fundamental democratic liberty.
It is a necessary protection against abuses of power and cover-ups of wrongdoing by public officials.
It was never more effectively displayed than in the Watergate investigation, which brought down Richard Nixon in 1974.
So it is no surprise that press freedom is the freedom that authoritarian governments are keenest to curtail.
Indeed, provided they can sufficiently muzzle the media they can even allow (relatively) free elections, as in Putin’s Russia.
With the press heavily shackled in large parts of the world, freedom of speech is still a worthy slogan. 
But one can have too much press freedom.
Over the years, the tabloid press has become increasingly intrusive, claiming the right not just to expose corruption and incompetence in high places, but to titillate readers with scandalous revelations about the private lives of the famous.
What started off as entertaining gossip about royalty and film stars has burgeoned into a massive assault on privacy, with newspapers claiming that any attempt to keep them out of the bedroom is an assault on free speech.
The issue has just been tested in Britain’s High Court.
In March, Britain’s leading scandal sheet, The News of the World published an “exclusive” front page story, under the headline “F1 BOSS HAS SICK NAZI ORGY WITH 5 HOOKERS.”
It told how Max Mosley, President of the Federation Internationale de l’Automobile (FIA, the body that oversees world motoring and racing) and son of the former British fascist leader, Sir Oswald Mosley, had, two days earlier, taken part in a sadomasochistic “orgy” with a “Nazi theme” in a private apartment in London.
The story was accompanied by photographs taken clandestinely by one of the women in cooperation with the News of the World , which readers were invited to download from the paper’s Web site.
Max Mosley admitted participating in this (not illegal) happening, but sued the News of the World for breach of privacy; the newspaper argued that it was in the “public interest” that Mosley’s sexual activities be disclosed.
The presiding judge, Mr. Justice Eady, rejected the newspaper’s defense, and awarded Max Mosley £60,000 ($115,000) compensation for the invasion of his privacy, the highest damages so far given for a complaint brought under Article 8.
There is a curious aspect to Eady’s judgment.
He rejected the News of the World’s “public interest” defense, because he found no evidence that the sadomasochistic party had a “Nazi theme.”
This implies that had there been a Nazi theme, it could have been legitimate to publish it, given Mosley’s position as FIA president.
But surely the particular nature of Mosley’s private fantasies is irrelevant to the case.
It is hard to see why I am less entitled to privacy because I am turned on by a Nazi uniform than I would be if I were excited by a pair of knickers.
What Eady’s judgment did accomplish was to highlight the crucial distinction, necessary for all clear thinking about privacy, between what interests the public and what is in the public interest.
So how can this distinction be made effective?
France has a privacy law that explicitly defines both the scope of privacy and the circumstances in which the law applies.
By contrast, in Britain it is left to judges to decide what the “right to privacy” means.
There is a natural fear that specific legislation designed to protect privacy would muzzle legitimate press inquiries.
At the same time, it is widely acknowledged (except by most editors and journalists) that a great deal of media intrusion is simply an abuse of press freedom, with the sole aim of boosting circulation by feeding public prurience.
A law that curtails the abuse of press power while protecting its freedom to expose the abuse of political power would be difficult, but not impossible, to frame.
The essential principle is that the media should not be allowed to pander to the public’s prurience under cover of protecting the public interest.
What famous people – indeed ordinary people, too – do in private should be off limits to the media unless they give permission for those activities to be reported, photographed, or filmed.
The only exceptions would be if a newspaper has reasonable grounds for believing that the individuals concerned are breaking the law, or that, even if they are not breaking the law, they are behaving in such a way as to render them unfit to perform the duties expected of them.
Thus, a pop star’s consumption of illegal drugs may be reported, but not his or her sexual habits (if they are legal).
The private life of a politician may be revealed if it is expected to have consequences for the way the country is being governed; that of a top executive of a public company if it may affect the returns to shareholders.
This should be the only “public interest” defense available to a media outlet that is sued for invasion of privacy.
The media might become a bit drearier, but public life would be far healthier.
The Price of 9/11
NEW YORK – The September 11, 2001, terror attacks by Al Qaeda were meant to harm the United States, and they did, but in ways that Osama bin Laden probably never imagined.
President George W. Bush’s response to the attacks compromised America’s basic principles, undermined its economy, and weakened its security.
The attack on Afghanistan that followed the 9/11 attacks was understandable, but the subsequent invasion of Iraq was entirely unconnected to Al Qaeda – as much as Bush tried to establish a link.
That war of choice quickly became very expensive – orders of magnitude beyond the $60 billion claimed at the beginning – as colossal incompetence met dishonest misrepresentation.
Indeed, when Linda Bilmes and I calculated America’s war costs three years ago, the conservative tally was $3-5 trillion.
Since then, the costs have mounted further.
With almost 50% of returning troops eligible to receive some level of disability payment, and more than 600,000 treated so far in veterans’ medical facilities, we now estimate that future disability payments and health-care costs will total $600-900 billion.
But the social costs, reflected in veteran suicides (which have topped 18 per day in recent years) and family breakups, are incalculable.
Even if Bush could be forgiven for taking America, and much of the rest of the world, to war on false pretenses, and for misrepresenting the cost of the venture, there is no excuse for how he chose to finance it.
His was the first war in history paid for entirely on credit.
As America went into battle, with deficits already soaring from his 2001 tax cut, Bush decided to plunge ahead with yet another round of tax “relief” for the wealthy.
Today, America is focused on unemployment and the deficit.
Both threats to America’s future can, in no small measure, be traced to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Increased defense spending, together with the Bush tax cuts, is a key reason why America went from a fiscal surplus of 2% of GDP when Bush was elected to its parlous deficit and debt position today.
Direct government spending on those wars so far amounts to roughly $2 trillion – $17,000 for every US household – with bills yet to be received increasing this amount by more than 50%.
Moreover, as Bilmes and I argued in our book The Three Trillion Dollar War, the wars contributed to America’s macroeconomic weaknesses, which exacerbated its deficits and debt burden.
Then, as now, disruption in the Middle East led to higher oil prices, forcing Americans to spend money on oil imports that they otherwise could have spent buying goods produced in the US.
But then the US Federal Reserve hid these weaknesses by engineering a housing bubble that led to a consumption boom.
It will take years to overcome the excessive indebtedness and real-estate overhang that resulted.
Ironically, the wars have undermined America’s (and the world’s) security, again in ways that Bin Laden could not have imagined.
An unpopular war would have made military recruitment difficult in any circumstances.
But, as Bush tried to deceive America about the wars’ costs, he underfunded the troops, refusing even basic expenditures – say, for armored and mine-resistant vehicles needed to protect American lives, or for adequate health care for returning veterans.
A US court recently ruled that veterans’ rights have been violated.
(Remarkably, the Obama administration claims that veterans’ right to appeal to the courts should be restricted!)
Military overreach has predictably led to nervousness about using military power, and others’ knowledge of this threatens to weaken America’s security as well.
But America’s real strength, more than its military and economic power, is its “soft power,” its moral authority.
And this, too, was weakened: as the US violated basic human rights like habeas corpus and the right not to be tortured, its longstanding commitment to international law was called into question.
In Afghanistan and Iraq, the US and its allies knew that long-term victory required winning hearts and minds.
But mistakes in the early years of those wars complicated that already-difficult battle.
The wars’ collateral damage has been massive: by some accounts, more than a million Iraqis have died, directly or indirectly, because of the war.
According to some studies, at least 137,000 civilians have died violently in Afghanistan and Iraq in the last ten years; among Iraqis alone, there are 1.8 million refugees and 1.7 million internally displaced people.
Not all of the consequences were disastrous.
The deficits to which America’s debt-funded wars contributed so mightily are now forcing the US to face the reality of budget constraints.
America’s military spending still nearly equals that of the rest of the world combined, two decades after the end of the Cold War.
Some of the increased expenditures went to the costly wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the broader Global War on Terrorism, but much of it was wasted on weapons that don’t work against enemies that don’t exist.
Now, at last, those resources are likely to be redeployed, and the US will likely get more security by paying less.
Al Qaeda, while not conquered, no longer appears to be the threat that loomed so large in the wake of the 9/11 attacks.
But the price paid in getting to this point, in the US and elsewhere, has been enormous – and mostly avoidable.
The legacy will be with us for a long time.
It pays to think before acting.
The Price of Inaction
BERKELEY – Are the world’s governments capable of keeping the world economy out of a deep and long depression?
Three months ago, I would have said yes, without question. Now, I am not so certain.
The problem is not that governments are unsure about what to do. The standard checklist of what to do in a financial crisis to avoid a deep and prolonged depression has been gradually worked out over two centuries: by Bank of England Governor Cornelius Buller in 1825; by the Victorian-era editor of The Economist , Walter Bagehot; and by the economists Irving Fisher, John Maynard Keynes, Milton Friedman, among many others.
The key problem in times like these is that investor demand for safe, secure, and liquid assets – and thus their value – is too high, while demand for assets that underpin and finance the economy’s productive capital is too low. The obvious solution is for governments to create more cash to satisfy the demand for safe, secure, liquid assets.
As Keynes liked to say: “Unemployment develops...because people want the moon” – safe, secure, and liquid assets.
“Men cannot be employed when the object of desire [i.e., money] is something which cannot be produced and the demand for which cannot readily be choked off.”
The solution is “to persuade the public that green cheese [i.e., the notes printed by the central bank] is practically the same thing and to have a green cheese factory [i.e. a central bank] under public control...”
By buying government bonds for cash, a central bank can satisfy demand and push down the price of cash.
When there is no excess demand for cash, there will be no excess supply of the bonds and stocks that underpin and finance the economy’s productive capital.
Thus, expansionary monetary policy via standard open-market operations by a central bank is the first item on the checklist of what to do in a financial crisis.
Three months ago, I argued that all but a tiny and unbalanced fringe of economists approve of expansionary open-market operations to keep total nominal spending constant in a downturn, and I was right.
I was also right to say that all but a tiny and unbalanced fringe of economists approve of central-bank guarantees of system stability, in order to prevent the risk of a collapse of the payments system from becoming a first-order consideration boosting the demand for cash to unnatural levels.
The problem comes when expansionary monetary policy via standard open-market operations and central-bank guarantees of orderly markets prove insufficient. Economists disagree about when, under what circumstances, and in what order governments should move beyond these first two items on the checklist.
Should governments try to increase monetary velocity by selling bonds, thereby boosting short-term interest rates?
Should they employ unemployed workers directly, or indirectly, by bringing forward expenditures or expanding the scale of government programs?
Should they explicitly guarantee large financial institutions’ liabilities and/or classes of assets?
Should they buy up assets at what they believe is a discount from their long-run values, or buy up assets that private investors are unwilling to trade, even at a premium above their likely long-run values?
All five of the world’s major economies implemented their own confused and haphazard combinations of monetary, fiscal, and banking stimulus policies during the Great Depression, and the sooner they did – the sooner each began its own New Deal – the better.
Japan and Britain began their New Deals in 1931. Germany and the US began theirs in 1933.
France waited until 1936. Japan and Britain recovered first and fastest from the Great Depression, Germany and the US followed well behind, and France brought up the rear.
The conclusion that I draw from this is that we should try a combination of all checklist measures – quantitative monetary easing; bank guarantees, purchases, recapitalizations, and nationalizations; direct fiscal spending and debt issues – while ensuring that we can do so fast enough and on a large enough scale to do the job.
Yet I am told that the chances of getting more money in the US for an extra round of fiscal stimulus this year is zero, as is the chance of getting more money this year to intervene in the banking system on an even larger scale than America’s Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP).
There is an 80% chance that waiting until 2010 and seeing what policies look appropriate then would not be disastrous. But that means that there is a 20% chance that it would be.
And the US, it should be noted, is the most aggressive and best behaved of all major governments.
The Price of Inequality
NEW YORK – America likes to think of itself as a land of opportunity, and others view it in much the same light.
But, while we can all think of examples of Americans who rose to the top on their own, what really matters are the statistics: to what extent do an individual’s life chances depend on the income and education of his or her parents?
Nowadays, these numbers show that the American dream is a myth.
There is less equality of opportunity in the United States today than there is in Europe – or, indeed, in any advanced industrial country for which there are data.
This is one of the reasons that America has the highest level of inequality of any of the advanced countries –&nbsp;and its gap with the rest has been widening.
In the “recovery” of 2009-2010, the top 1% of US income earners captured 93% of the income growth.
Other inequality indicators –&nbsp;like wealth, health, and life expectancy –&nbsp;are as bad or even worse.
Those at the top, in such cases, are enriched at the direct expense of those at the bottom.
It might not be so bad if there were even a grain of truth to trickle-down economics – the quaint notion that everyone benefits from enriching those at the top.
But most Americans today are worse off – with lower real (inflation-adjusted) incomes – than they were in 1997, a decade and a half ago.
All of the benefits of growth have gone to the top.
Defenders of America’s inequality argue that the poor and those in the middle shouldn’t complain.
While they may be getting a smaller share of the pie than they did in the past, the pie is growing so much, thanks to the contributions of the rich and superrich, that the size of their slice is actually larger.
The evidence, again, flatly contradicts this.
Indeed, America grew far faster in the decades after World War II, when it was growing together, than it has since 1980, when it began growing apart.
This shouldn’t come as a surprise, once one understands the sources of inequality.
Rent-seeking distorts the economy.
Market forces, of course, play a role, too, but markets are shaped by politics; and, in America, with its quasi-corrupt system of campaign finance and its revolving doors between government and industry, politics is shaped by money.
For example, a bankruptcy law that privileges derivatives over all else, but does not allow the discharge of student debt, no matter how inadequate the education provided, enriches bankers and impoverishes many at the bottom.
In a country where money trumps democracy, such legislation has become predictably frequent.
But growing inequality is not inevitable.
There are market economies that are doing better, both in terms of both GDP growth and rising living standards for most citizens.
Some are even reducing inequalities.
America is paying a high price for continuing in the opposite direction.
Inequality leads to lower growth and less efficiency.
Lack of opportunity means that its most valuable asset – its people – is not being fully used.
Many at the bottom, or even in the middle, are not living up to their potential, because the rich, needing few public services and worried that a strong government might redistribute income, use their political influence to cut taxes and curtail government spending.
This leads to underinvestment in infrastructure, education, and technology, impeding the engines of growth.
The Great Recession has exacerbated inequality, with cutbacks in basic social expenditures and with high unemployment putting downward pressure on wages.
Moreover, the United Nations Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System, investigating the causes of the Great Recession, and the International Monetary Fund have both warned that inequality leads to economic instability.
But, most importantly, America’s inequality is undermining its values and identity.
With inequality reaching such extremes, it is not surprising that its effects are manifest in every public decision, from the conduct of monetary policy to budgetary allocations.
America has become a country not “with justice for all,” but rather with favoritism for the rich and justice for those who can afford it –&nbsp;so evident in the foreclosure crisis, in which the big banks believed that they were too big not only to fail, but also to be held accountable.
America can no longer regard itself as the land of opportunity that it once was.
But it does not have to be this way: it is not too late for the American dream to be restored.
The Primacy of NATO
F OR PUBLICATION FEBRUARY 22, NOT BEFORE
Today, 26 NATO Heads of State and Government will meet at NATO Headquarters in Brussels. They are here to demonstrate a strong spirit of unity in the transatlantic community, a determination to look forward and take action together.
There are important questions to be addressed, not only about the direction of NATO’s missions and operations, but also about the future of transatlantic security cooperation and the role the Alliance will play.
The broad range of issues to be discussed mirrors the essential place of the Alliance in addressing today’s security challenges.
They will discuss how to reinforce the success the international community has had in helping to build a new, democratic Afghanistan.
NATO and its members are already providing the essential security Afghanistan needs in order to make its aspirations for self-sustaining peace and prosperity a reality.
Today, NATO leaders will reaffirm their commitment to the courageous people of this country: we will help them for as long as it takes.
Iraq is a case in point.
All 26 NATO nations are now, as an Alliance, working together to respond to the Iraqi government’s request for support: by training Iraqi security forces, by providing equipment, or by helping to fund NATO’s efforts.
We are building a stronger relationship with the broader Middle East.
Already, the Alliance is developing a deeper political dialogue and more practical cooperation with the countries of North Africa, Israel and Jordan, and opening up a discussion with the Gulf States.
When Dr. Rice made her first visit as Secretary of State to NATO headquarters two weeks ago, Alliance Foreign Ministers had a discussion about the Middle East Peace Process.
The broader Middle East will be on the agenda of Heads and State and Government again today.
Many other critical political issues will be addressed: from ensuring stability in Kosovo as the political situation evolves this year; to the importance of maintaining strong relations and a frank dialogue with Russia; to building a stronger relationship with the EU, one that maximises the complementarity between our two organisations; to supporting the new government in Ukraine as it finds its path.
In that regard, this morning NATO leaders will welcome their first meeting with President Yushchenko.
They will share with him their common determination to help him build a better, more democratic future for his people, and strengthen Ukraine’s Euro-Atlantic integration.
But NATO leaders will also lift their eyes from the immediate challenges of the day, and discuss a fundamental strategic question as well: how to use NATO to its fullest potential as a platform for holding political discussions and building transatlantic consensus across the wide range of the issues where Europe and North America share common interests and wish to defend common values.
NATO is the only permanent political forum in which North America sits together with Europe.
This is a unique framework for profound transatlantic political consultation and effective military cooperation.
And it works -- but it can do more.
The Alliance can and should be the place to discuss and debate a broader range of political issues.
Indeed, as we face today’s security challenges - terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, failed states - we cannot afford not to.
I am encouraged that, more and more, Alliance leaders are coming to share the same view.
Today’s Summit meeting will give a new impulse to NATO’s political evolution.
That evolution will accelerate in the coming months and years, as NATO’s strengthens its role in shaping and delivering transatlantic security cooperation in the 21st century.
Capitalists for Inclusive Growth
LONDON – In 2012, the Pew Research Center found that 85% of self-described middle-class adults in the United States believe that it is more difficult now than it was a decade ago for people like them to maintain their standard of living.
The share of Americans who say that they are in the lower-middle or lower class has risen from a quarter of the adult population in 2008 to around a third today.
And Pew’s research found that only 63% of those surveyed believe that hard work leads to success, down from 74% in 1999.
These statistics, which represent popular sentiment in the world’s largest economy, should raise significant concerns for governments and business leaders elsewhere, particularly in countries challenged by stagnant growth and rising levels of youth unemployment.
Indeed, in January, the IMF revised its near-term outlook for eurozone growth downward, to -0.2% in 2013.
Meanwhile, official data from Spain indicate that the jobless rate rose to 26% (almost six million people) in the last three months of 2012, the highest figure since the mid-1970’s, with the rate of youth unemployment reaching 55%.
The need for growth – specifically, the kind of inclusive growth that can provide jobs for the vast number of out-of-work young people and combat rising levels of income inequality – has never been more vital.
Nevertheless, today’s debates about how to achieve sustainable, inclusive growth are too narrowly focused on the role of governments and policymakers.
The role of the private sector – with its multinational reach, vast piles of cash, and ability to innovate – has been neglected.
There are three main areas to which business should turn its attention if capitalism is to function in a more inclusive way and meet society’s most pressing needs.
First, companies should work to overcome skills/jobs mismatches by investing in vocational training and apprenticeships.
Companies like Rolls-Royce and British Gas operate impressive apprenticeship schemes that add value for their businesses by creating a pipeline of talented recruits.
Other initiatives have been established to scale up these efforts by engaging multiple companies to create entry-level positions for the significant number of young people who are currently unemployed.
Second, just as a collective effort is needed to strengthen the skills of national workforces, so, too, an industry commitment is required to support small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) as part of the wider business environment.
In its 2011 fiscal year, Hewlett-Packard used more than 600 SMEs in its supply chain in the United Kingdom, representing nearly 10% of its spending on suppliers.
HP aims to increase this share to more than 15% by the end of 2013 with the addition of a further 150 SMEs, thereby fueling what it rightly regards as the engine of UK economic growth.
Similarly, in March 2012, a consortium of large corporations led by IBM created the web-based Supplier Connection to make it easier for small businesses to become suppliers to large companies.
Currently, the members of Supplier Connection purchase more than $150 billion in goods and services annually through their global supply chains.
Finally, public corporations must be managed for the long term, and should be rewarded by investors for being more inclusive.
For example, Unilever has rejected the short-term pressures of capital markets by ending quarterly earnings reporting and broadening its focus to advance greater social interests, rather than just the interests of its shareholders.
But enlightened companies require enlightened investors.
The Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan is exemplary in its commitment to supporting the best governance practices in the companies in which it invests, and it has reaped large benefits from this approach: the Plan has earned average annual returns of 10% since its inception in 1990.
The idea that underlies all of these initiatives, and the notion of inclusive capitalism itself, is that companies must be managed for the long term.
Companies that follow this approach are concerned with the skills of their future workforces; seek to build loyal and productive supplier bases; and make investment decisions based on sustainable value creation, not short-term profitability.
There is no contradiction between delivering high returns and adopting a long-term approach.
Furthermore, as companies begin to adopt these practices, a rising tide will lift all boats: with greater support, SMEs, which currently account for 99% of businesses and two-thirds of private-sector employment in the European Union, will be able to invest in research and development, and to hire more employees.
In turn, large companies will receive the benefits of faster innovation, rates of youth unemployment will fall, and the hollowing out of the middle class – and its faith in future living standards – will be reversed.
It is this type of profoundly positive influence on prospects for shared prosperity and inclusive growth that currently eludes national governments.
The Problem with “China Bashing”
Pressure on China today to push up the value of the yuan against the dollar is eerily similar to the pressure on Japan 30 years ago to make the yen appreciate.
Back then, “Japan bashing” came to mean the threat of US trade sanctions unless Japan softened competitive pressure on American industries.
By 1995, the Japanese economy had become so depressed by the overvalued yen ( endaka fukyo ) that the Americans relented and an&shy;nounced a new “strong dollar” policy.
Now “China bashing” has taken over, and the result could be just as bad, if not worse.
By 2000, China’s bilateral trade surplus was as large as Japan’s; by 2004, it was twice as large.
Whereas Japan bashing included “vol&shy;untary” restraints on exports that threatened US heavy industries, where lobbies were concentrated and politically potent, recent Chinese exports have mainly been low- to middle-tech products of light industry.
Thus, China bashing primarily means pressure to revalue the yuan.
However, this demand is as unwarranted now as was pressure on Japan to make the yen appreciate.
The financial press and many influential economists argue that a major de&shy;preciation of the dollar is needed to correct America’s external deficit.
But the US current-account deficit – about 6% of GDP in 2004 and 2005 – mainly reflects a new round of deficit spending by the US federal government and surprisingly low personal savings by American households (perhaps because of the bubble in US residential real estate).
Moreover, the cure can be worse than the disease.
Sustained appreciation of a creditor country’s currency against the world’s dominant money is a recipe for a slowdown in economic growth, followed by eventual deflation, as Japan found in the 1990’s – with no obvious decline in its large relative trade surplus.
In a rapidly growing develop&shy;ing country whose financial system is still im&shy;mature, introducing exchange-rate flexibility in order to insulate domestic macroeconomic policy from the ebb and flow of international payments, as the IMF advocates, is an even more questionable strategy.
If a discrete exchange-rate appreciation is to be sustained, it must reflect expected monetary policies: tight money and deflation in the appreciated country, and easy money with inflation in the depreciated country.
But domestic money growth in China’s immature bank-based capital market is high and unpredictable, while many interest rates remain officially pegged.
Thus, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) cannot rely on observed domestic money growth or interest rates to indicate whether monetary policy is too tight or too loose.
From 1995 to July 21, 2005, China’s authorities held the now unified exchange rate constant at 8.28 yuan/dollar (plus or minus 0.3%).
They subordinated domestic monetary and fiscal policies to maintaining the fixed exchange rate – even during the 1997-98 Asian crisis, despite great pressure to devalue.
They also dismantled tariffs and quotas on imports faster than their World Trade Organization obligations required.
Greater economic openness, coupled with the fixed nominal exchange rate, ended China’s inflationary roller-coaster ride, and, after 1994, real GDP growth also became more stable.
The government is now seeking to decontrol domestic interest rates, create a more robust domestic bond market, and finally remove capital controls.
However, with China’s economy currently threatened by ongoing yuan appreciation, liberalizing the financial system could have perverse short-run consequences.
In a liberalized capital market, the undiminished risk that the yuan might appreciate means that investors must be compensated by a higher interest rate on dollar assets.
But interest rates on dollar assets are given in world markets independently of what China does.
Thus, the market can establish the necessary interest differential only if interest rates on yuan assets fall below their dollar equivalents.
As the huge buildup of dollar reserves – now almost $800 billion – expands China’s domestic monetary base, short-term interest rates will be driven down, at least until they hit zero.
In May 2006, the fairly free domestic interbank rate was just 1.62%, while the US Federal Funds rate was 5%.
Just letting the yuan float upward does not resolve the dilemma.
Actual appreciation would lead to actual deflation and further downward pressure on domestic interest rates.
If actual appreciation does not reduce China’s trade surplus, pressure to appreciate the yuan further would only continue, as was true for Japan before 1995.
If China is to avoid falling into a Japanese-style liquidity trap, the best solution is to fix its exchange rate in a completely credible way so that there is no fear of currency appreciation.
Then financial liberalization could proceed with market interest rates remaining at normal levels.
But China’s abandonment of the yuan’s “traditional parity” in July 2005 rules out a new, credibly fixed exchange-rate strategy for some time.
Failing this, China must postpone full liberalization of its financial markets.
This means retaining, and possibly strengthening, capital controls on inflows of highly liquid “hot” money from dollars into yuan, and continuing to peg certain interest rates, such as basic deposit and loan rates, to help preserve the profitability of banks.
Such measures are, of course, an unfortunate detour.
True, China’s economy is now growing robustly and is not likely to face actual deflation anytime soon, but if China does fall into a zero-interest rate trap, the PBC, like the BOJ, would be unable to offset deflationary pressure in the event of a large exchange-rate appreciation.
With short-term interest rates locked at zero, pressure for further appreciation would leave the PBC helpless to re-expand the economy.
China’s monetary and foreign exchange policies are now in a state of limbo.
Instead of stable guidelines with a well-defined monetary (exchange rate) anchor and a firm mandate to complete financial liberalization, China’s macroeconomic and financial decision making will be ad hoc and anybody’s guess – as was true, and still is, for Japan.
The Problem With “Illiberal Democracy”
PRINCETON – Poland’s turn toward authoritarian rule has set off alarm bells across the European Union and within NATO.
Since coming to power in October, Jarosław Kaczyński’s Law and Justice party (PiS) has attacked the country’s Constitutional Court, politicized the judiciary and the civil service, and launched an assault on media pluralism.
Critics of the PiS government, which is led by Prime Minister Beata Szydło (with Kaczyński, ruling from behind the scenes as he holds no official post), have described its actions as a blitz to install “illiberal democracy,” similar to what Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has done in his country over the past six years.
But to call what is being constructed in Poland illiberal democracy is deeply misleading – and in a way that undermines efforts to rein in would-be autocrats like Kaczyński and Orbán.
After all, it is not just liberalism that is under attack, but democracy itself.
The concept of “illiberal democracy,” attributable to a 1997 essay by the American foreign-policy thinker Fareed Zakaria, was an effort to describe regimes that held elections, but did not observe the rule of law and regularly overrode their political systems’ constitutional checks and balances.
It was an idea born of disillusion.
In the heady days after the fall of communism, a kind of democratic ecstasy prevailed (at least in the West).
The “end of history” had been achieved, and elections, representative institutions, and the rule of law would, it seemed, always go neatly together.
Soon, however, newly empowered electorates were voting in majorities that used their power to oppress minorities and violate fundamental rights.
The implication was clear: Democracy on its own was not enough.
Liberalism – the protection of minorities and individual civil liberties – had to be strengthened.
The word “liberalism,” however, does not mean the same thing to all people.
In many circles, it came to be used to describe unfettered capitalism and full freedom of choice in personal lifestyles.
And it was the alternative meanings that initially allowed politicians like Orbán and the Turkish leader Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to make the case for a different form of majoritarian democracy.
Erdoğan, emphasizing traditional Islamic morality, started to present himself as a “conservative democrat.”
Orbán, in a controversial speech in 2014, declared his desire to create an “illiberal state.”
More recently, during the refugee crisis, Orbán announced the end of the era of what he called “liberal blah blah” and predicted that Europe would come around to his “Christian and national” vision of politics.
To be sure, the phrase “illiberal democracy” is not necessarily a contradiction in terms.
Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth century, many European Christian Democrats would have called themselves “illiberal.”
In fact, they might have been offended if one questioned their staunch anti-liberalism.
What this did not mean, however, is that they failed to understand and recognize the importance of minority rights in a functioning democracy (after all, minorities can become the majority in the next election).
Nor did it mean that they believed unelected institutions like constitutional courts were somehow undemocratic.
They associated “liberalism” with individualism, materialism and, very often, atheism; but being anti-liberal did not mean rejecting the importance of rights or independent institutions.
What governments like those in Poland, Hungary, and Turkey are proposing is something very different.
It is one thing to criticize materialism, atheism, or even individualism.
It is something else altogether to attempt to limit freedom of speech and assembly, media pluralism, or the protection of minorities.
The first is a disagreement about different political philosophies that can justify democracy.
The second is an attack on democracy’s very foundations.
An election, after all, can be undemocratic even if the ruling party refrains from stuffing ballot boxes.
If opposition parties have been hindered in making their case to the electorate, and journalists do not dare to report on the government’s failures, the ballot boxes have already been stuffed.
It is no accident that many of the democracies that emerged after the fall of communism established constitutional courts to protect rights and preserve pluralism.
These institutions ultimately secure and sustain democracy.
As long as critics keep using the phrase “illiberal democracy” to describe what is happening in countries like Poland, leaders like Kaczyński will simply say, “Exactly!”
Far from being received as a criticism, the phrase reinforces such leaders’ image as opponents of liberalism, while allowing them to continue to refer to their actions as “democratic” – which, for all the disappointments over the last quarter-century, is still the most important prerequisite for inclusion in the geopolitical “West.”
Furthermore, the expression “illiberal democracy” confirms the narrative that democracy is the domain of national governments – and that it is the European Union that is pushing undemocratic liberalism.
This allows figures like Kaczyński and Orbán to paint the EU as the agent of rampant capitalism and libertine morality.
The fact that Europe’s new authoritarians have come to power through free and fair elections does not lend democratic legitimacy to their efforts to transform entire political systems to their own advantage.
Instead of describing them as “illiberal” we should be calling them what they really are: “undemocratic.”
Learning from Lehman
HONG KONG – When the US investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed five years ago, emerging-market economies did not hold many of the toxic financial assets – mainly American subprime mortgages – that fueled the subsequent global financial crisis.
But they were deeply affected by the drop in world trade, which recorded a peak-to-trough decline of at least 15%, with trade finance also contracting sharply, owing to a shortage of dollar liquidity. Have policymakers responded appropriately since then?
Soon after the crisis erupted, the G-20 countries embraced massive stimulus packages, unconventional monetary policies in the advanced economies, and major institutional efforts, such as the Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation in the United States and the Basel III initiative to strengthen banking standards.
China’s ¥4 trillion stimulus package, unveiled in November 2008, restored confidence in global commodity markets.
Led by strong Chinese growth, emerging markets stabilized.
Since 2009, quantitative easing (QE) by the US Federal Reserve has resulted in record-low interest rates around the world.
But, while the resulting surge in capital flows to emerging markets stimulated economic growth, it also inflated asset bubbles.
Now, with the Fed publicly considering an end to its massive, open-ended purchases of long-term securities and foreign capital fleeing home from emerging markets, many fear that Asia’s economies could come crashing down, as they did in the late 1990’s.
Leverage in some emerging markets’ household and corporate sectors has reached record levels.
China’s annual economic growth has slowed to around 7.5%, while Indonesia and India –&#160;and, outside Asia, Brazil and South Africa – are experiencing sharp downward pressure on their exchange rates.
Moreover, there has been no major reform of the global financial architecture.
China’s renminbi is internationalizing, but its share of global payments remains relatively small, with the dollar retaining its role as the world’s main reserve currency.
And, while regulatory reform is progressing, its effectiveness in addressing the weaknesses exposed by the global financial crisis will depend not only on the new rules that emerge, but also on the consistency and quality of their implementation.
There has been commendable progress on the Basel 3 capital requirements for banks, with 25 of 27 Basel Committee members having issued final rules.
Likewise, the impact of regulatory changes resulting from major legislation and policy directives in the United States, Europe, and the United Kingdom on banking, insurance, financial-transaction taxes, anti-money laundering, and cyber-space is likely to be substantial.
Although rules on shadow-banking have yet to be formulated, another problem exposed by the crisis has abated: America’s external deficit has shrunk to a much more manageable 2-3% of GDP, accompanied by drops in the surpluses run by Japan and China.
Global trade rebalancing has arrived.
Still, fiscal conditions in the advanced economies remain unsustainable, with many OECD members’ debt levels hovering around 100% of GDP.
Japan, which has one of the world’s highest debt/GDP ratios, currently well over 200%, is engaging in a risky experiment with further monetary stimulus to try to target 2% annual inflation.
In many advanced economies, both monetary and fiscal policies have reached the limits of their effectiveness.
The key questions now are whether global economic growth is self-sustaining without QE, whether emerging markets’ output will continue to rise strongly, albeit at a slower pace, and whether current global financial-reform efforts will be sufficient to prevent another crisis in emerging markets.
Given the high degree of trade and financial globalization that now characterizes the world economy, there is no doubt that the slowdown in the advanced economies, which account for two-thirds of global GDP, will undermine emerging-country growth. Indeed, the threat to withdraw QE is already having an enormous impact on emerging economies’ asset markets.
As real interest rates and risk premia begin to rise, the level of global trade and investment will decline.
In the coming years, emerging markets will most likely struggle with implementation of global financial regulatory standards, which apply mostly to more sophisticated financial markets. They will also confront a rapidly changing external environment and a growing need to manage capital flows more effectively, which will require much closer coordination between central banks and financial regulators.
Indeed, perhaps the most important lesson learned in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers is that we can no longer afford to examine problems in terms of individual institutions and from regulatory “silos.”
The global economy’s high degree of interconnectivity, interdependence, and complex feedback mechanisms imply that one weak hub can bring down the entire system.
In other words, the world needs a systemic approach to deal with systemic risks and system failures.
Unfortunately, there may be little hope of strengthening global financial governance as long as implementation and enforcement of rules remain at the national level.
Like other emerging markets, China is committed to financial stability and playing its role in reforming the global financial system.
China was one of the first countries to sign up to the Basel 3 standards, and further renminbi internationalization will be implemented in a prudent and pragmatic manner. Domestic financial reforms will focus on strengthening policy coordination and moving toward market-determined interest rates and exchange-rate flexibility.
All of these steps will contribute to sustainable domestic growth and a more stable global financial system.
Other major emerging economies’ policymakers would be wise to act with the same purpose in mind.
Read more from "The Lehman Legacy"
The Promise of Central Asia
Central Asia is frequently in the news these days – and most of the news seems to be bad.
The casual reader, viewer, and listener has become acquainted with a region of landlocked and poor countries – Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan – that share a legacy of isolation, squandered natural resources, environmental degradation, and Soviet-era political systems.
And yet, it is also a region with a distant history of great economic and cultural achievement in the Silk Road era, and that recently has emerged as a focus of renewed global competition reminiscent of the Cold War.
Can Central Asia regain a key role at the center of the huge Eurasian landmass, surrounded by some of the world’s most dynamic economies – China, Russia, and India?
While there is a laudable international effort to help Africa grow out of heavy donor dependency in the next decade, the equally momentous economic-development and human-security challenges facing Central Asia is generally not fully understood.
History and geography – measured by distance from the closest seaports – have isolated these countries physically, economically, and socially, and have exacerbated the difficulties of their transitions to market economies.
The result is that development and governance indicators in Central Asia are on par with those in many sub-Saharan African countries.
The Central Asian Human Development Report, recently launched by the United Nations Development Program, argues that the countries of Central Asia have a great opportunity to capitalize on their location at the center of a dynamic continent, their abundant natural resources, and their still-strong potential to forge a prosperous, stable, and cohesive region.
This will require them to open up to the rest of the world, cooperate with each other and their neighbors, and radically reform their antiquated political systems.
Regional cooperation should include areas ranging from trade, transport, and transit, to water and energy, as well as efforts to control of drug trafficking.
The Report estimates that by doing so, and by improving their investment climates and governance, Central Asian countries can double their incomes over ten years, modernize their economies, connect with the rest of the world, and improve the lives of their citizens dramatically.
Currently, the region suffers from tremendous transport and transit constraints.
Trade times and costs are unnaturally high due to unintegrated and lengthy border procedures, high tariff rates, corruption, and underinvestment in transport infrastructure.
These costs could be halved by better customs, border and transit management, improved transport corridors and more competitive transport services.
By joining the World Trade Organization, improving their investment climates, and stopping interference with shuttle traders – mostly poor women trying to make a living –governments would give the region’s businesses and farmers access to markets and attract much-needed new investment.
Central Asia is blessed with an abundance of energy and water resources, even though much is wasted by inefficient use and poor maintenance of infrastructure.
An estimated $1.7 billion of agricultural production is lost annually due to poor water management.
The region is poised to become one of the main suppliers of oil and gas for world energy markets, and its big rivers, if properly managed, have the capacity to provide enough water both for irrigation and for electricity exports to China, India, and Russia.
But cooperation is needed both within the region and with key neighbors in order to realize effective regional water and energy management.
The region is also at risk from the effects of drug trafficking.
While illicit drugs are moved through all Central Asian countries, Tajikistan bears the brunt of the scourge due to its location at the northern border of Afghanistan.
Up to 100 tons of heroin are estimated to pass through Tajikistan each year, which is equivalent to the estimated annual North American and West European demand.
Unless Central Asian countries and their neighbors cooperate in controlling drug production, use, and trafficking, this source of major health risks, corruption, and crime will not be eradicated.
The good news today is that most of the Central Asian countries, their neighbors and the international community have recognized the importance of cooperation, openness, and integration.
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan are actively opening up and working together on many fronts.