Sovereignty has thus become a particularly seductive concept for citizens of the southern member countries, who have increasingly come to believe that the EU's “rigid" structure has been imposed upon them.
Meanwhile, the northern EU countries are falling prey to a simplistic message of their own: that their southern counterparts are irresponsible spendthrifts who should be left to solve their own problems.
At the root of both beliefs is the fear and uncertainty generated by globalization, with citizens concerned for their security and unsure of their place in the world.
But there is no going back to a global order defined by isolated nation-states – even if one would not know it from the populist rhetoric dominating today's discussions.
Of course, EU members are sovereign states, and they negotiate among themselves as such.
But they are also interdependent, with each member's actions shaped by external factors.
This interdependence stems not only from a shared currency: it is the fruit of endless socioeconomic interactions that weave the EU member states into a dynamic web.
That is why a public debate that considers only two extreme scenarios – imposed integration or absolute national sovereignty – is misleading and dangerous.
It drives participants into opposite corners, setting them up for conflict – an outcome that should be avoided at all costs.
There is a middle ground.
The EU should commit to continue democratizing its institutions, as it did when it gave the democratically elected European Parliament a voice in the selection of the European Commission president.
For their part, EU member countries should recognize that they, as sovereign actors, chose integration, because the benefits of pooling their sovereignty outweighed the costs.
European institutions reflect this dynamic.
The European Stability Mechanism, for example, is a collective project aimed at safeguarding the eurozone's financial stability, not an instrument of domination or confrontation.
The ESM's resources belong to everyone, just as one country's bankruptcy affects everyone.
When financially stable countries disregard the challenges facing their struggling counterparts, they are acting against their own interests.
Likewise, the economic transfers conducted through the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund involved sovereign, democratic countries.
The idea that, when the going gets tough, an EU country can solve all of its problems by reverting to pure national sovereignty is an intellectual fallacy, a political chimera, and thus a source of considerable social frustration.
Sovereignty does not negate interdependence.
It is time for countries to abandon the notion that there is some magical form of sovereignty that will allow them to escape their responsibilities as EU members without incurring serious costs.
In the real world of Europe today, debtors cannot break agreements that they have made in exchange for aid, and creditors must recognize the need to continue contributing resources to the bailout fund.
It would also help if creditors understood that their contributions, like their decades of support to cohesion funds, will not impoverish them (by, say, depleting their public pensions).
On the contrary, creditor countries will benefit from more stable, solvent commercial partners for their exports.
The myth of sovereignty has been perpetuated for far too long in the EU, fueling dangerous nationalist sentiment and fear of the “other."
Member countries, beginning with Greece, must acknowledge that interdependency is unavoidable – and, indeed, desirable, if managed properly.
As Greece's prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, admitted recently, “Europe is a space for negotiation and mutually beneficial compromises."
Integration was a choice – and a positive one.
Europe has much work to do to strengthen the multiple identities needed to avoid conflict.
Whether we are from the north or the south, from Germany or Greece, we are all European.
And we are richer for it.
Migration Beyond Crisis Mode
MADRID – Over the past seven years, Europe has been in crisis mode almost without interruption.
From Ukraine to Greece, events have led the continent from the frying pan to the fire and back again, with all of the attendant summitry, declarations, and brinkmanship.
Now, it is a migration crisis – one that is unlikely to be resolved in the foreseeable future – that is commanding the European Union’s attention.
But, if Europe is to respond effectively, it must move beyond crisis mode to understand both what it is facing and what it wants to achieve.
It is indisputable that migration deserves the EU’s focus.
Not only are migrant flows into Europe shattering records from one month to the next; migrants’ primary entry points are changing as well.
Meanwhile, the already-hazy lines between asylum-seekers, refugees, displaced persons, and purely economic migrants are becoming increasingly difficult to distinguish at all.
The dangerous conditions of the migrants’ journey constitute a serious humanitarian crisis.
Since the beginning of this year, roughly 2,500 people have died attempting to cross the Mediterranean, to say nothing of gruesome scenes like the recent discovery of 71 decomposing bodies in an abandoned truck in Austria.
Thousands more languish in makeshift camps with little or no support.
To make matters worse, there has been a steady stream of migration-related violence across Europe, from an arson attack on a planned refugee shelter in Germany to police brutality against migrants in Macedonia and Hungary.
The port of Calais has become a chokepoint of the crisis, with migrants desperately trying to force their way onto trucks and trains bound for the United Kingdom.
The situation screams “emergency” – and has triggered a response by the EU.
Most notably, the EU has tripled the budget of Operation Triton, designed to strengthen border security; launched an EU-wide naval operation against human smugglers and traffickers in the Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR Med); and allocated additional funds to overwhelmed frontline member countries.
Some individual member countries have also acted.
Most notably, Germany, despite facing the arrival of a predicted 800,000 asylum-seekers this year, has suspended implementation of the EU’s Dublin Regulation, which would have led to the deportation of thousands of Syrian refugees.
But these measures, though helpful, are far from adequate.
In fact, they are examples of crisis-mode policymaking, which tends to favor impressive-seeming stopgap measures (not to mention lofty declarations that can verge on hollowness or hyperbole), instead of real solutions.
By allowing EU leaders to avoid acknowledging the long-term nature of the migrant challenge, this approach weakens their motivation to take collective action.
And, indeed, a reluctance to cooperate was on display at last month’s meeting of the EU’s Justice and Home Affairs Council, where representatives failed to produce an arrangement on how to distribute the paltry 40,000 refugees that the European Council agreed to accept in June.
The fact is that the pressure of migration is here to stay.
After all, the factors driving hundreds of thousands of people to risk everything to get to Europe are nowhere near being resolved.
Iraq and Syria remain mired in violence and chaos; Eritrea is in the grip of a repressive regime; and Libya has become a collapsed state.
Add to that weak or non-existent governance in much of Africa (and the concomitant security threats and bleak economic prospects), and it is difficult to imagine how the tide of migrants will be slowed.
The chance of a better life – or any life at all – is all but irresistible to the people trapped in these areas.
No matter how strong the EU’s external borders are – though, of course, better monitoring and patrolling measures are needed – the flow of migrants will continue to overwhelm their capacity, endangering the openness that is so fundamental to European unification, beginning with the Schengen acquis, which guarantees freedom of movement, without border controls, among 26 European countries.
If Europe is to adapt to the migrant challenge, and design realistic and productive solutions that heed European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker’s call for “collective courage,” it must target the root causes and enablers of the current migration wave.
Specifically, the EU must support governance reform, economic development, and the establishment of basic human security in the countries that migrants are fleeing.
At the same time, efforts are needed to strengthen deterrence near and en route to Europe’s borders, through partnerships with major source and transit countries.
Legal channels of migration should be opened for those who either deserve protection under international law or possess skills that could benefit European societies.
For migrants who reach EU territory, are not entitled to international legal protection, and lack such vital skills, repatriation regimes must be established.
All of this will require an update of the legal categorizations of migrants, as well as burden-sharing within the EU, which is glaringly absent at the moment.
The EU cannot simply wait out the current migration crisis by implementing piecemeal and panicked measures in the hope that the problem will eventually resolve itself.
What is needed is careful consideration of how best to balance humanitarian imperatives with security concerns, domestic social welfare with international legal obligations, and member countries’ duties to one another with their responsibilities to their own citizens.
Only then can leaders design the kind of thoughtful, comprehensive, and forward-looking strategy that the migrant crisis – and, indeed, the EU’s own survival – demands.
Putting People First in Europe
PARIS – The same type of populist discontent that fueled Brexit in the United Kingdom is on the rise throughout Europe, suggesting that policymakers have lost sight of the European project’s central objective: to ensure the wellbeing of all Europeans.
As the first United Nations Human Development Report put it in 1990: “People are the real wealth of a nation.”
The best way to capitalize on the people of a country or region is through social equity.
Amartya Sen, in his magisterial The Idea of Justice, concluded that true social equity requires not equal treatment for all, but rather unequal treatment in favor of the poor and most disadvantaged.
Mere equity in public finance or in the eyes of the law is not enough if we don’t also consider the different starting points for individuals and groups in society.
Recognizing this, successive UN development reports since 1990 have made the case that both economies and societies are stronger when public policy puts people’s wellbeing first.
However, this outlook hasn’t yet taken root in the EU’s elite policymaking circles, where well-meaning economists and politicians often believe they are doing the right thing by balancing budgets and reining in spending, usually by cutting health, education, and infrastructure budgets.
These policymakers, with little empirical evidence, believe that fiscal prudence today will lead to a stronger economy tomorrow.
This is the thinking behind the current policy mix in Europe, where fiscal austerity is combined with “structural reform,” meaning less spending on the social safety net and less regulation to protect workers.
Obviously, the costs of these policies are mostly borne by the poor and the middle class.
But there are several other problems with this approach as well.
First, it isn’t good for most people’s incomes.
When the Oxford University economist Tony Atkinson looked at the UK’s economic performance through the lens of inequality, the 1980s, generally considered a strong decade in terms of growth, appeared much worse; and the 1990s, regarded as a low-growth decade, appeared much better.
Atkinson’s findings point to a central question: Who benefits from growth – the many or the few?
If an economy can be said to be growing when a small minority receives most of the gains while everyone else’s lot stays the same or decreases, the concept of economic growth loses much of its meaning.
This leads to a second problem with the prevailing paradigm, which is that it puts abstract economic indicators before actual people.
Because gross domestic product is the preferred gauge of any economy’s value, many factors that contribute to human wellbeing are ignored, and spending on fundamental needs, such as health and education, comes to be seen as an expense rather than an essential investment.
If policymakers viewed such spending as an investment, they could start thinking about how to maximize returns.
Like all investments in human or fixed capital, there may be diminishing returns at high levels.
So, rather than funneling economic benefits to the rich and assuming it will “trickle down,” policymakers should assess whether investing in opportunities for the poor actually does more for economic growth.
In the US, the 1944 Servicemen’s Readjustment Act (better known as the GI Bill) was a success because it provided training for those most in need of it, enabling returning World War II veterans to re-enter the productive economy.
The bill created a more educated workforce and ushered in a period of rising incomes for most Americans.
A third problem with the current approach is that its central objective is not full employment.
It is time to return to the macroeconomic policies of the 1950s and 1960s, which recognized the benefits of full employment in fostering social stability and sustainable growth.
As the Nordic model shows, high employment is good for the economy because it ensures adequate tax revenues to finance high levels of social investment, which creates a virtuous cycle.
Many European countries are now in a vicious cycle instead, with austerity policies worsening the problem of youth unemployment.
This is not only unnecessary, but also wasteful, because it risks creating a generation that will be ill equipped to drive future growth.
As John Maynard Keynes pointed out in 1937, “The boom, not the slump, is the right time for austerity at the Treasury.”
In the current slump, European countries should be investing in their human capital to spur their economies’ potential growth.
The fourth problem is that European countries’ fiscal policies do not emphasize creativity and innovation, which benefits not only from a conducive regulatory environment, but also from high-quality education and infrastructure.
Governments need to reduce bureaucratic red tape so that entrepreneurs can take more risks.
But breakthrough technology companies such as Apple, Facebook, and Twitter also depend on people who had access to well-funded education systems.
And while there is a growing “tech for good” sector in Europe, it will succeed only if it is supported by up-to-date infrastructure, which generally requires public outlays.
Policymakers in Europe (and elsewhere) need to adjust their thinking – especially their fiscal thinking – to put people first.
Governments that make it their central objective to maximize human wellbeing end up not only encouraging higher economic growth, but also nurturing healthier politics.
Britain’s Watershed Year
LONDON – On a grey and rain-sodden London day at the beginning of 2016, it can be tough to find reason for optimism.
The sun still comes up in the morning.
At some point, it will presumably stop raining.
My grandchildren offer a ray of sunshine; all Star Wars fans, they can just about convince me that, like Princess Leia’s dissident forces, the good guys will eventually win.
Newspaper headlines, however, are pretty good at tempering such sentiments.
With economic prospects in China and Brazil looking distinctly gloomy, the world economy is at risk of flat-lining – or worse.
Western Asia is in turmoil, and Saudi Arabia and Iran have shown no sign that they are prepared to work together to ease Sunni-Shia hostilities.
Migrants continue to arrive by the thousand at Europe’s fragile borders.
North Korea claims that it is building a bigger and better nuclear weapon.
The good news from last month’s United Nations climate change conference in Paris has been buried in an avalanche of geopolitical gloom.
And things could get even worse by the end of this year.
In the United Kingdom, where a referendum on whether to remain in the European Union is likely to take place before the end of the year, things could get a lot worse.
If, deluded by mendacity and make-believe, Britain votes to quit the EU, the referendum – introduced as a way to placate the growing number of anti-EU voices in the Conservative Party – will have blown up Prime Minister David Cameron’s cabinet and done irreparable harm to Britain.
I don’t think it will happen.
But, then again, I wouldn’t have believed a few years ago, or even a few months ago, that the Republican Party in the United States would be choosing between Donald Trump and Ted Cruz as its presidential nominee.
Clearly, populist folly can eviscerate reason and common sense.
A vote against EU membership, especially in such a dangerous international environment, truly would be irrational.
For starters, the argument that the UK could negotiate favorable terms for selling its goods in the EU makes little sense, as Europe’s single market matters far more to British exporters than the UK market matters to European businesses.
Claims that leaving the EU would enable the UK to pursue its own commercial interests, like Norway or Switzerland, fail to acknowledge that these countries have to accept the rules of Europe’s single market in order to access it – rules that they have no part in making.
At the beginning, the Norwegians called it “fax democracy”: Instructions from Brussels would simply appear in Oslo government offices, to be implemented without debate.
This, remarkably, is what British Euroskeptics call “sovereignty.”
But sovereignty is always a slippery concept.
Nationalists often argue as though it was akin to virginity – there one moment, gone the next.
But sovereignty is far from an absolute condition.
How much sovereignty does the UK enjoy as a net energy importer, with much of its future supply set to be provided by nuclear power stations in French and Chinese hands?
How sovereign is a country once the hedge funds and bond traders mark it down?
And what good is sovereignty when we face environmental threats that can be countered only through international cooperation?
The idea of making all decisions unilaterally may sound nice, but it simply isn’t plausible in today’s integrated world.
Even as the world’s fifth-largest economy, the UK probably would not find it easy to negotiate favorable trade deals with giants like America, Japan, and China.
In fact, if the UK decides to go it alone, big investors could soon rush to the exit.
By the end of this year, manufacturers could be trying to calculate how much of their plant they should move to the continent.
And by January, Britain, having just kicked the EU in the teeth, could find itself attempting to negotiate, under a new prime minister and cabinet, a new political and economic relationship with the EU’s 27 other members.
It looks like mayhem to me.
Of course, it is possible that none of this will happen.
British voters could – as our closest friends and allies, from the US to Japan, have advised – choose to remain citizens of the real world.
Following such a vote, the UK could begin to repair its reputation in the EU – a reputation that has been severely undermined by our prolonged status as the carping, semi-detached member of the club.
Nowadays, even if another EU member agrees with the UK, it might not say so, in order to avoid being tainted by our toxic brand.
Changing negative perceptions does not mean that we must act against our interests.
It means that we must make clear our desire to pursue an agenda that suits others as well as us.
It means being constructive, instead of simply criticizing everything from the sidelines.
In this spirit, Britain should be leading the effort to complete the single market.
We should be at the forefront of the campaign to complete the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the US.
We should be pressing for an EU energy policy that reinforces our security.
We should be spearheading a European strategy to address the serious challenges facing our neighbors, as well as the countries of Western Asia and North Africa.
If we are doing all of this by the end of 2016, some good will have emerged in a year that seems likely to provide a lot of bad news.
Neville Cameron?
LONDON – The European question is the grim reaper of British politics – dividing parties, debilitating governments, and destroying careers.
But never before have the stakes surrounding the question been so high.
Prime Minister David Cameron’s decision to hold a referendum – perhaps as early as June – on the United Kingdom’s continued membership in the European Union could bring down his government, destroy his political party, and literally tear his country apart.
Cameron is doing all he can to renegotiate the terms of membership in order to persuade voters to choose to remain in the EU.
But referendums are notoriously unpredictable.
And there is no reason to believe that the storms of populism blowing across the continent will not make landfall in the UK.
A decision to leave the EU would fall like a sledgehammer on the British economy and greatly diminish its international stature.
Far worse, it could lead to the dissolution of the UK.
The Scottish National Party has threatened to hold a second independence referendum if British voters decide to leave the EU.
This, the SNP’s leaders argue, would allow an independent Scotland to remain part of Europe, even as England, Wales, and Northern Ireland set out on their own.
Were this to happen, the dismemberment of the UK would make Cameron’s legacy the worst of any prime minister in British history.
That might seem like a high bar, given that the title is usually associated with Neville Chamberlain, who famously tried to appease Adolf Hitler.
But while the stakes were certainly higher in Chamberlain’s case, at least his polices could be reversed before they destroyed the country (and Winston Churchill did just that).
If Cameron loses both the EU and Scottish referendums, his successors will not be able to put the EU or the UK back together again.
As Cameron fights to save his party and his country, a line from Oscar Wilde resonates: “For each man kills the thing he loves.”
The prime minister’s predicament is that his political strength depends on his ability to stretch the Conservative Party’s blanket over its uneasy bedfellows of flag-waving nationalists and free-market fundamentalists; but the European question pits one side against the other.
For capital and big business, EU membership is an economic imperative, offering access to 500 million consumers and reserves of cheap, qualified labor.
For nationalists, it is a threat, undermining British sovereignty and control over the country’s borders.
Cameron’s call for a referendum, first issued when he was in opposition, was an attempt to appease both sides, allowing each to stick to their principles while promising to give voters the final say.
The trouble began when he became Prime Minister and was forced to pick a side.
Fortunately for Cameron, he has a lot going in his favor.
The facts are clear: the UK’s economy, security, and international stature all benefit from EU membership.
And broadly, the business community, trade unions, parliament, the media, and even a plurality of the British public all favor remaining in the EU.
Meanwhile, opponents of EU membership have yet to make the case for a credible alternative.
Moreover, Cameron has an impressive track record of exceeding expectations.
Few predicted he would take control of his party when he launched his leadership campaign in 2005.
When the Conservatives came to power in 2010, many doubted that he would serve a full term as Prime Minister.
And even Cameron himself did not expect to win an outright majority in last year’s general election.
But there is no guarantee that his winning streak will continue.
The news from Europe has been unrelentingly grim, and it could ultimately sway the result of the referendum.
The refugee crisis, terrorist attacks, and the lingering effects of the global economic crisis are all providing fuel for simmering nativist sentiment.
Worries over migration and the spectacle of a divided, dysfunctional Europe have benefited xenophobes and extremists across the continent.
And terrorist attacks, by their very nature, are intended to provoke irrational backlashes (as evidenced by a recent referendum in Denmark, in which voters unexpectedly rejected a proposal to modify the country’s opt-outs from certain EU home-affairs regulations).
Cameron’s allies say he has only two modes of operation: complacency and panic.
So far, he has faced his referendum challenge calmly.
But that is likely to change as the vote approaches and the risk grows that he will be remembered as the leader who, to paraphrase Churchill, was given a choice between his party and his country, chose his party, and ended up losing both.
A Lifeline for European Solidarity
MADRID – A human tragedy is unfolding in the Mediterranean, with hundreds of thousands of refugees risking – and, in many cases, losing – their lives for the chance to find refuge in Europe.
How the European Union responds to this crisis matters not just for humanitarian reasons; it will also be a bellwether of the future of the Union itself.
The EU must get it right.
Europe faces no shortage of challenges.
Over the last five years, it has confronted a seemingly endless series of tests, including a eurozone-wide financial crisis, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, renewed fears of a Greek default, and the prospect of a British exit.
But none has raised such fundamental questions about the meaning of the EU as the current debate about migration.
Unfortunately, efforts so far have been inconsistent.
The EU acted quickly in the aftermath of the drowning of more than 1,000 migrants in a particularly horrific episode in April, tripling the budget of its much-maligned naval surveillance operations and expanding their operational area to match Italy’s discontinued Mare Nostrum operation.
This move has already borne fruit, with record numbers of rescues late last month.
Another initiative – the European Commission’s proposed “Agenda on Migration” – is less straightforward.
The agenda presents a hodgepodge of measures in varying degrees of detail.
An important and controversial offshoot of the agenda is the action plan against migrant smuggling, which may include the use of military force to stop the smugglers’ boats.
Critics have questioned the plan’s legality, the risk of collateral damage, and, most important, the effectiveness of armed intervention in stemming human-trafficking operations.
There is also the troubling prospect that such a showy initiative would, by creating the impression that the EU is taking action, enable the EU and its members to avoid the long-term commitment and politically unpopular measures that an effective crisis response would demand.
And, indeed, the EU has so far been focusing on a largely symbolic measure: the proposed EU-wide relocation and resettlement system for asylum seekers.
At first glance, the relocation system – which would move 40,000 asylum-seekers from Italy and Greece to other EU members countries, with the allocation determined according to factors such as GDP, population, and the unemployment rate – may seem like a substantial step.
But, with Italy alone having received more than 63,000 asylum applications and 170,000 irregular migrants last year, the program’s impact would be minimal.
The European Commission’s proposal is intended to underscore European solidarity and burden-sharing – both core EU principles.
But the plan’s limited scope undermines this impression.
Worse, the response to the plan – with some member states opting out of the program; others objecting to how the quotas are to be measured; and still others bristling at the idea that the EU should propose a quota at all – seems to suggest that it is every country for itself.
Throughout these discussions, the line between asylum seekers and economic migrants, who are not protected by binding international humanitarian conventions, has been blurred.
These squabbles in the face of undeniable, large-scale human suffering controvert the EU’s core values, including its commitment to adhere to a rules-based international order.
They also reflect a disturbing trend affecting EU institutions: individual countries’ interests are increasingly trumping unity and cooperation.
The problem is that many Europeans regard the EU as either a dispenser of benefits, a bogeyman, or an albatross – not something to which they are obliged in any way.
As the financial crisis has dragged on, and recriminations among member countries have weakened the sense of community that forms the EU’s foundations, the refugee challenge has exacerbated a dangerous divisiveness.
Instead of reinforcing its foundations with solidarity and compassion, the Union has fractured.
In fact, Europe’s interest in mounting an effective response to the crisis extends beyond values.
As rapid population aging generates significant fiscal pressures, EU members have a strong economic incentive to accept more immigrants.
The short-term challenges that doing so would pose, however, seem to be obscuring this fact.
But the refugee challenge is not a short-term issue.
On the contrary, with countries throughout the Middle East and Africa facing continued violence, poverty, and governmental breakdown, the crisis will only deepen.
In Libya alone, an estimated 500,000 to one million additional migrants are awaiting passage to Europe.
It is time to place principle back at the forefront of policy.
EU leaders must make a clear commitment to do what it takes to address the refugee crisis – even if that means pushing through measures, such as expanded options for legal migration, that are neither expedient nor popular.
To facilitate implementation, the EU and its member states could initiate a campaign to educate the public about the benefits of a more supple and responsive immigration system.
No response, it must be stressed, would be complete without a sustained commitment to addressing the drivers of mass immigration – and that means a complete overhaul of the EU’s Neighborhood Policy.
The new policy should focus on contributing to the creation of economic opportunities in countries with large unemployed youth populations, so that young people no longer feel that risking their lives to reach Europe is their only chance at a future.
All of this will require a sustained commitment, underpinned by a strong sense of common purpose.
If Europeans do not stand together in addressing migration, countless more people will drown in the Mediterranean and the EU will continue to unravel.
It is as simple as that.
Staying the Course in Europe’s East
STOCKHOLM – As the European Union’s leaders gather in Riga for a summit with the six members of the EU’s “Eastern Partnership,” many recall the dramatic meeting in Vilnius of November 2013.
It was there that Ukraine’s then-president, Viktor Yanukovych, under heavy Russian pressure, refused to sign the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement that had been negotiated from 2007 to 2012.
Of course, when Yanukovych returned home, he had to face thousands of protesters in Kyiv’s Maidan (Independence Square).
Determined to hold him to his promise to sign the EU agreement and not take Ukraine into a customs union with Russia, the protesters mobilized the country.
Yanukovych, failing to crush them with his security forces, simply fled.
Russia’s behavior in Ukraine since then has made the Eastern Partnership more important than ever.
The Eastern Partnership was launched in 2009 on the initiative of Poland and Sweden, where I was the foreign minister at the time.
The aim was to respond to the desire of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine for some of the instruments of integration that had helped transform the Central European and Baltic countries into the democracies – and now EU members – that they are today.
The Eastern Partnership was also seen as a way to balance the EU’s “Russia first” approach.
Enormous resources had been invested in the relationship with Russia, but very little had gone into helping the countries in the neighborhood that the EU and Russia share – including the most important of these neighbors, Ukraine.
Until 2013, the EU’s Eastern Partnership seemed to raise no concerns in the Kremlin.
It was never brought up at any of the numerous high-level bilateral meetings, nor at any meeting in which I participated.
The Kremlin probably regarded it as irrelevant.
That changed after Vladimir Putin returned to Russia’s presidency in 2012.
His main geopolitical project was now the creation of the Eurasian Union, which he knew could not succeed without forcing Ukraine off of its EU path and into his embrace.
While the EU’s vision of “wider Europe” relies on soft power, economic integration, and long-term institution building, Putin’s “wider Russia” policy depends on intimidation and violence.
The EU pursues long-term geo-economics, whereas the Kremlin plays short-term hardball geopolitics.
That is why, soon after Yanukovych decided to flee to Russia, Putin’s “little green men” began to appear openly in Crimea, while Russian Buk anti-aircraft missiles and Russian battalion battle groups appeared in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region not long after.
In annexing Crimea and stoking separatist violence in Donbas, the Kremlin’s aim has clearly been to destabilize Ukraine in order to bring it under Russia’s thumb.
Indeed, the very notion of an independent Ukrainian state is openly questioned by Russia’s leaders, Putin included.
In Riga, the EU’s leaders will reaffirm the so-called deep and comprehensive free-trade agreements concluded with Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia.
The most important signal will be the EU’s pledge that these agreements will take effect.
Despite massive propaganda, intense economic pressure, and overt military aggression, the EU can and will stay the course in its Eastern Partnership and its offers to its neighbors.
Clearly, no one in Europe should underestimate the challenges ahead.
When I left the Vilnius meeting in 2013, I could certainly see storm clouds gathering, but I did not know that Putin was prepared to unleash so much aggression and turmoil.
Now we in Europe have every reason to prepare for the long-term effort needed to help our neighbors along their chosen paths.
But this will require a greater European commitment, both politically and economically, than we have seen thus far.
Ukraine has been misgoverned for decades, and it will have to pass through a valley of reform-induced tears before it starts to reap the benefits of association and integration with the EU.
Unfortunately, it is far easier for Russia to fuel short-term volatility than it is for Europe to help build long-term stability.
But to allow the Kremlin and its proxies to succeed would not only undermine the Eastern Partnership countries; it might jeopardize peace in Europe itself.
After all, the appetite grows with eating, which might well apply to the Kremlin’s “wider Russia” strategy.
At some point, the risk of an open confrontation between NATO and Russia could grow.
Even China, as it poses as Russia’s friend and patron, should consider the consequences for itself of such a risk.
Such a clash must be prevented.
By confirming the Eastern Partnership agreements, the EU’s leaders will demonstrate that they are not prepared to acquiesce in a new Yalta-style division of the continent that would deprive these countries of their right to choose their own destiny.
The Riga meeting is unlikely to produce any headline-grabbing new initiatives.
But none is needed.
With everything from massive disinformation to tanks and soldiers thrown against the Eastern Partnership since 2013, just staying the course is a powerful sign of success.
And, in the interest of long-term stability across Europe, that should be welcomed – even in Putin’s nationalistically aroused Russia.
Brexit and King Canute
LONDON – The legend of King Canute describes how an early Anglo-Saxon King showed his subjects the limits of royal power.
Canute set his throne by the sea and commanded the rising tide to turn back.
When the sea rose as usual and soaked Canute, he told his courtiers: “Now let all men know how empty is the power of kings.”
British Prime Minister Theresa May, whose motto is “Brexit means Brexit,” seems to believe that Canute’s message was about democracy, not astronomy: he should have held a referendum.
Though May opposed the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union, she now has a new mantra: “We will make Brexit a success because people voted for it.”
This is nonsense.
If Britain becomes the only European country apart from Russia to exclude itself from the EU single market, it will not succeed economically, regardless of how people vote.
Democracy would not have prevented the ocean tides, driven by gravity, from drowning Canute if he had stayed on his throne, and a referendum will not turn back the economic tides driven by globalization.
Businesses understand this.
That is why Britain now faces what economists call “radical uncertainty,” a situation where risks cannot be rationally quantified, making changes in interest rates, taxes, and currency values largely ineffective.
As the Bank of England has noted, many investment and hiring decisions will now be delayed until Britain’s trading terms are clarified.
If Brexit goes ahead, this will take many years.
As Britain’s economy sinks into recession, and the government’s promises of a quick “successful Brexit” prove unrealistic, public opinion will shift.
May’s small parliamentary majority will come under pressure, not least from the many enemies she made by purging all of former Prime Minister David Cameron’s allies from office.
The main decisions on Brexit will therefore be made not in London but in Brussels and Berlin.
In making these decisions, European leaders must answer two questions: Should Britain keep the main benefits of EU membership if it rejects EU rules and institutions?
By making exit conditions non-negotiable, while offering room for maneuver on the terms of continuing membership, Europe could shift attention to the second, constructive question: Can voters be persuaded to feel positive again about the EU?
Addressing this question seriously would focus attention on the many tangible benefits of EU membership beyond technocratic abstractions about the single market: environmental improvements, rural subsidies, financing for science, infrastructure, and higher education, and the freedom to live and work throughout Europe.
By excluding spurious intermediate options such as the “Norwegian” or “Swiss” models – which May has, in any case, rejected, because they imply free movement of people – the EU could make Brexit’s economic implications unequivocally clear.
London would cease to be Europe’s financial capital because regulations would be deliberately changed to shift business activities into EU jurisdictions.
For the same reason, many UK-based export industries would become non-viable.
Facing this prospect, businesses on both sides of the English Channel would be impelled to campaign openly for Britain to keep full EU membership, instead of quietly lobbying for special deals for their own sectors.
The media might even point out the constitutional absurdity of a representative democracy treating a narrow referendum majority as permanently binding on parliamentary decisions.
Hard-core nationalists might pay no attention, but enough marginal Euroskeptics would probably reconsider their positions to flip the 52%-48% Brexit majority the other way.
Imagine them easing the counterproductive budget and banking rules that have suffocated southern Europe.
Imagine, finally, that the EU acknowledged that centralization of power has gone too far and formally ended the drive for “ever closer union.”
Such reforms are considered unthinkable in Brussels, because they would require treaty changes and could be rejected by voters.
But voters who opposed previous EU treaties for centralizing power would almost certainly welcome reforms that restored authority to national parliaments.
The real obstacle to reform is not the difficulty of treaty change; it is the bureaucracy’s resistance to ceding power.
The European Commission remains obsessed with defending the acquis communautaire, the collection of powers “acquired” by the Union, which EU doctrine dictates must never be returned to nation-states.
Jean-Claude Juncker, the Commission President, and his chief of staff, Martin Selmayr, have even welcomed Brexit as a chance to “strengthen the acquis” by centralizing power even more.
Juncker, like May, should recall King Canute.
The tide of national democracy is rising across Europe, and slogans about “ever closer union” will not reverse it.
European leaders must acknowledge reality – or watch Europe drown.
Eurobonds or Bust
LONDON – The eurozone’s institutional weaknesses have been laid bare.
The attempt to run a common monetary policy without a common treasury has failed.
Investors do not know what they are buying when they purchase an Italian bond – is it backstopped by Germany or not?
We now know that the best credit must stand behind the rest, or else bear runs, such as those that have derailed Greece, Ireland, and Portugal – and that now threaten to do the same to Italy and Spain – are inevitable.
Debt mutualization alone will not save the euro, but, without it, the eurozone is unlikely to survive intact.
The eurozone’s July 21 summit was a small step forward.
Leaders agreed to lower interest rates on loans made by the European Financial Stability Fund (EFSF) and they recognized that Greece’s debt burden is unsustainable.
But this falls far short of what is needed to arrest the currency union’s deepening crisis.
Borrowing costs remain unsustainably high for many eurozone economies – and not just those in the periphery.
The economic growth potential of Spain and Italy, for example, now hovers around 1%, but their borrowing costs exceed 6%.
By contrast, German sovereign yields have fallen sharply, lowering public and private-sector borrowing costs.
This is a recipe for further economic divergence and insolvency in the eurozone.
To prevent this, the eurozone needs a “risk-free” interest rate.
The struggling economies need lower borrowing costs, or they will suffocate economically (and political support for eurozone membership will evaporate).
Only mutualization of debt issuance can generate the low (risk-free) interest rate needed to enable these countries to put their public finances on a sound footing and lay the basis for a return to economic growth.
All eurozone countries should, therefore, finance debt by issuing bonds that would be jointly guaranteed by all member states.
The obvious problem with eurobonds is moral hazard: how to prevent fiscally irresponsible countries from free-riding on the credit-worthiness of other member states.
This is the understandable fear of countries such as Germany and the Netherlands.
One possible solution would be to permit member states to issue debt as eurobonds up to, say, 60% of GDP, and to require them to be individually responsible for any debt exceeding that level.
This would give countries with high levels of public debt an incentive to consolidate their public finances.
Had the eurozone introduced such a system from the outset, it might well have worked.
But it is too late for that now.
For several eurozone economies, the additional borrowing would simply be too expensive.
A better solution would be to create a new, independent fiscal body to establish borrowing targets for individual member states, together with a European debt agency to issue eurobonds (up to a certain level) on their behalf.
How would the new fiscal rules be designed?
A dogmatic target of budgetary balance four years hence, irrespective of a country’s position in the economic cycle, would achieve little: targets are meaningless if they are impossible to implement.
So the rules would have to be set with reference to each member state’s cyclically adjusted fiscal position (for which the OECD already produces estimates).
Careful thought would need to be given to the composition of the new fiscal body.
A board of 17 people, one from each eurozone economy, would be unwieldy, and unlikely to win the support of the eurozone’s principal creditor countries.
At the same time, a board dominated by the creditor economies would be unlikely to win the backing of the debtor countries.
A board of nine economists, from the big eurozone members, the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the OECD might form a good basis.
The eurozone, of course, has a poor record of enforcing fiscal rules, implying the need for strong penalties for non-compliance.
If a country deviated from its fiscal targets, it would be barred from borrowing additional funds at the risk-free interest rate.
It would have to borrow under its own rating, which would be prohibitively expensive for fiscally weaker countries.
To provide additional incentives to abide by the rules, the ECB could refuse to accept debt issued under national ratings as collateral.
Alternatively, a new EU financial regulator could handicap own-country bonds by requiring banks holding them to set aside more capital.
Fiscal rules of the type envisaged (and a new body to enforce them) would not necessarily require a treaty change.
And, while various creditor countries rightly fear that eurobonds would push up their borrowing costs and constitute a transfer union, opponents might eventually come around to seeing eurobonds as the least bad option.
The risk is that, by then, it could be too late to save the euro from a partial break-up: what might work if adopted promptly could be ineffective if adopted in six months.
For core countries, eurobonds would certainly be a cheaper option than underwriting loans to struggling member-states, which essentially means throwing good money after bad. They will book large losses on EFSF loans, and those losses will be even larger if, as seems possible, some of the borrowers end up leaving the eurozone and defaulting on their debt.
Eurobonds without Fear
SANTIAGO – The day of the Eurobond may be near.
What was once a quack’s idea for resolving Europe’s financial crisis is now the only reliable way to save the euro.
Having their bonds purchased by the European Central Bank did not keep Greece, Ireland, and Portugal from needing a bailout.
It will not save Spain and Italy, either.
But Spain and Italy are too large to be bailed out.
The new European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) is not up to the task.
And enlarging the EFSF to an appropriate size would require massive additional French borrowing, which could well place France itself at the receiving end of a speculative attack.
This is where Eurobonds come in.
The five countries in trouble will need to place tens of billions of euros in new debt and roll over even larger amounts of old debt.
Markets long ago stopped buying bonds issued by Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, and might soon stop buying paper issued by Italy and Spain – or do so only at prohibitive interest rates.
But markets would happily gorge on bonds backed by the full faith and credit of the eurozone.
Eurobonds would cut borrowing costs for the European Union’s two large troubled members. And it would spare German and other taxpayers from the EU’s solvent northern countries from having to fund yet another bailout of a southern member state.
The debate about whether and how to introduce Eurobonds has focused on the appropriate limits on issuance.
With no limit, profligate countries could go on a spending spree at the expense of thriftier ones.
After the advent of the euro, the eurozone’s Mediterranean members enjoyed a lending boom while piggybacking on Germany’s low interest rates.
There is understandable reluctance to allow that to happen again.
But arguments about whether the limit should be 60% of GDP or more miss a larger point.
Nineteen years of experience with the Maastricht Treaty, which created both the EU and the euro, has shown convincingly that such limits are unenforceable.
Countries with the clout to flaunt the limits will do so whenever it is politically convenient.
And, if a debt crisis is near, exceptions will be found, waivers will be issued, and buyers for the additional debt will be lined up.
So the question is not what to do when debt gets near its limit, however high or low.
It is how to prevent debt from getting near that limit in the first place, except in very extreme and unusual circumstances.
And for that, you need fiscal rules.
A fiscal rule is any pre-specified mechanism that constrains spending or the deficit.
According to a study by the International Monetary Fund, 80 countries around the world use some kind of fiscal rule.
But not all fiscal rules are created equal.
If too loose, a rule is merely ornamental.
If too tight – a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget, for example – the rule could create rather than solve problems: think of the economic and political chaos that would ensue if Spain, with unemployment at 21%, were forced to eliminate its huge fiscal deficit overnight.
Sweden and Chile are almost poles apart geographically, but both have used sophisticated fiscal rules successfully.
Chile sets a target for its cyclically-adjusted fiscal balance – that is, the balance that emerges after accounting for the deviations in commodity prices and domestic output from their trends.
When commodity prices boomed in the middle of the last decade, the rule called for huge budget surpluses – which Chile achieved, repaying almost all of its public debt and accumulating a sizable rainy-day fund.
When the financial crisis came, Chile was able to mount an aggressive fiscal stimulus without so much as a hiccup from financial markets.
Of course, no fiscal rule can account for all contingencies.
That is why you need an independent fiscal council to administer it, just as you need an independent central bank to pursue an inflation-targeting monetary rule.
Agreeing on the composition of such a council for Europe would be hard, but no harder than it was to agree on the makeup of the ECB’s board.
Eurobonds plus fiscal rules: this formula is the euro’s best hope for salvation.
Unfortunately, another crisis or two might be necessary before European leaders consider it seriously.
Europe’s Easy-Money Endgame
MUNICH – The euro has brought a balance-of-payments crisis to Europe, just as the gold standard did in the 1920s.
In fact, there is only one difference between the two episodes: During today’s crisis, huge international rescue packages have been available.
These rescue packages have relieved the eurozone’s financial distress, but at a high cost.
Not only have they enabled investors to avoid paying for their poor decisions; they have also given overpriced southern European countries the opportunity to defer real depreciation in the form of a reduction of relative prices of goods.
This is necessary to restore the competitiveness that was destroyed in the euro’s initial years, when it caused excessive inflation.
Indeed, for countries like Greece, Portugal, or Spain, regaining competitiveness would require them to lower the prices of their own products relative to the rest of the eurozone by about 30%, compared to the beginning of the crisis.
Italy probably needs to reduce its relative prices by 10-15%.
But Portugal and Italy have so far failed to deliver any such “real depreciation,” while relative prices in Greece and Spain have fallen by only 8% and 6%, respectively.
Revealingly, of all the crisis countries, only Ireland managed to turn the corner.
The reason is obvious: its bubble already burst at the end of 2006, before any rescue funds were available.
Ireland was on its own, so it had no option but to implement massive austerity measures, reducing its product prices relative to other eurozone countries by 13% from peak to trough.
Today, Ireland’s unemployment rate is falling dramatically, and its manufacturing sector is booming.
In relative terms, Greece received most of Europe’s bailout money and showed the largest increase in unemployment.
The official loans granted to the country by the European Central Bank and the international community have increased more than sixfold during the past five years, from €53 billion ($58 billion) in February 2010 to €324 billion, or 181% of GDP, now.
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate has more than doubled, from 11% to 26%.
There are four possible economic and policy responses to this state of affairs.
First, Europe could become a transfer union, with the north giving more and more credit to the south and later waiving it.
Second, the south can deflate.
Third, the north can inflate.
And, fourth, countries that are no longer competitive can exit Europe’s monetary union and depreciate their new currency.
Each path is associated with serious complications.
The first creates a permanent dependence on transfers, which, by sustaining relative prices, prevents the economy from regaining competitiveness.
The second path drives many debtors in crisis countries into bankruptcy.
The third expropriates the creditor countries of the north.
And the fourth may cause contagion effects via capital markets, possibly forcing policymakers to introduce capital controls, as in Cyprus in 2013.
European politics has focused so far on providing public credit to the crisis countries at near-zero interest rates, which eventually may morph into transfers.
But now the ECB is attempting to break the impasse through quantitative easing (QE).
The ECB’s stated goal is to reflate the eurozone, thereby reducing the euro’s external value, by purchasing more than €1.1 trillion worth of assets.
According to ECB President Mario Draghi, the inflation rate, which currently stands at just below 0%, is to be raised to an average of just below 2%.
This would offer southern European countries a way out of their competitiveness trap, because if prices remained unchanged in the south, while the northern countries inflated, the southern countries could gradually reduce their goods’ relative prices without feeling too much pain.
Of course, in that case the north needs to inflate faster than by just 2%.
If, say, southern Europe kept its inflation rate at 0% and France inflated at a rate of 1%, Germany would have to inflate by a good 4%, and the rest of the eurozone at 2% annually, to reach a eurozone average of slightly less than 2%.
This pattern would have to continue for about ten years to bring the eurozone back into balance.
At that point, Germany’s price level would be about 50% higher than it is today.
I do expect QE to bring about some inflation.
Given that an exchange rate is the relative price of a currency, as more euros come into circulation, their value has to fall substantially to establish a new equilibrium in the currency market.
Experience with similar programs in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan has shown that QE unleashes powerful forces of depreciation.
QE in the eurozone will thus bring about the inflation that Draghi wants via higher import and export prices.
Whether this effect will be sufficient to revitalize southern Europe remains to be seen.
There is a risk that Japan, China, and the US will not sit on their hands while the euro loses value, with the world possibly even sliding into a currency war.
Moreover, the southern EU countries, instead of leaving prices unchanged, could abandon austerity and issue an ever greater volume of new bonds to stimulate the economy.
Competitiveness gains and rebalancing would fail to materialize, and, after an initial flash in the pan, the eurozone would return to permanent crisis.
The euro, finally and fully discredited, would then meet a very messy end.
One can only hope that this scenario does not come to pass, and that the southern countries stay the course of austerity.
This is their last chance.
Europe, America, and the Drumbeat of War with Iran
America’s capital is once again abuzz with talk of war, not only of the latest “strategy for victory” in Iraq, but now also of military action against Iran.
The harder it becomes to discern any rationality in the Bush administration’s actions, the louder the rumor mill grinds.
Will Bush order an air and Special Forces attack on Iran?
Ever since Bush’s State of the Union address at the end of January, hardly a day has passed without something happening in connection with Iran or without the Bush administration’s ratcheting up its rhetoric.
Clearly, the US is also pressing ahead with preparations for an air strike.
(A more extensive military commitment is scarcely possible, given how overstretched US ground forces already are.)
Indeed, the confrontation with the Iranians in Iraq is visibly intensifying, and it may be gathering strength elsewhere as well.
A bomb directed at the Iranian Revolutionary Guard recently exploded on Iran’s border with Afghanistan.
And there are, of course, new attempts by the United States to drum up “evidence” of an Iranian threat that may justify an attack.
Is this all a bluff?
The world could perhaps calmly wait for an answer, but for the fact that the progress of Iran’s nuclear program and the approaching end of President Bush’s term might create an incalculable dynamic of its own.
As with Iraq, America’s strength may be enough to start a war, but not to win it.
But the consequences of a military adventure in Iran would far surpass those of the war in Iraq.
Doing things by halves yet again in the Middle East would be the worst of all possible options – bad for the region and bad for its neighbors.
The first among the neighbors affected would be Europe.
So how has Europe, with its vital security interests at stake, responded to these developments?
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has already adapted to the US administration’s new confrontational rhetoric.
French President Jacques Chirac unguardedly speculated that an Iran with one or two nuclear bombs might not pose a serious a threat, given the possibility of nuclear retaliation &#45;&#45; his musings so startled French officials that they quickly jumped in to correct the President’s comments.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel gives speeches at security conferences that find favor in America, but otherwise Germany prefers to stay in the background.
Across Europe, risk avoidance seems to be the order of the day, even at the expense of the common interest and NATO solidarity.
The German navy is defending the Lebanese coast against Hezbollah, while other European nations bear the brunt of policing Lebanon on the ground.
In Afghanistan, Germany, with its strong military presence in the north, has been turning a deaf ear to calls for help from the Canadian allies fighting a revived Taliban in the south.
Germany now wants to send some Tornado jets for reconnaissance purposes – better than nothing, but not by much.
In terms of security policy, Europe is stagnating, if not regressing, at the very moment when unity is needed more then ever.
The Big Three of Europe – and Germany, as the current EU president in particular – must find a way to act together in strategic security matters.
If they don’t, Europe will largely cease to matter when the going gets rough.
And the going is now getting quite rough in Iran and the Persian Gulf.
Should Iran be attacked this year, the consequences will be borne first and foremost by the region, but also by Europe as the Middle East’s immediate western neighbor – and they will be felt for a long time to come.
Indeed, Europe will have to share the costs if Iran prevails and becomes a nuclear power.
So there is much at stake for the old continent.
To be precise, two overriding EU security interests are at stake: avoiding a war with Iran and preventing Iran from becoming a nuclear power.
These two apparently contradictory interests can be reconciled and translated into a common strategy by adopting a three-pronged approach based on efficient isolation, effective containment, and direct negotiations.
The Europeans – led by Merkel, Blair, and Chirac – should agree to assure the US that Europe is ready to pay a high, perhaps very high, economic price by taking decisive action to intensify the sanctions against Iran.
But they should offer this only on two strict preconditions: that the military option be taken off the table, and that all parties involved – including the US – enter into direct negotiations with Iran.
The policy of isolation coupled with direct negotiations would be strengthened further by a common strategy toward Syria, aimed not at “regime change,” but at “coalition change” – that is, drawing Syria away from its close alliance with Iran.
It was both right and important that the EU Council of Foreign Ministers agreed on sanctions against Iran.
Faced with the threat of financial sanctions, Iran’s political elite is increasingly realizing the price of its confrontational course.
It is imperative to further this process in a resolute manner, while at the same time rejecting military adventurism.
It is up to Europe to prevent the two worst developments in Iran – war and nuclear armament – by acting jointly and with determination.
Vital European and transatlantic interests are at stake.
It is thus Europe’s responsibility – and especially Germany’s, as the current EU president – to act now.
Europe Under Siege?
BRUSSELS – Many Europeans feel like their countries are under assault, as huge numbers of migrants flow across their borders.
Whether they are being exposed to refugees firsthand, or just seeing images of them splashed across newspaper pages, Europeans are well aware of the vast numbers of desperate people trying to enter European Union territory by any means possible.
But this awareness has yet to translate into a unified response.
Tensions among member states seem to be rising, perhaps because the problem differs so greatly across countries.
On a per capita basis, Sweden receives 15 times more asylum applications than the United Kingdom, where official policy toward refugees remains the most hostile.
Germany has now become the main destination overall, receiving nearly 40% of the EU total; even on a per capita basis, this is several times more than the EU average.
Of course, there are clear rules about how responsibility for refugees is delineated: according to the so-called Dublin Regulation, the first EU member state into which a refugee crosses is responsible for that person’s asylum application.
But this is clearly problematic, as it puts the entire burden of refugees on the EU’s frontier countries.
Though this may not have been a huge problem in the 1990s, when EU countries received, in all, only 300,000 asylum applications annually, it cannot work in a year when the total is expected to be triple that number.
Smaller border countries like Hungary and Greece simply do not have the capacity to register and house hundreds of thousands of asylum-seekers.
And larger countries like Italy have an incentive to overlook the large numbers of refugees landing on their shores, knowing that, if nothing is done, those refugees will likely head elsewhere (mainly to northern Europe).
Germany, recognizing that the Dublin system is untenable, has now decided to process all asylum applications from Syrians, regardless of where they crossed into the EU.
The decision was likely driven, at least partly, by how difficult it is, given the EU’s porous internal borders, to determine where a refugee first entered.
A 2013 ruling by the European Court of Justice that Germany could not return an Iranian refugee to Greece (where the applicant was found “to face a real risk of being subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment”) probably heightened Germany’s sense of responsibility on this issue.
Germany is the largest EU member country in terms of population and GDP; so, to some extent, it does make sense for it to take the lead.
But Germany still accounts for less than one-fifth of the EU’s population, and less than one-quarter of its economy.
In other words, not even Germany can handle all of Europe’s refugees today.
A few months ago, the European Commission tried its hand at resolving this problem with a courageous proposal to distribute refugees across member states according to a simple equation that accounts for population and GDP.
But the plan was rejected, with member states – particularly those with the fewest refugees – claiming that it represented an undue interference in domestic affairs.
This has put the EU in its usual quandary: everybody recognizes that there is a problem, but a solution requires unanimity, which cannot be achieved, because each country defends only its own interests.
The only way forward is to leave out the countries that are most averse to accepting immigrants, at least temporarily, and create a solution involving just those that are willing to share the burden.
This may not seem “fair,” but, with more refugees landing on Europe’s borders every day, EU leaders cannot afford to delay action.
But there is another dimension to the crisis that makes addressing it all the more complicated.
The migrants are not all from conflict areas like Syria, and thus do not, according to international law, have a “right to asylum.”
There are also plenty of economic migrants from, say, the poorer parts of the Balkans, hoping to escape poverty at home – and willing to misuse the asylum system in the process.
Lodging an application, even one without any chance of being accepted, is appealing, because until it is rejected, the applicant receives basic housing, social services (including health care), and pocket money in an amount that may well exceed wages in his or her home country.
Spending a few months in northern Europe while an asylum application is processed is far more attractive than going home to a job that pays a barely livable wage, or to no job at all.
As the number of asylum-seekers increases, so does the time it takes to process their applications, making the system all the more tempting for economic migrants.
And, indeed, close to half of all asylum-seekers in Germany now come from safe countries, like Serbia, Albania, or Macedonia.
As Europe’s populists use such cases of “welfare tourism” to sow fear and anger among the European public, reaching an agreement to accommodate actual refugees becomes increasingly difficult.
Against this background, the EU needs to take action on two fronts.