Aside from these obvious benefits, education is also a widely accepted humanitarian obligation and an internationally mandated human right.
But this right is unrealized for the 28% of the world’s school-age children who are not enrolled in school.
Most are illiterate and live in absolute poverty.
The majority of these children are female.
Of those who enter primary school in developing countries, more than one in four drops out before attaining literacy.
Moreover, enrollment does not necessarily mean attendance, attendance does not necessarily mean education, and education does not necessarily mean good education.
In 2000, the global community pledged to achieve universal primary education (UPE) by 2015.
Many poor countries are wildly off track when it comes to meeting this goal.
At the current rate of educational expansion, an estimated 118 million children will be absent from primary school in 2015. Nearly twice that number will not attend secondary school.
The World Bank, UNICEF, and UNESCO have estimated that achieving UPE by 2015 will entail annual expenditures of between $6.5 billion and $35 billion, on top of the approximately $82 billion that developing countries spend each year on primary education.
Not included is the cost of other improvements needed to encourage children to attend school, such as meals, tuition subsidies, and more effective, dynamic, and knowledgeable teachers.
Nor does this include the cost of improving national governments’ capacity to collect data and to implement and oversee educational reforms.
Though more money is essential, it is not sufficient.
In some regions, cultural barriers inhibit schooling of girls and of linguistic, religious, and ethnic minorities.
The political energy required for expanding and reforming education is difficult to muster in the world’s wealthiest nations.
Ensuring high-quality education for all children requires an open discussion of educational goals, an international commitment to improving its effectiveness and economic efficiency, recognition of the need to extend secondary education to all children, and acknowledgment of educational diversity and the need to adapt aid policies to local contexts.
None of these tasks is possible without supplementing the funding already provided by developing countries.
The world, or even the US by itself, has the ability to provide the additional funds needed.
As the G8 leaders gather in Scotland, it is hard to imagine them coming up with a better investment in our common future.
How Scary Is the Bond Market?
NEW HAVEN – The prices of long-term government bonds have been running very high in recent years (that is, their yields have been very low).
In the United States, the 30-year Treasury bond yield reached a record low (since the Federal Reserve series began in 1972) of 2.25% on January 30.
The yield on the United Kingdom's 30-year government bond fell to 2.04% on the same day.
The Japanese 20-year government bond yielded just 0.87% on January 20.
All of these yields have since moved slightly higher, but they remain exceptionally low.
It seems puzzling – and unsustainable – that people would tie up their money for 20 or 30 years to earn little or nothing more than these central banks' 2% target rate for annual inflation.
So, with the bond market appearing ripe for a dramatic correction, many are wondering whether a crash could drag down markets for other long-term assets, such as housing and equities.
It is a question that I am repeatedly asked at seminars and conferences.
After all, participants in the housing and equity markets set prices with a view to prices in the bond market, so contagion from one long-term market to another seems like a real possibility.
I have been thinking about the bond market for a long time.
In fact, the long-term bond market was the subject of my 1972 PhD dissertation and my first-ever academic publication the following year, co-authored with my academic adviser, Franco Modigliani.
Our work with data for the years 1952-1971 showed that the long-term bond market back then was pretty easy to describe.
Long-term interest rates on any given date could be explained quite well as a certain weighted average of the last 18 quarters of inflation and the last 18 quarters of short-term real interest rates.
When either inflation or short-term real interest rates went up, long-term rates rose.
When either fell, so did long-term rates.
We now have more than 40 years of additional data, so I took a look to see if our theory still predicts well.
It turns out that our estimates then, if applied to subsequent data, predicted long-term rates extremely well for the 20 years after we published; but then, in the mid-1990s, our theory started to overpredict.
According to our model, long-term rates in the US should be even lower than they are now, because both inflation and short-term real interest rates are practically zero or negative.
Even taking into account the impact of quantitative easing since 2008, long-term rates are higher than expected.
But the explanation that we developed so long ago still fits well enough to encourage the belief that we will not see a crash in the bond market unless central banks tighten monetary policy very sharply (by hiking short-term interest rates) or there is a major spike in inflation.
Bond-market crashes have actually been relatively rare and mild.
A 1979 Gallup Poll had shown that 62% of Americans regarded inflation as the “most important problem facing the nation."
Volcker took radical steps to deal with it, hiking short-term interest rates so high that he created a major recession.
He also created enemies (and even faced death threats).
People wondered whether he would get away with it politically, or be impeached.
Regarding the stock market and the housing market, there may well be a major downward correction someday.
But it probably will have little to do with a bond-market crash.
That was the case with the biggest US stock-market corrections of the last century (after 1907, 1929, 1973, 2000, and 2007) and the biggest US housing-market corrections of all time (after 1979, 1989, and 2006).
It is true that extraordinarily low long-term bond yields put us outside the range of historical experience.
But so would a scenario in which a sudden bond-market crash drags down prices of stocks and housing.
When an event has never occurred, it cannot be predicted with any semblance of confidence.
The Great Disconnect
PARIS – Since the second half of 2012, financial markets have recovered strongly worldwide.
Indeed, in the United States, the Dow Jones industrial average reached an all-time high in early March, having risen by close to 9% since September.
In Europe, European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s “guns of August” turned out to be remarkably effective.
Draghi reversed the euro’s slide into oblivion by promising potentially unlimited purchases of member governments’ bonds.
Between September 1 and February 22, the FTSEurofirst index rose by almost 7%.
In Asia, too, financial markets are up since September, most dramatically in Japan.
Even the Italian elections in late February seem not to have upset markets too much (at least so far).
Although interest-rate spreads for Italian and Spanish ten-year bonds relative to German bonds briefly jumped 30-50 basis points after the results were announced, they then eased to 300-350 basis points, compared to 500-600 basis points before the ECB’s decision to establish its “outright monetary transactions” program.
Indicators for the eurozone are even worse.
The economy contracted in 2012, and wages declined, despite increases in Germany and some northern countries.
Reliable statistics are not yet available, but poverty in Europe’s south is increasing for the first time in decades.
On the political front, the US faces a near-complete legislative stalemate, with no sign of a compromise that could lead to the optimal policy mix: short-term support to boost effective demand and long-term structural reforms and fiscal consolidation.
In Europe, Greece has been able – so far – to maintain a parliamentary majority in support of the coalition government, but there, and elsewhere, hyper-populist parties are gaining ground.
The Italian election results could be a bellwether for Europe.
Beppe Grillo’s populist Five Star Movement emerged with 25% of the popular vote – the highest support for any single party.
Former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, confounding those who had forecast his political demise, re-emerged at the head of a populist-rightist coalition that ended up only 0.3 percentage points away from winning.
In short, we are witnessing a rapid decoupling between financial markets and inclusive social and economic well-being.
In the US and many other places, corporate profits as a share of national income are at a decades-long high, in part owing to labor-saving technology in a multitude of sectors.
Moreover, large corporations are able to take full advantage of globalization (for example, by arbitraging tax regimes to minimize their payments).
As a result, the income of the global elite is growing both rapidly and independently of what is happening in terms of overall output and employment growth.
Demand for luxury goods is booming, alongside weak demand for goods and services consumed by lower-income groups.
All of this is happening in the midst of extremely expansionary monetary policies and near-zero interest rates, except in the countries facing immediate crisis.
Structural concentration of incomes at the top is combining with easy money and a chase for yield, driving equity prices upward.
And yet, despite widespread concern and anxiety about poverty, unemployment, inequality, and extreme concentration of incomes and wealth, no alternative growth model has emerged.
The opposition to the dominant mainstream in Europe is split between what is still too often an “old” left that has trouble adjusting to twenty-first-century realities, and populist, anti-foreigner, and sometimes outright fascist parties on the right.
In the US, the far right shares many of the characteristics of its populist European counterparts.
But it is a tribute to the American two-party system’s capacity for political integration that extremist forces remain marginalized, despite the rhetoric of the Tea Party.
President Barack Obama, in particular, has been able to attract support as a liberal-left idealist and as a centrist-realist at the same time, which enabled him to win re-election in the face of a weak economy and an even weaker labor market.
Nonetheless, without deep socio-economic reforms, America’s GDP growth is likely to be slow at best, while its political system seems paralyzed.
Nowhere is there a credible plan to limit the concentration of wealth and power, broaden economic gains through strong real-income growth for the poor, and maintain macroeconomic stability.
The absence of such a plan in the US (and in Europe) has contributed to the decoupling of financial markets from inclusive economic progress, because it suggests that current trends are politically sustainable.
But, while this disconnect could continue for some time if no alternative program emerges, the huge gap between financial markets’ performance and most people’s well-being is unlikely to persist in the longer term.
When asset prices overshoot reality, eventually they have nowhere to go but down.
Why Stimulus Has Failed
NEW DELHI – Two fundamental beliefs have driven economic policy around the world in recent years.
The first is that the world suffers from a shortage of aggregate demand relative to supply; the second is that monetary and fiscal stimulus will close the gap.
Is it possible that the diagnosis is right, but that the remedy is wrong?
That would explain why we have made little headway so far in restoring growth to pre-crisis levels.
And it would also indicate that we must rethink our remedies.
High levels of involuntary unemployment throughout the advanced economies suggest that demand lags behind potential supply.
While unemployment is significantly higher in sectors that were booming before the crisis, such as construction in the United States, it is more widespread, underpinning the view that greater demand is necessary to restore full employment.
Policymakers initially resorted to government spending and low interest rates to boost demand.
As government debt has ballooned and policy interest rates have hit rock bottom, central banks have focused on increasingly innovative policy to boost demand.
Yet growth continues to be painfully slow.
Why?
What if the problem is the assumption that all demand is created equal?
We know that pre-crisis demand was boosted by massive amounts of borrowing.
When borrowing becomes easier, it is not the well-to-do, whose spending is not constrained by their incomes, who increase their consumption; rather, the increase comes from poorer and younger families whose needs and dreams far outpace their incomes.
Their needs can be different from those of the rich.
Moreover, the goods that are easiest to buy are those that are easy to post as collateral – houses and cars, rather than perishables.
And rising house prices in some regions make it easier to borrow even more to spend on other daily needs such as diapers and baby food.
The point is that debt-fueled demand emanates from particular households in particular regions for particular goods.
While it catalyzes a more generalized demand – the elderly plumber who works longer hours in the boom spends more on his stamp collection – it is not unreasonable to believe that much of debt-fueled demand is more focused.
So, as lending dries up, borrowing households can no longer spend, and demand for certain goods changes disproportionately, especially in areas that boomed earlier.
Of course, the effects spread through the economy – as demand for cars falls, demand for steel also falls, and steel workers are laid off.
But unemployment is most pronounced in the construction and automobile sectors, or in regions where house prices rose particularly rapidly.
It is easy to see why a general stimulus to demand, such as a cut in payroll taxes, may be ineffective in restoring the economy to full employment.
The general stimulus goes to everyone, not just the former borrowers.
And everyone’s spending patterns differ – the older, wealthier household buys jewelry from Tiffany, rather than a car from General Motors.
And even the former borrowers are unlikely to use their stimulus money to pay for more housing – they have soured on the dreams that housing held out.
Indeed, because the pattern of demand that is expressible has shifted with the change in access to borrowing, the pace at which the economy can grow without inflation may also fall.
With too many construction workers and too few jewelers, greater demand may result in higher jewelry prices rather than more output.
Put differently, the bust that follows years of a debt-fueled boom leaves behind an economy that supplies too much of the wrong kind of good relative to the changed demand.
Unlike a normal cyclical recession, in which demand falls across the board and recovery requires merely rehiring laid-off workers to resume their old jobs, economic recovery following a lending bust typically requires workers to move across industries and to new locations.
There is thus a subtle but important difference between my debt-driven demand view and the neo-Keynesian explanation that deleveraging (saving by chastened borrowers) or debt overhang (the inability of debt-laden borrowers to spend) is responsible for slow post-crisis growth.
Both views accept that the central source of weak aggregate demand is the disappearance of demand from former borrowers.
But they differ on solutions.
The neo-Keynesian economist wants to boost demand generally.
But if we believe that debt-driven demand is different, demand stimulus will at best be a palliative.
Writing down former borrowers’ debt may be slightly more effective in producing the old pattern of demand, but it will probably not restore it to the pre-crisis level.
In any case, do we really want the former borrowers to borrow themselves into trouble again?
The only sustainable solution is to allow the supply side to adjust to more normal and sustainable sources of demand – to ease the way for construction workers and autoworkers to retrain for faster-growing industries.
The worst thing that governments can do is to stand in the way by propping up unviable firms or by sustaining demand in unviable industries through easy credit.
Supply-side adjustments take time, and, after five years of recession, economies have made some headway.
But continued misdiagnosis will have lasting effects.
The advanced countries will spend decades working off high public-debt loads, while their central banks will have to unwind bloated balance sheets and back off from promises of support that markets have come to rely on.
Frighteningly, the new Japanese government is still trying to deal with the aftermath of the country’s two-decade-old property bust.
One can only hope that it will not indulge in more of the kind of spending that already has proven so ineffective – and that has left Japan with the highest debt burden (around 230% of GDP) in the OECD.
Unfortunately, history provides little cause for optimism.
The Dirt on Plastic Waste
NEWARK, NJ – Plastics are everywhere.
Whether used to store leftovers, keep hospital equipment sterile, or insulate a home, plastics are unmatched for their adaptability, durability, and low cost.
Given their seemingly boundless benefits, it is unsurprising that plastics have replaced traditional materials in many sectors – for example, steel in cars, paper and glass in packaging, and wood in furniture.
As a result, annual plastics consumption worldwide has increased from five million tons in the 1950’s to around 280 million tons today.
Roughly half of plastic products, such as packaging, are intended for one-time, short-lifespan (less than six months) applications prior to disposal.
Given that most of these items are not biodegradable, and are not recycled, plastics waste is building up – with serious environmental consequences.
While governments have begun to implement new (and often quite strict) regulations aimed at managing plastics waste – for example, China banned lightweight plastic shopping bags in 2008 – they are inadequate to address the world’s growing plastics-waste problem.
Moreover, most plastic products are made from so-called “petroleum-based commodity thermoplastics.”
Given that a non-renewable resource forms the basis of many plastic products – most of which will not last long – current plastics usage patterns are not sustainable.
Closed-loop recycling, in which plastics waste is used to make another product, thus carries significant environmental benefits, such as reduced energy and oil consumption.
But the process of separating the petroleum-based recyclable plastics from other kinds of plastics and solid waste is difficult, costly, and labor-intensive, so only a small proportion is recycled.
In 1988, the United States Society of Plastics Industry (SPI) developed a coding system in which each kind of resin is labeled with a number, 1-7, to facilitate sorting.
The system has also been used elsewhere, including in Canada and Switzerland, but has not been adopted worldwide and is still confusing to some consumers.
If consumers knew to collect and separate household plastics based on their number, when available, the resulting boost to recycling efforts would demonstrate to government and industry the viability of a more sustainable approach, reduce exposure to rising oil prices, and support growing global demand for plastics.
There are four categories of plastics recycling: primary recycling, in which the plastic is re-used in the same application; secondary recycling, in which material (mixed or contaminated) is used in less demanding applications; tertiary recycling, in which the plastic is converted into monomers or chemicals; and quaternary recycling, in which only energy is recovered through incineration.
Such developments would encourage industry to re-use or recycle more parts.
Although all 40 kinds of plastics used in a North American automobile can be recycled, the need to separate and clean them makes using them more expensive than using virgin plastic resins.
This translates into a higher proportion of plastics in the remnants of shredded end-of-life automobiles – a contaminated mixture of plastics and non-plastics that is usually disposed of through some combination of landfilling, incineration, and secondary recycling.
Increasing the proportion of re-used plastics is a crucial step toward more sustainable plastics consumption.
To this end, some automobile manufacturers have adjusted their designs to allow for easy disassembly of parts made of compatible plastics, while governments have set recycling target proportions for end-of-life vehicles.
Such efforts should be intensified.
Furthermore, industry should seek new applications for recycled materials, while minimizing the amount of virgin material used.
And, where possible, manufacturers should “down-gauge” materials (make parts thinner).
Government legislation can be enacted to support such measures, as well as to require plastics manufacturers to get involved in the disposal of plastic items – a responsibility long imposed on packaged-goods manufacturers in Europe.
An example of successful waste management is the reprocessing of PET bottles (made of polyethylene terephthalate) into polyester fibers.
In the last decade, Japan passed several laws obliging both businesses and individuals to separate plastics waste.
This, combined with a lack of landfill space and the country’s expanding population, has enhanced plastics recycling efforts.
As a result, in 2010, Japan recycled 72% of PET bottles, compared to roughly 30% in the US and 48% in Europe.
While incineration and landfilling are still practiced, such high recycling rates underscore the positive impact of targeted policies.
Another promising development is bioplastics, which have begun to compete with petroleum-based products in certain short-lifespan applications – such as packaging and agriculture – over the last two decades.
Given that bioplastics are produced from renewable or “bio-based” sources (cellulose, starch, and glucose) – and, in some cases, through microbial fermentation – they have a lower carbon footprint, contribute less to global warming, and biodegrade to small molecules.
But bioplastics are not a silver bullet for managing plastics waste.
In fact, they may threaten the secondary recycling of petroleum-based plastics, owing to possible contamination during sorting of mixed streams.
And critics have expressed concern about the environmental impact of corn and other crops grown for industrial purposes, such as plastics and ethanol production, not to mention the potential effects on global food prices.
In a world that is reliant on plastics, more sustainable production, consumption, and disposal of plastic products is crucial.
Civil society, industry, and government must work together to increase the share of recycled plastics, thereby ensuring that plastics’ costs do not outweigh their benefits.
Can South Korea Make More Babies?
SEOUL – South Korea is facing major demographic challenges.
The total fertility rate (the number of children per woman), at 1.24, is one of the lowest in the world, and well below the level – 2.1 children per woman – needed to sustain a population without immigration.
As a result, the population is aging fast, and the government, despite its best efforts, seems to have no answer.
A low birthrate is common in industrialized countries.
Before South Korea’s economic boom – a time when having more children was viewed as a source of security in old age – the fertility rate was much higher, averaging more than six until 1960.
But, as South Korea’s economy advanced, child-rearing costs rose, and female labor-force participation increased, the fertility rate declined dramatically, dropping below two in the 1980s.
At first, falling fertility rates were an economic blessing, as households saved more and invested in children’s development.
In 2015, the college enrollment rate for women hit 81%, compared to just 6% in 1980.
But the decline of the prime working-age population has lately been undercutting economic growth, and threatens to place excessive pressure on the public pension system down the road.
South Korea’s government has attempted to address these challenges with a series of measures aimed at boosting fertility rates.
A recent package includes more paternity leave, priority enrollment in public childcare facilities for third children, and subsidies for infertility treatment.
But whether these measures will lead to higher fertility rates is dubious, for a simple reason: they fail to tackle sufficiently the high economic hurdles that are causing South Koreans to delay or forego having children.
One of those hurdles is the cost of education.
South Korean parents are willing to invest heavily in giving their few children the best chance of prospering.
In 2015, they spent almost 7% of their disposable income on private tutoring for their children in primary and secondary education.
They also pay an absurdly high price for their children’s college education, which no longer guarantees prosperity in life.
In fact, South Korea’s share of private spending for college education is the highest among OECD countries, even ahead of the United States.
That limits how many children parents may feel they can afford to raise.
For many young South Koreans, even marriage is economically unfeasible nowadays, owing to factors like high housing costs and youth unemployment, even among university graduates.
The number of weddings in South Korea plunged from 435,000 in 1996 to 302,800 in 2015.
In a country where only 2% of children are born outside marriage, this trend has a powerful impact on fertility rates.
Women confront the highest barriers to increased fertility.
Pervasive gender inequality, together with a lack of affordable, high-quality childcare, causes many South Korean women to withdraw from the labor market after marriage or childbirth.
And many of them do not wish to do so.
In a recent survey by the Federation of Korean Industries, 38% of the single female respondents said that they do not want children, mostly because they fear that they will struggle to keep up at work or lose their jobs.
Only one-third responded positively to the government’s program for promoting fertility.
South Korea’s government must pursue a more comprehensive policy package aimed at lowering some of the barriers to childbirth.
Women, in particular, need greater support, in order to eliminate the binary choice between career and family.
The key is to provide more flexible work arrangements, to build a more accepting corporate culture, and to ensure accessible childcare, both public and private.
To this end, allowing the migration of foreign housekeepers and caregivers could be very helpful.
South Korea remains conservative about offering permanent residency to foreign nationals.
But the reality is that, in advanced economies where market services for childcare and households are available, highly educated women tend to have more children, especially at older ages.
Japan, for its part, has managed to boost its ultra-low fertility rate – which bottomed out in 2005 at 1.26 – to 1.46 in 2015, through consistent efforts to reduce childrearing costs and change the corporate culture.
To sustain this recovery, it has recently decided to take initiatives to attract more foreign housekeepers.
These changes reflect Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s commitment to prevent the population from falling below 100 million.
Even where foreign household workers do not raise the fertility rate, they enable more women to continue working after having children.
In Singapore, for example, families often hire live-in maids from neighboring countries, including the Philippines and Indonesia, to take care of the housework and childcare.
Though Singapore’s fertility rate stands at just 1.3 – one of the lowest in the world – this policy enables the country to attract foreign talents to fill the population gap and sustain the economy.
To some extent, demographic change is inevitable, as is its transformative economic impact.
But there are steps that governments can take to shape demographic trends and blunt their negative effects.
If South Korea creates an environment in which families can live and work happily, those families will grow larger.
Privatizing Development Aid
LONDON – Much has changed about official development assistance (ODA) over the last 50 years.
Since it originated during the Cold War, when members of the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee spent roughly $60 billion annually (an amount that the Soviet Union undoubtedly matched), recipient countries have been called “backward,” “developing,” “southern,” and, lately, “emerging.”
Indeed, what defines a recipient country has increasingly been called into question in recent years.
The United Kingdom is debating whether to discontinue aid to India, the third-largest recipient of capital inflows and the home of the UK’s largest manufacturing employer, the Tata Group.
Likewise, eurozone countries have been looking to long-time aid recipient China, which holds $2.5 trillion of US government debt, to help them overcome their own debt crisis.
Furthermore, development itself has been redefined, with the policy focus shifting to good governance, transparency, accountability, and human rights.
As a result, initiatives aimed at improving health, education, and gender equality have replaced large-scale construction projects.
Now it is time to re-examine the ODA system.
After all, donor countries are mired in debt and stagnation, while some recipient economies are growing 5-7 times faster than they are.
Moreover, almost 10% of total ODA is allotted for humanitarian relief, which should be similarly uncontroversial.
But the overall impact of ODA remains dubious.
In a report released last March, the UK’s House of Lords Select Committee on Economic Affairs cited disagreement among experts on the issue, with estimates ranging from a 0.5% boost to annual GDP growth in recipient countries to no effect on growth at all.
There are several possible explanations for the fact that development aid has not always translated into GDP growth.
Recipient governments might misuse the aid, preventing it from trickling down to those who would spend or invest it, or the money may be given on the condition that it is spent on goods or services from the donor country.
And, even if development aid does spur GDP growth, this does not necessarily lead to better lives for the poorest citizens, especially in the short term.
While eliminating extreme poverty is undoubtedly an urgent moral imperative, ODA may not be the best way to achieve it.
In fact, there is a strong case for involving the private sector in development assistance.
Over the last two decades – a period when globalization opened up the world financial system – private capital flows have contributed more to developing economies’ growth than has ODA.
Indeed, in 2009, more than $1 trillion in private capital flowed to developing countries – nine times more than total aid.
Moreover, privately funded organizations like Oxfam or Medecins Sans Frontières (Doctors Without Borders) tend to allocate resources more effectively than governments, delivering genuine gains where they are needed most.
Following this model, countries’ aid budgets could be opened up for bids from development NGOs, which would assume responsibility for allocating and delivering the funds as efficiently as possible – and would be required to provide a careful accounting of how they spent the money.
A bolder solution would be direct cash transfers to the poor.
With global aid totaling roughly $130 billon, each of the 1.3 billion people living in extreme poverty (less than $1 per day) worldwide would receive $100 in cash.
Some countries have already experimented with such programs, and India is preparing to begin providing cash transfers to its 300 million poor citizens.
In other words, a global cash-transfer scheme could be very effective, and would be feasible if donor countries pooled their aid budgets.
The simplest – and most radical – solution would be to stop all official aid payments.
Instead, the money could be returned to donor-country citizens through tax deductions or income transfers, and they could decide how to help those in need.
Given the prevalence of poverty and disease, many of these citizens would be motivated to contribute to global poverty-reduction efforts.
Allowing citizens to choose how to donate may help to tackle corruption in countries where politicians often misappropriate ODA, while discouraging wasteful or impractical projects.
In addition, people would be far less likely to complain that their money is being wasted or misused if they chose where it went.
ODA has, at best, a patchy record.
After 50 years of inefficiency, it is time to try something new.
In the near term, at least, cash transfers seem to be the best option.
Only by allowing each recipient to decide how best to use the money can we ensure that development aid actually enables the world’s poorest citizens to improve their lives.
The Crisis Europe Needs
BERKELEY – It’s hard to be optimistic about Europe.
Last summer, a political cage match between Germany and Greece threatened to tear the European Union apart.
In country after country, extremist political parties are gaining ground.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin’s incursion into Ukraine, in the EU’s backyard, has turned the common European foreign and security policy into a punch line.
Now comes the refugee crisis.
The EU’s 28 member states are quibbling over how to distribute 120,000 refugees, when more than three times that number crossed the Mediterranean in the first nine months of 2015 alone.
Refugees are coming by land as well as sea.
Germany alone expects as many as a million asylum-seekers this year.
It is risible to think that European governments will be able to deport, or “repatriate” in diplomacy-speak, any substantial fraction of these arrivals.
Like a rubber ball, they will only come bouncing back.
Nor is there agreement on how to handle this flood of humanity.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel first declared that her country had a historical obligation to absorb refugees, before backing down in the face of political criticism.
Hungary opened its borders, hoping that the human tide would flow onward, but then erected a razor-wire fence when it turned out that there were too few welcoming destinations.
The EU’s Eastern European members initially resisted taking their share of the 120,000; but, dependent on fiscal transfers from the EU’s wealthier members, they fell into line after diplomatic arm-twisting similar to that administered to Greece.
Besides raising doubts about European leaders’ competence and solidarity, this crisis jeopardizes the EU’s signal achievement, the single market, which ensures freedom of movement for goods, services, capital, and people.
The Schengen Agreement providing for passport-free transit is what makes freedom of movement for people meaningful.
But, given the inability of participating states to control their borders with non-EU countries, Germany and other Schengen members have temporarily reinstated controls.
Indeed, this move could be more than temporary, with influential voices now calling for Schengen’s demise.
Dismantling Schengen would be a significant economic setback.
Allowing trucks and trains to cross the EU’s internal borders without interruption not only facilitates trade; it also encourages the development of regional supply chains and production networks.
Motor vehicle parts can be produced in one member state and assembled in another, after which the final product can be delivered to market.
At a time when Europe is struggling to boost productivity and competitiveness, reinstating border controls would come as a serious blow.
The irony is that this is precisely the type of crisis that the EU was created to address.
Solving the border-security problem requires European countries to work together.
Individual countries like Greece have limited incentive to invest in controls insofar as refugees are only passing through.
At the same time, unilateral action by countries, like Hungary, that are unprepared to countenance even transiting migrants, merely ends up diverting the flow.
The EU has an agency called Frontex to coordinate and strengthen national border-control policies.
But governments have not allowed it to issue directives to national agencies.
If the crisis is to be solved, this will have to change.
The same goes for resettlement.
Germany and Sweden cannot be expected to be the only destinations for all refugee arrivals.
Burden sharing is essential if the costs are to be tolerable.
In principle, the outlines of a deal are not difficult to formulate.
Germany can provide money and manpower to secure the EU’s external borders.
Its neighbors can then agree to accept more refugees and to offer them real economic opportunity as an incentive to stay.
Creating institutions to enhance border security and resettle refugees will require Europe to take another step toward deeper political integration, with decisions made at the EU, not the national, level.
There may be a reluctance to contemplate this, but there is no choice if Europe is to have a hope of solving the problem.
More razor wire at the border is not an adequate answer.
Europe also needs to address the conditions driving residents of war-torn and poverty-stricken countries to flee.
So far, the EU has been singularly ineffectual in deploying aid, diplomacy, and boots on the ground to address conflicts in Africa and the Middle East.
In particular, Germany, the EU’s largest country, has hesitated to contribute forces, funds, and even strategic advice, reflecting its dark military history.
Merkel, her involvement in negotiations over Ukraine aside, has deferred to the German public’s historically rooted objections to deeper foreign entanglements.
Such reticence is no longer acceptable.
One rationale for the European project has always been to allow Germany to project diplomatic and military force in the context of a larger, EU-wide foreign policy.
That way, both Germans and other Europeans can trust Germany to be a positive force for change.
If not now, one might ask, then when?
Johnson is a tribune of the people who grew up with the privileges of the 1%; a child of immigrants who campaigned for closed borders; a Conservative who wants to upend the political order; an erudite man who mocks expertise; and a cosmopolitan who casually calls black people “piccaninnies.”
Johnson did more than anyone to bury Britain’s European future; but his ultra-flexibility may yet prove to be its salvation.
In his first public appearance after being appointed Foreign Secretary, Johnson compared the Brexit vote to the French Revolution.
Provoking boos at the French Embassy’s Bastille Day celebration, he hailed the referendum as “a great popular uprising against a stifling bureaucratic ancient regime (sic) whose democratic credentials had become very far from obvious.”
But the Brexit vote – with its promise to recreate the Britain of yesterday – is less revolution than counter-revolution.
Boris and his band of Brexiteers have more in common with Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, who overturned the French republic to create a new monarchy, than with Danton or Robespierre.
If anyone or anything has a claim to embody the progressive ideals of 1789, it is the EU.
Its politicians and officials have translated the vague trinity of liberty, equality, and fraternity into a concrete form: 80,000 pages of laws that cover rights and regulations from the bedroom to the factory floor.
And the application of these rules helped waves of countries – from Greece and Spain to Estonia and Poland – move from autocracy to democracy.
The EU has driven a revolution in how countries live together – advancing individual rights, international law, and the pooling of sovereignty.
Its transformative power springs from the promise of potential membership, a “neighborhood policy” that exports European values, and its facilitation of global institution-building and copycat regional integration.
Now, as a result of the counter-revolution, the EU club is shrinking, rather than growing.
Rather than remaking the world in its image, the EU fears neighbors that export chaos rather than import values.
Interdependence causes, rather than ends, intra-European conflict.
And the European idea has become a focus of political opposition across the continent.
Indeed, the most troubling thing about Europe today is not the United Kingdom’s departure, but the fragility and disunity of the remaining 27 states, where the domestic consensus for Europe has all but evaporated.
The UK’s “Leave” campaign channeled a widely felt desire to restore past certainties, not to establish new rights.
And all member states are subject to the economic insecurity, cultural anxiety, and political alienation that new political forces are exploiting by using referenda to recast politics as a fight between the people and self-serving elites.
Britain’s post-referendum economic and political travails will make other EU member states think twice before holding their own popular votes on membership.
But make no mistake: the EU is well into an era of disintegration.
A slow slide into ungovernability can be just as devastating as a breakup.
Some EU decisions are already being challenged by national referenda, such as Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s planned plebiscite on refugee quotas.
In France, the so-called Posted Workers Directive (which allows employers to pay seconded workers no more than the minimum rate in the host country) may not be implemented.
And the European Commission is backtracking on favored projects such as a free-trade deal with Canada.
Rather than banding together, each new challenge has divided the EU into ever-smaller groups.
The euro has divided north and south; Ukraine and the refugee crisis have divided east and west.
Pro-Europeans need to engage with the sources of discontent and rethink the forms used to express the European ideal.
The EU was based on a mechanical idea that interdependence would reduce conflict.
By linking European means of production together – first through the European coal and steel community, and later through the common market and the euro – the EU hoped to bind Europe’s states together so closely that war between them would no longer be an option.
True, war in Europe is now mostly unthinkable, with much wealth created.
If they succeed, the UK may even eventually want to rejoin.
Of course, that is not what the Brexiteers or their allies elsewhere are seeking.
They may succeed in unraveling the EU, but they are unlikely to deliver on their promise of recreating the world of yesterday, much less a better future.
In fact, they could inadvertently destroy the benefits of European integration that people most value.
Voters who supported Brexit may yet echo what Marx said of Louis Napoleon’s counter-revolution: “A whole people, that imagines it has imparted to itself accelerated powers of motion through a revolution, suddenly finds itself transferred back to a dead epoch.”
They discover that what they overthrew was not the tyranny of the ancien régime, but “the concessions that were wrung from it by centuries of struggle.”
That is where Johnson’s political cross-dressing may come into its own.
If the UK enters a deep recession and struggles to deliver on the Leave campaign’s promises, many voters may yet want to remain in the single market, or even the EU itself.
That sort of volte-face would be impossible for most of the Brexit camp, for whom the dream of sovereignty trumps the threat of economic collapse.
But Johnson is culturally at ease with Europe and at times seemed ambivalent about the Leave campaign that he led.
Johnson’s ability to escape the shackles of his previous statements would inspire Houdini.
If the EU manages to reform and the UK’s economic problems deepen, all that seems solid – particularly Johnson’s Euroskepticism – could melt into air.
The Creditworthy Poor?
WASHINGTON, DC – Over the last five years, several low-income countries, such as Rwanda and Honduras, have issued their first-ever bonds to private foreign investors in London and New York.
Until recently, that might have been unthinkable, so the new borrowers’ initial bond issue should be viewed as a sign of great investor confidence.
But it should also sound some familiar warning bells.
Some 20 “debut issues” have raised around $12 billion at interest rates that, on average, are just 4.5 percentage points above what the United States government pays at maturities of five or more years.
This is small change in the grand scheme of global finance; but, given that many of these borrowers were in distress or default just a decade ago, and needed debt forgiveness, theirs is an especially impressive turnaround.
But low-income countries’ access to private lenders comes with risks that should be highlighted at the outset, before they grow into imminent threats.
For starters, there is rollover risk.
The bonds have to be repaid in a foreign currency, usually US dollars, in a single “bullet” payment.
These bullets can be big, especially when compared with past debt obligations or future export earnings.
World Bank data tracking the evolution of developing-country debt since the 1970s show that the probability of a country falling into debt distress increases nine-fold (to a one-in-five chance) if its repayments are equivalent to more than one-tenth of its exports – a situation that one in three of today’s new issuers could face when their bonds come due.
Whether poor borrowers can avoid such a financial squeeze will depend on several factors.
One is whether they will be able to issue more bonds to pay off those coming due.
Another is whether they invest the money prudently, thereby enabling prompt repayment.
And it will also depend on whether countries with volatile incomes, especially those reliant on natural resources, put money aside when earnings are high.
A second, medium-term risk involves capital-flow reversals.
Lenders’ appetite for low-income-country bonds has been fueled in large part by a combination of abundant liquidity and near-zero interest rates in developed economies since the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
With only paltry yields on offer at home, investors have looked to riskier, “frontier” markets for higher returns.
Sooner or later, however, developed economies will revert to tighter monetary policy, which will make developing-country bonds less attractive.
Those borrowers with sound macroeconomic policies will probably retain some appeal for global financial markets; but less prudent governments might suddenly find themselves cut off.
Unfortunately, the quality of debt-management practices among the new bond issuers is uneven.
Sensible debt strategies, a professional and independent debt office, and a clear legal framework for public borrowing have become more important than ever.
To be sure, there has been significant progress on this front over the past decade, much of it funded by rich-country assistance.
But more can and should be done before this new borrowing wave becomes too large to manage, or spreads to state and municipal governments that suffer from weaker administrative capacity.
It is worth noting the strong negative correlation between the quality of a country’s debt-management practices and its risk of debt distress, with 90% of low-risk countries demonstrating good practices.
A third risk is that future debt workouts will become harder to agree.
Traditionally, low-income countries’ creditors were rich-world governments and multilateral organizations that found it politically unfeasible to call in debts if this meant that borrowers had to cut vital public services such as education or health.
In a process that has already taken 15 years – and remains unfinished – the debts of 35 highly indebted poor countries (HIPCs) have been forgiven, at a cost of more than $100 billion.
Now, however, many former HIPCs are selling bonds in the global market to private investors, which has become significantly riskier in recent months, in the wake of court rulings in the United States that permit bondholders to reject debt workouts and sue for full payment.
One must hope that the funds raised will be put to good use, and that repayments will not require major sacrifices, as there is currently no agreed mechanism to restructure, let alone cancel, the new debts.
One might ask why anyone but the private global investors taking the risk should care about roll-overs, reversals, debt management, and workouts.
The reason is that public-debt distress most harms a country’s poorest citizens, who have little knowledge, and no choice, about issuing bonds.
When a country defaults, the economic damage swells the number of poor people and worsens their living conditions.
When Argentina defaulted in 2001, one in five citizens fell under the poverty line.
Sound debt management is, in effect, sound social policy – a lesson that borrowers and lenders alike should heed as they enter into debts that, if not properly managed, can turn out to be more complicated than first assumed and more troublesome than anyone expected.
Bottom Dollar
As more time passes with neither the value of the dollar declining sharply nor market forces beginning to shrink America’s current-account deficit – which may well reach $1 trillion this year – two diametrically opposed reactions are emerging.
Most international finance economists are becoming increasingly frightened that a major international financial crisis could erupt.
Indeed, they fear that the scale of that potential crisis is becoming larger and larger.
Others – especially managers of financial assets – are becoming increasingly convinced that economists don’t know very much, and that what they do know is of no use to traders like themselves.
They see little reason to believe that current asset values and trade flows are not sustainable.
After all, they (or some of them) argue, the real GDP of the United States is growing by $400 billion per year, with about $270 billion going to labor and $130 billion to capital.
Even after depreciation, that $130 billion of extra annual income is capitalized at about $1.5 trillion of wealth, so the current-account deficit, even at $1 trillion, is not overwhelmingly large.
We Americans can sell off two-thirds of the increment to our wealth to finance imports and still be $500 billion better off this year than we were last year.
Moreover, the annual interest charged on the extra $1 trillion per year that Americans borrow from the rest of the world is about $50 billion – just one-eighth of annual economic growth, while the trade deficit is financed out of the growth of the value of capital.
So what’s unsustainable?
Why can’t the US current-account deficit remain at its 2006 value indefinitely?
The counterargument hinges on the difference between the current-account deficit and the trade deficit.
The current-account deficit is equal to the trade deficit plus the cost of servicing the net international asset position: the net rent, interest, and dividends owed to foreigners who have invested their capital in the US.
As time passes, deficits accumulate.
As deficits accumulate, the cost of servicing the net international asset position grows.
Thus, in order to keep the current-account deficit stable, the trade deficit must shrink.
And the only way for the trade deficit to shrink substantially is for net imports to fall, which requires either a relatively sharp decline in the value of the dollar, thereby raising import prices, or a depression in the US.
Both outcomes would weaken demand for foreign goods by making Americans feel that they are too poor to buy them.
As a result, holders of dollar-denominated assets should be looking forward to two alternative scenarios.
In one, the value of the dollar will be low; in the other, the US will be in a depression.
In neither scenario does it make sense to hold huge amounts of dollar-denominated assets today.
Therefore, foreign speculators should, any day now, dump their dollar-denominated assets onto the market, and so bring about the dollar decline that they so fear.
But foreign-currency speculators and international investors are not looking forward to either of these scenarios.
They continue to hold very large positions in dollar-denominated assets, which they would not do if they thought the US faced a choice between a cheap dollar and a deep depression.
So, what alternative does the market see?
And why is it so different from the possible scenarios that international financial economists see?
The answer appears to be that there is nobody in the financial centers of New York, London, Tokyo, Frankfurt, and Hong Kong who thinks it is their business to bet on a future flight from the dollar.
Especially in times of crisis – and a sharp fall in US imports would imply a much more severe crisis for Asian and European exporters than it would for the US – the dollar is a currency that you run to, not from.
George Soros can bet on a run on the British pound. Thai import-export firms can bet on a run on the baht by accelerating their dollar receipts and delaying their dollar payouts.
Everyone can bet on a run on the Argentine peso – a favorite sport of international financial speculators for a century and a half.
But not the dollar. Not yet.
In other words, the market is betting that the dollar will fall gradually in the next five years, and that the US current-account deficit will narrow without a financial crisis.
That is what happened in the late 1980’s, and in the late 1970’s, too.
After all, God, it is said, protects children, fools, dogs, and the United States of America.
But the odds on a soft landing are lengthening with each passing day.
The Emperor’s New Goal
NEW DELHI – Japanese Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, in a rare overseas trip, are scheduled to begin a tour of the Indian cities of New Delhi and Chennai on November 30.
The imperial couple’s weeklong visit is likely to mark a defining moment in Indo-Japanese relations, fostering closer economic and security ties between Asia’s two leading democracies as they seek a pluralistic, stable Asian order.
Traditionally, a visit from the Japanese emperor – except for a coronation or royal anniversary celebration – signified a turning point in a bilateral relationship.
While the emperor is merely the “symbol of the state” under Japan’s US-imposed postwar constitution, he retains significant influence, owing to Japanese veneration of the imperial dynasty – the world’s oldest continuous hereditary monarchy, the origins of which can be traced to 660 BC.
Indeed, the emperor’s overseas visits remain deeply political, setting the tone – if not the agenda – for Japan’s foreign policy.
Consider Akihito’s 1992 visit to China – the first such visit by any Japanese emperor.
Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping’s government – grateful for Japan’s reluctance to maintain punitive sanctions over the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre and eager for international recognition, not to mention Japanese capital and commercial technologies – had extended seven invitations over two years.
Akihito’s trip, which came at the height of Japan’s pro-China foreign policy, was followed by increased Japanese aid, investment, and technology transfer, thereby cementing Japan’s role in China’s economic rise.
The improved diplomatic relationship lasted until the recent flare-up of territorial and other bilateral disputes.
Although no Japanese emperor has visited India before, the bilateral relationship runs deep.
In traditional Japanese culture, India is Tenjiku (the country of heaven).
Today, Japan is India’s largest source of aid and has secured a key role in supporting infrastructure development, financing projects like the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor, the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor, and the Bangalore Metro Rail Project.
With these natural allies seeking to add strategic bulk to their rapidly multiplying ties, Akihito’s tour is the most significant visit to India by any foreign leader in recent years.
Indeed, it is expected to be one of the last foreign trips for the 79-year-old emperor, who has undergone several major surgeries in the past decade.
Akihito’s travel schedule contrasts sharply with that of Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
Despite having had open-heart surgery during his first term, India’s 81-year-old leader has sought to offset his low domestic political stock by flying more than one million kilometers on overseas trips – including visits to Japan, China, Indonesia, Russia, Thailand, and the United States in the last six months alone.
The paradox of Akihito’s tour – for which Singh has appointed a special envoy with ministerial rank to oversee preparations – is that Japan is investing substantial political capital to build a strong, long-term partnership with India’s government at a time when India is gripped by policy paralysis.
Japan’s leaders are perhaps counting on the continuity of India’s strategic policies, which would require the Indian government that emerges from next year’s general election to sustain the momentum of cooperation.
But, more important, Japan is adjusting to meet the challenges of a rapidly changing regional environment, characterized by rising geopolitical competition with China.
In a historical reversal, Japan has found itself on the defensive against the increasingly muscular foreign policy of its former colony and old rival.
This situation is forcing the Japanese government to reconsider its postwar pacifism, revise its defense strategy, and increase its military spending.
In this context, Japan knows that a deeper strategic collaboration with India – which is also seeking to blunt increasing military pressure from China – is its best move.
In modern history, Japan has had the distinction of consistently staying ahead of the rest of Asia.
During the Meiji era, in the second half of the nineteenth century, it became the first Asian country to modernize.
It was also the first Asian country to emerge as a world power, defeating Manchu-ruled China and Czarist Russia in separate wars.
And after its defeat in World War II, Japan rose from the ashes to become Asia’s first global economic powerhouse.
With per capita GDP of more than $37,000, Japan still ranks among the world’s richest countries, specializing in the highest-value links of global supply chains.
And income inequality in Japan ranks among the lowest in Asia.
Nonetheless, almost two decades of economic stagnation have eroded Japan’s regional clout.
This raises the question of whether Japan’s current problems –sluggish growth, high public debt, and rapid population aging – presage a similar trend across East Asia.
Similar problems are already appearing in South Korea, while China has been driven to loosen its one-child policy and unveil plans for economic reforms aimed at reviving growth.
For India, Japan is indispensable as both an economic and a security partner.
It is central to India’s “Look East” policy, which has evolved into more of an “Act East” policy, whereby the original strategy’s economic logic has been amplified by the larger geopolitical objective of ensuring Asian stability and a regional balance of power.
It is in this light that Akihito’s historic visit should be viewed.
China’s Borderline Belligerence
NEW DELHI – In recent years, the People’s Liberation Army has been taking advantage of its rising political clout to provoke localized skirmishes and standoffs with India by breaching the two countries’ long and disputed Himalayan frontier.
The PLA’s recent intensification of such border violations holds important implications for President Xi Jinping’s upcoming visit to India – and for the future of the bilateral relationship.
In fact, such provocations have often preceded visits to India by Chinese leaders.
Indeed, it was just before President Hu Jintao’s 2006 visit that China resurrected its claim to India’s large northeastern state of Arunachal Pradesh.
Likewise, prior to Premier Wen Jiabao’s trip to India in 2010, China began issuing visas on loose sheets of paper stapled into the passports of Kashmir residents applying to enter China – an indirect challenge to India’s sovereignty.
Moreover, China abruptly shortened the length of its border with India by rescinding its recognition of the 1,597-kilometer (992-mile) line separating Indian Kashmir from Chinese-held Kashmir.
And Premier Li Keqiang’s visit last May followed a deep PLA incursion into India’s Ladakh region, seemingly intended to convey China’s anger over India’s belated efforts to fortify its border defenses.
Now, China is at it again, including near the convergence point of China, India, and Pakistan – the same place last year’s PLA encroachment triggered a three-week military standoff.
This pattern suggests that the central objective of Chinese leaders’ visits to India is not to advance cooperation on a shared agenda, but to reinforce China’s own interests, beginning with its territorial claims.
Even China’s highly lucrative and fast-growing trade with India has not curbed its rising territorial assertiveness.
By contrast, Indian prime ministers since Jawaharlal Nehru have traveled to China to express goodwill and deliver strategic gifts.
Unsurprisingly, India has often ended up losing out in bilateral deals.
Particularly egregious was Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee’s 2003 surrender of India’s Tibet card.
Vajpayee went so far as to use, for the first time, the legal term “recognize” to accept what China calls the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) as “part of the territory of the People’s Republic of China.”
That opened the way for China to claim Arunachal Pradesh (three times the size of Taiwan) as “South Tibet” and reinforced China’s view of territorial issues: Whatever area it occupies is Chinese territory, and whatever territorial claims it makes must be settled on the basis of “mutual accommodation and understanding.”
Vajpayee’s blunder compounded Nehru’s 1954 mistake in implicitly accepting, in the Panchsheel Treaty, China’s annexation of Tibet, without securing (or even seeking) recognition of the then-existing Indo-Tibetan border.
In fact, under the treaty, India forfeited all of the extraterritorial rights and privileges in Tibet that it had inherited from imperial Britain.
As agreed in the pact, India withdrew its “military escorts” from Tibet, and conceded to the Chinese government, at a “reasonable” price, the postal, telegraph, and public telephone services operated by the Indian government in the “Tibet region of China.”
For its part, China repeatedly violated the eight-year pact, ultimately mounting the trans-Himalayan invasion of 1962.
In short, China used the Panchsheel Treaty to outwit and humiliate India.
Yet, just this summer, Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s new government sent Vice President Hamid Ansari to Beijing to participate in the treaty’s 60th anniversary celebrations.
Ansari was accompanied by Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, who, during her stay, signed an agreement allowing China – without any quid pro quo – to establish industrial parks in India.
This will exacerbate existing imbalances in the bilateral trade relationship – China currently exports to India three times more than it imports from the country, with most of these imports being raw materials –thereby exposing India to increased strategic pressure and serving China’s interest in preventing India’s rise as a peer competitor.
The fact that the spotlight is now on China’s Tibet-linked claim to Arunachal Pradesh, rather than on Tibet’s status, underscores China’s dominance in setting the bilateral agenda.
Given India’s dependence on cross-border water flows from Tibet, it could end up paying a heavy price.
Embarrassed by China’s relentless border violations – according to Indian Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju, there were 334 in the first 216 days of this year – India has recently drawn a specious distinction between “transgressions” and “intrusions” that enables it to list all of the breaches simply as transgressions.
But word play will get India nowhere.
A reminder of that came at July’s BRICS summit of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, when, yet again, China emerged ahead of India.
The BRICS’ New Development Bank, it was announced, will be headquartered in Shanghai, not New Delhi; India’s consolation prize was that an Indian will serve as the Bank’s first president.
Under pressure from an unyielding and revanchist China, India urgently needs to craft a prudent and carefully calibrated counter-strategy.
For starters, India could rescind its recognition of Chinese sovereignty over Tibet, while applying economic pressure through trade, as China has done to Japan and the Philippines when they have challenged its territorial claims.
By hinging China’s market access on progress in resolving political, territorial, and water disputes, India can prevent China from fortifying its leverage.
Moreover, India must be willing to respond to Chinese incursions by sending troops into strategic Chinese-held territory.
This would raise the stakes for Chinese border violations, thereby boosting deterrence.
Finally, India must consider carefully the pretense of partnership with China that it is forming through trade and BRICS agreements – at least until a more balanced bilateral relationship emerges.
After all, neither booming trade nor membership in the BRICS club offers protection from bullying.
The International Misrule of Law
NEW DELHI – On the face of it, China’s recent declaration of an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) extending to territories that it does not control has nothing in common with America’s arrest and strip-search of a New York-based Indian diplomat for allegedly underpaying a housekeeper she had brought with her from India.
In fact, these episodes epitomize both powers’ unilateralist approach to international law.
A just, rules-based global order has long been touted by powerful states as essential for international peace and security.
Yet there is a long history of major powers flouting international law while using it against other states.
The League of Nations failed because it could not punish or deter such behavior.
Today, the United States and China serve as prime examples of a unilateralist approach to international relations, even as they aver support for strengthening global rules and institutions.
Consider the US, which has refused to join key international treaties – for example, the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the 1997 UN Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses (which has not yet entered into force), and the 1998 International Criminal Court Statute.
Indeed, unilateralism remains the leitmotif of US foreign policy, and this is also reflected in its international interventions, whether cyber warfare and surveillance, drone attacks, or efforts to bring about regime change.
Meanwhile, China’s growing geopolitical heft has led to muscle-flexing and territorial claims in Asia that disregard international norms.
China rejects some of the same treaties that the US has declined to join, including the International Criminal Court Statute and the Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses (the first law to establish rules on the shared resources of transnational rivers, lakes, and aquifers).
Indeed, despite their geopolitical dissonance, the world’s most-powerful democracy and its most powerful autocracy have much in common when it comes to how they approach international law.
For example, the precedent that the US set in a 1984 International Court of Justice (ICJ) case filed by Nicaragua still resonates in China, underscoring that might remains right in international relations.
The ICJ held that America violated international law both by supporting the contras in their insurrection against the Nicaraguan government and by mining Nicaragua’s harbors.
But the US prevented Nicaragua from obtaining any compensation by vetoing UN Security Council resolutions that called for enforcement of the ICJ’s judgment.
China still hews to Mao Zedong’s belief that “power grows out of the barrel of a gun.”
Indeed, while China ratified UNCLOS, it then reinterpreted the provisions to justify cartographic aggression in the South and East China Seas.
Worse still, China has refused to accept the UNCLOS dispute-settlement mechanism, thereby remaining unfettered in altering facts on the ground.
The Philippines has filed a complaint against China with the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
China, however, has simply refused to participate in the proceedings, as if it were above international law.
Whatever the tribunal’s decision, China will simply shrug it off.
Only the Security Council can enforce an international tribunal’s judgment on a noncompliant state.
But China wields a veto there and will block enforcement of an adverse ruling, just as the US did in the Nicaragua case.