China’s new ADIZ, while aimed at solidifying its claims to territories held by Japan and South Korea, is similarly provocative, because it extends to areas that China does not control, setting a dangerous precedent in international relations.
Japan has asked its airlines to ignore China’s demand for advance notification of flights, even if they are merely transiting the new zone and not heading toward Chinese territorial airspace.
By contrast, the US has advised American carriers to obey China’s prior-notification demand.
There is a reason for this: Although the prior-notification rule in American policy applies only to aircraft headed for US national airspace, in practice the US demands advance notification of all flights through its ADIZ, regardless of their intended destination.
If other countries emulated the example set by China and the US by establishing unilateral claims to international airspace, a dangerous situation would result.
Binding international rules are thus imperative in order to ensure the safety of fast-growing commercial air traffic.
But who is supposed to take the lead when China and the US have pursued a unilateralist approach on this issue?
Now consider the case of the Indian diplomat, Devyani Khobragade, whose treatment India’s national security adviser called “despicable and barbaric.”
True, as a consulate-based diplomat, Khobragade enjoyed only limited diplomatic immunity under the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
But this convention guarantees freedom from detention until trial and conviction, except for “grave offenses.”
Can a wage dispute qualify as a “grave offense” warranting arrest and humiliation?
Would the US tolerate similar treatment of one of its consular officers?
The harsh truth is that the US interprets the Vienna Convention restrictively at home but liberally overseas, in order to shield even the military and intelligence contractors that it sends abroad.
A classic case involved the CIA contractor Raymond Davis, who fatally shot two men in 2011 in Lahore, Pakistan.
Claiming that Davis was a bona fide diplomat with its Lahore consulate, and thus enjoyed immunity from prosecution, the US accused Pakistan of “illegally detaining” him, with President Barack Obama defending him as “our diplomat in Pakistan.”
Despite a widely held belief that the current international system is based on rules, the fact is that major powers are rule makers and rule imposers, not rule takers.
They have a propensity to violate or manipulate international law when it is in their interest to do so.
If universal conformity to a rules-based international order still seems like a distant prospect, an important reason is that countries that should be leading the charge still so often behave like rogue states.
Japan’s Obama Problem
TOKYO – When Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe visited Tokyo’s controversial Yasukuni Shrine last month, Chinese leaders predictably condemned his decision to honor those behind “the war of aggression against China.”
But Abe was also sending a message to Japan’s main ally and defender, the United States.
Faced with US President Barack Obama’s reluctance to challenge China’s muscle-flexing and territorial ambitions in Asia – reflected in Japan’s recent split with the US over China’s new Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) – an increasingly desperate Abe was compelled to let both countries know that restraint cannot be one-sided.
For China and South Korea, the Yasukuni Shrine’s inclusion of 14 Class A war criminals who were executed after World War II has made it a potent symbol of Japan’s prewar militarism, and Abe had long refrained from visiting it – including during his previous stint as prime minister.
He may well have maintained that stance had China not established the ADIZ, which set an ominous new precedent by usurping international airspace over the East China Sea, including areas that China does not control.
(Abe does not appear to have considered the possibility that his pilgrimage to Yasukuni might end up helping China by deepening South Korea’s antagonism toward Japan.)
The Obama administration had been pressing Abe not to aggravate regional tensions by visiting Yasukuni – an entreaty reiterated by Vice President Joe Biden during a recent stopover in Tokyo on his way to Beijing.
In fact, Biden’s tour deepened Japan’s security concerns, because it highlighted America’s focus on balancing its relationships in East Asia, even if that means tolerating an expansionist China as the strategic equivalent of an allied Japan.
Instead of postponing Biden’s trip to Beijing to demonstrate disapproval of China’s new ADIZ, the US advised its commercial airlines to respect it, whereas Japan asked its carriers to ignore China’s demand that they file their flight plans through the zone in advance.
By calling for Japanese restraint, the US stoked Japan’s anxiety, without winning any concessions from China.
Now, the widening rift between the US and Japan has become starkly apparent.
Abe feels let down by Obama’s decision not to take a firm stand on the ADIZ – the latest in a series of aggressive moves by China to upend the status quo in the East China Sea.
For its part, the US government openly – and uncharacteristically – criticized Abe’s Yasukuni visit, with its embassy in Japan releasing a statement saying that the US was “disappointed that Japan’s leadership has taken an action that will exacerbate tensions with Japan’s neighbors.”
Such recriminations do not mean that the US-Japan alliance – the bedrock of America’s forward military deployment in Asia – is in immediate jeopardy.
Japan remains a model ally that hosts a large US troop presence, even paying for the upkeep of American forces on its soil.
Indeed, Abe’s visit to Yasukuni came only a day after he completed a long-elusive, US-backed bilateral deal to relocate America’s airbase in Okinawa to a less populous area of the island.
And he supports Japan’s entry into the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership, an emerging regional trading bloc that will exclude China.
Nonetheless, a psychological schism between the Abe and Obama administrations has gradually developed.
While the US frets about Abe’s nationalistic stance vis-à-vis China and South Korea, Japanese officials have stopped trying to conceal their uneasiness over Obama’s effort to strike a balance between its alliance commitments and its desire for Sino-American ties.
Biden spent more than twice as much time in discussions with Chinese President Xi Jinping as he did with Abe.
The paradox is that while anxiety over China’s growing assertiveness has returned the US to the center of Asian geopolitics and enabled it to strengthen its security arrangements in the region, this has not led to action aimed at quelling China’s expansionary policies.
As a result, Japan is becoming skeptical about America’s willingness to support it militarily in the event of a Chinese attack on the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands (called the Diaoyu Islands in China).
The Obama administration’s contradictory rhetoric – affirming that the US-Japan security treaty covers the Senkakus, while refusing to take a position on the islands’ sovereignty – has not helped.
A wake-up call for Japan was Obama’s inaction in 2012, when China captured the Scarborough Shoal, part of the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone.
In an effort to end a tense standoff, the US brokered a deal in which both countries agreed to withdraw their maritime vessels from the area.
But, after the Philippines withdrew, China occupied the shoal – and, despite a mutual-defense treaty between the US and the Philippines, the US did little in response.
This emboldened China effectively to seize a second Philippine-claimed shoal, part of the disputed Spratly Islands.
Factors like geographical distance and economic interdependence have made the US wary of entanglement in Asia’s territorial feuds.
And, unlike Asian countries, America would not really suffer from a Chinese “Monroe Doctrine” declaring that China would not accept any outside intervention in Asia.
But America’s neutrality on sovereignty disputes threatens to undermine its bilateral security alliances (which, by preventing countries like Japan from turning toward militarism, actually serve Chinese interests).
The Obama administration’s Asian balancing act obfuscates the broader test of power that China’s recent actions represent.
What is at stake are not merely islands in the East and South China Seas, but a rules-based regional order, freedom of navigation of the seas and skies, access to maritime resources, and balanced power dynamics in Asia.
By fueling Japanese insecurity, US policy risks bringing about the very outcome – a return to militarism – that it aims to prevent.
Arming the Elephant
NEW DELHI – The rise in US arms sales to India is being widely cited as evidence of the two countries’ deepening defense relationship.
But the long-term sustainability of the relationship, in which India is more a client than a partner, remains a deep concern for Indians.
Does the recently issued Joint Declaration on Defense Cooperation, which establishes intent to move beyond weapons sales to the co-production of military hardware,mark a turning point, or is it merely a contrivance to placate India?
The factors driving the strategic relationship’s development are obvious.
Since 2006, bilateral trade has quadrupled, reaching roughly $100 billion this year.
And, over the last decade, US defense exports to India have skyrocketed from just $100 million to billions of dollars annually.
With US military spending slowing and other export markets remaining tight, American defense firms are eager to expand sales to India, which is now the world’s largest arms importer.
And the political environment is amenable to their plans: India now conducts more joint military exercises with the US than with any other country.
For the US, displacing Russia as India’s leading arms supplier was a major diplomatic triumph, akin to Egypt’s decision during the Cold War to shift its allegiance – and its arms supplier – from the Soviet Union to America.
The difference is that India can actually pay for the weapons that it acquires.
And the bills are substantial.
In recent years, India has ordered American arms worth roughly $9 billion.
It is now purchasing additional US weapons systems – 22 Apache attack helicopters, six C-130J turbo military transport aircraft, 15 Chinook heavy-lift helicopters, and 145 M-777 ultra-light howitzers – worth $5 billion.
The value of India’s arms contracts with US firms exceeds that of American military aid to any country except Israel.
Nirupama Rao, India’s ambassador to the US, has called such defense transactions “the new frontier” in US-India relations and “a very promising one at that.”
But, while it is certainly a positive development for the US, for India, it represents a new frontier of dependency.
The problem is that India’s defense sector has virtually nothing that it can sell to the US.
The country has yet to develop a credible armament-production base like that of, say, Japan, which is co-developing advanced weapons systems with the US.
In fact, India depends on imports – not only from major suppliers like the US and Russia, but also from Israel, the world’s sixth-largest arms exporter – to meet even basic defense needs.
Moreover, India’s leaders have not leveraged the bargaining power afforded by its massive arms purchases to advance national interests.
They could, for example, try to persuade the US to stop selling arms to Pakistan, or secure better access to the American market for India’s highly competitive IT and pharmaceutical sectors, which are facing new US non-tariff barriers.
Applying the recent declaration on defense cooperation will not be easy.
For example, efforts to identify specific opportunities for collaborative weapons-related projects are to be pursued in accordance with “national policies and procedures.”
But the two sides cannot truly “place each other at the same level as their closest partners” unless national policies and procedures – especially in the US – evolve sufficiently.
Similarly, the declaration merely reiterates America’s position that it supports India’s “full membership” in the four US-led technology-control regimes: the Wassenaar Arrangement, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime, and the Australia Group.
Given that US policy is to deny sensitive technologies to those outside these regimes, India’s admission would make all the difference in facilitating technology sharing.
But the declaration does not include any commitment from the US to expedite India’s admission.
All of this suggests that the US is pandering to India’s desire for a more equal defense relationship.
It is willing to co-produce with India some smaller defensive systems, such as Javelin anti-tank missiles, in order to pave the way for more multi-billion-dollar deals for US-made systems.
The Indian media are doing their part to strengthen the illusion of progress, latching onto the phrase “closest partners” in their acclaim for the agreement.
The irony is that, while America’s pursuit of a stronger defense relationship with India is aimed largely at offsetting an increasingly assertive China, US President Barack Obama has charted a neutral course in Sino-Indian disputes.
For example, the US has declined to hold joint military exercises in the northeastern Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, which China has claimed as “South Tibet” since 2006.
As it stands, the US sells mainly defensive weapons systems to India, while Russia, for example, offers India offensive weapons, including strategic bombers, an aircraft carrier, and a lease on a nuclear submarine.
Would the US be willing to sell India offensive weapons – including high-precision conventional arms, anti-submarine systems, and long-range air- and sea-launched cruise missiles – that could help to deter Chinese military preemption?
As US-India defense cooperation broadens, this question will loom ever larger.
America’s Never-Ending War
NEW DELHI – It is official: US President and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Barack Obama is at war again.
After toppling Libyan ruler Muammar el-Qaddafi and bombing targets in Somalia and Yemen, Obama has initiated airstrikes in the Syria-Iraq belt, effectively declaring war on the Islamic State – a decision that will involve infringing on the sovereign, if disintegrating, state of Syria.
In his zeal to intervene, Obama is again disregarding US and international law by seeking approval from neither the US Congress nor the United Nations Security Council.
Obama’s predecessor, George W. Bush, launched America’s so-called “war on terror” to defeat groups that he insisted wanted to “establish a radical Islamic empire that spans from Spain to Indonesia.”
But Bush’s invasion and occupation of Iraq was so controversial that it fractured the global consensus to fight terror, with the Guantánamo Bay detention center and the rendition and torture of suspects coming to symbolize the war’s excesses.
After Obama took office, he sought to introduce a gentler, subtler tone.
Contending in a 2009 interview that “the language we use matters,” he rebranded the war on terror as a “struggle” and a “strategic challenge.”
But the rhetorical shift did not translate into a change in strategy, with the Obama administration moving beyond security concerns to use its anti-terrorism activities to advance America’s broader geopolitical interests.
Thus, instead of viewing the elimination of Osama bin Laden in 2011 as the culmination of the anti-terror “struggle” that Bush launched, the Obama administration increased aid to “good” rebels (such as those in Libya), while pursuing “bad” terrorists more vehemently, including through a “targeted killing” program.
When it comes to terrorist activity, however, such lines are difficult to draw.
For example, Obama initially placed the Islamic State in the “good” category, as it undermined Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s rule and Iran’s interests in Syria and Iraq.
His position changed only after the Islamic State threatened to overrun Iraq’s Kurdish regional capital, Erbil – home to US military, intelligence, diplomatic, and business facilities.
Add to that the beheadings of two American journalists, and suddenly Obama’s team was using Bush’s war rhetoric, declaring that the US is at war with the Islamic State “in the same way that we are at war with Al Qaeda and its affiliates all around the globe.”
America’s war on terror now risks becoming a permanent war against an expanding list of enemies – often inadvertently created by its own policies.
Just as covert aid to Afghanistan’s anti-Soviet rebels in the 1980s contributed to Al Qaeda’s emergence – something that Hillary Clinton acknowledged when she was Obama’s secretary of state – the help that the US and its allies provided to Syrian insurgents after they emerged in 2011 contributed to the rise of the Islamic State.
The US returned to Afghanistan in 2001 to wage an as-yet-unfinished war on the jihadists whom its actions had spawned.
Likewise, it is now launching a war in Iraq and Syria against the offspring of Bush’s forced regime change in Baghdad and Obama’s ill-conceived plan to topple Assad.
It is time for the US to recognize that since it launched its war on terror, the scourge has only spread.
The Afghanistan-Pakistan belt has remained “ground zero” for transnational terrorism, and once-stable countries like Libya, Iraq, and Syria have emerged as new hubs.
Obama’s effort to strike a Faustian bargain with the Afghan Taliban, whose top leaders enjoy sanctuary in Pakistan, indicates that he is more interested in confining terrorism to the Middle East than defeating it – even if it means leaving India to bear the brunt of terrorist activity.
(In fact, Pakistan’s ongoing war of terror against India also sprang from America’s anti-Soviet operation in Afghanistan – the largest in the CIA’s history – as the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence siphoned off a large share of the billions of dollars in military aid for the Afghan rebels.)
Similarly, Obama’s strategy toward the Islamic State seeks merely to limit the reach of a barbaric medieval order.
Moments after declaring his intention to “degrade and destroy” the group, Obama responded to a reporter’s request for clarification by stating that his real goal is to turn the Islamic State into a “manageable problem.”
Making matters worse, Obama plans to use the same tactics to fight the Islamic State that led to its emergence: authorizing the CIA, aided by some of the region’s oil sheikhdoms, to train and arm thousands of Syrian rebels.
It is not difficult to see the risks inherent in flooding the Syrian killing fields with even more and better-armed fighters.
The US may have some of the world’s top think tanks and most highly educated minds.
But it consistently ignores the lessons of its past blunders – and so repeats them.
US-led policies toward the Islamic world have prevented a clash between civilizations only by fueling a clash within a civilization that has fundamentally weakened regional and international security.
An endless war waged on America’s terms against the enemies that it helped to create is unlikely to secure either steady international support or lasting results.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the tepid Arab and Turkish response to America’s effort to assemble an international coalition in support of what the Obama administration admits will be a multiyear military offensive against the Islamic State.
The risk that imperial hubris accelerates, rather than stems, Islamist terror is all too real – yet again.
An Afghan Afghanistan
NEW DELHI – As it braces for its upcoming presidential election, Afghanistan finds itself at another critical juncture, with its unity and territorial integrity at stake after 35 years of relentless war.
Can Afghanistan finally escape the cycle of militancy and foreign intervention that has plagued it for more than three decades?
Two key questions are shaping discussions about Afghanistan’s post-2014 trajectory.
The first concerns the extent to which Pakistan will interfere in Afghan affairs, such as by aiding and abetting the Afghan Taliban and its main allies, including the Haqqani network and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar’s militia.
This will depend on whether the United States conditions its generous aid to cash-strapped Pakistan on noninterference in Afghanistan.
The second question is whether US-led NATO forces will continue to play any role in Afghanistan.
It is no secret that US President Barack Obama wants to maintain an American military presence in the country – a reversal of his declaration in 2009 that the US sought no military bases there.
Indeed, for several months, the US has been involved in painstaking negotiations with the Afghan government to conclude a bilateral security agreement that would enable the US to maintain bases in Afghanistan virtually indefinitely.
What was supposed to be an endgame for Afghanistan has turned into a new game over America’s basing strategy.
But, despite having finalized the terms of the agreement, Obama failed to persuade Afghanistan’s outgoing president, Hamid Karzai, to sign it.
That means that America’s role in the country can be settled only after the new Afghan president assumes office in May.
And the election’s outcome is far from certain.
While all eight Afghan presidential candidates claim to support the security accord, this may offer little comfort to the US, given that most of the candidates have directly opposed US interests in the past – not to mention that several of them are former or current warlords.
Moreover, there remains the question of how a residual American-led force, even if sizable, could make a difference in Afghanistan, given that a much larger force failed to secure a clear victory over the past 13 years.
Obama has offered no answer.
Nonetheless, there is strong bipartisan support in the US for maintaining military bases in Afghanistan, as a means of projecting hard power, and the increasingly charged confrontation between the US and Russia over Ukraine has boosted that support considerably.
In fact, former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice explicitly linked Russia’s actions in Ukraine with “talk of withdrawal from Afghanistan, whether the security situation warrants it or not.”
According to Rice, anything less than a residual force of 10,000 American troops will send the message that the US is not serious about helping to stabilize Afghanistan – a message that would embolden Russian President Vladimir Putin further.
What she does not seem to recognize is that America’s deteriorating ties with Russia – a key conduit for US military supplies to Afghanistan – could undercut its basing strategy.
The US is clearly convinced that a continued military presence in Afghanistan is in its interests.
But what would it mean for Afghanistan, a country that has long suffered at the hands of homegrown militant groups and foreign forces alike?
Afghanistan has been at war since 1979, when Soviet forces launched a disastrous eight-year military campaign against multinational insurgent groups.
That intervention – together with the US and Saudi governments’ provision of arms to Afghanistan’s anti-Soviet guerrillas through Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence agency – helped spread militancy and terrorism, which the subsequent US military intervention has kept alive.
As a result, Afghanistan is now at risk of becoming partitioned along ethnic and tribal lines, with militia- or warlord-controlled enclaves proliferating.
In short, foreign involvement in Afghanistan has so far failed to produce positive results.
That is why Afghanistan’s political and security transition would be better served by focusing on three key internal factors:
·         Free and fair elections that are widely viewed as reflecting the will of the Afghan people to chart a peaceful future.
·         The ability of Karzai’s successor to unite disparate ethnic and political groups – a tall order that can be filled only by a credible and widely respected leader.
·         The government’s success in building up Afghanistan’s multi-ethnic security forces.
How next month’s presidential election plays out is crucial.
If threats and violence from the Taliban prevent too many Afghans from casting their vote, the legitimacy of the outcome could be questioned, possibly inciting even more turmoil, which Afghanistan’s fledging security forces would struggle to contain.
To be sure, the security forces have, so far, mostly held their ground, deterring assassinations and keeping Kabul largely secure.
But they have also failed to make significant gains, and US plans to cut aid will make progress even more difficult.
Unable to sustain the current force with reduced aid, the Afghan government will have to try to make it “leaner and meaner.”
Whether it will succeed is far from certain.
That only increases the pressure to maintain a foreign military presence, even though it is unlikely to bring peace to Afghanistan.
In fact, the risk of becoming locked in a protracted, low-intensity war against militancy and warlordism is likely to outweigh any geopolitical advantages that the US would gain from military bases in the country.
After all, the terrorist havens and command-and-control centers for the Afghan insurgency are located in Pakistan – undercutting the US military effort to rout the Afghan Taliban since 2001.
All of this points to a clear conclusion: Afghanistan’s future must finally be put in the hands of Afghans.
Outside resources should be devoted to building the governing capacity needed to keep the country united and largely peaceful.
IMF Therapy for Brazil
MONTEVIDEO – Brazil’s economy is in intensive care.
And its intensifying political crisis – impeachment proceedings have now been initiated against President Dilma Rousseff for allegedly using irregular accounting maneuvers to disguise the size of the budget deficit – is raising serious questions about who can provide the much-needed treatment.
The situation is certainly serious.
Output is contracting; fiscal revenues are faltering; and the budget deficit exceeds 9% of GDP.
Inflation has surpassed the double-digit mark, forcing the central bank to raise interest rates – an approach that is unsustainable, given the deepening recession and the ballooning cost of servicing Brazil’s rapidly growing debt.
Indeed, with Brazil’s creditworthiness deteriorating fast, interest-rate spreads on its sovereign debt are reaching Argentine levels.
And its international reserve position of $370 billion, which once seemed unassailable, looks increasingly vulnerable.
When the notional value of foreign-exchange swaps ($115 billion) is netted out, the share of short-term public debt (foreign and domestic) covered by international reserves is below the critical threshold of 100%.
At the beginning of the year, when Rousseff’s second presidential term officially began, her administration’s priorities were clear: implement a credible fiscal-adjustment program that would take the primary budget balance (which excludes interest payments) comfortably back into surplus and reduce the growth rate of public debt to sustainable levels.
Rousseff soon appointed an economic team associated with fiscal orthodoxy to lead the effort.
But the situation has only deteriorated, owing partly to China’s economic slowdown, the end of the commodity boom, tighter international financial conditions, weak global growth, and a years-long legacy of policy mismanagement.
But domestic politics has made a bad situation much worse; indeed, the biggest obstacle to economic recovery this year came in the form of a massive corruption scandal at the state-owned oil giant Petrobras.
Although the scandal broke last year, allegations and evidence have more recently been mounting against senior officials of the traditional political parties, as well as prominent businessmen.
And, like Italy’s mani pulite (“clean hands”) investigations in the 1990s, the Petrobras scandal has thrown Brazilian politics into disarray.
A sitting senator has, for the first time, been arrested on corruption charges.
Impeachment proceedings against Rousseff will only complicate the situation further.
Brazil is now trapped in a vicious circle, or what economists call a “bad equilibrium.”
Even if there were a government willing and able to carry out the necessary fiscal adjustment, the political fallout of the Petrobras affair has damaged Brazil’s credibility severely.
That credibility will take time to recover – and time is a luxury that Brazil does not have.
Without market credibility, interest rates and credit spreads will remain high and hijack the fiscal-adjustment effort, forcing the economy into a downward spiral.
Moreover, budgetary pressures will make it increasingly difficult for the central bank to raise short-term interest rates to fulfill its mandate of curbing excess inflation.
In short, Brazil lacks a credible fiscal and monetary anchor.
If Brazil is to regain its credibility swiftly, it will need the support of the international community.
Brazil doesn’t have the institutional equivalent of the European Central Bank to do “whatever it takes” to retain access to credit at reasonable interest rates as it pursues fiscal and structural adjustment.
The closest thing Brazil has is the International Monetary Fund, with which it should negotiate an adjustment program.
Such a program would include increasing the primary surplus to 2-3% of GDP over the medium term; constraining government expenditures (the tax burden is already sky high); and eliminating indexing rules that make spending overly rigid.
Moreover, Brazil would have to delink revenues and expenditures – a feature of the country’s budget that renders it difficult to manage properly in times of distress.
And it would gradually have to phase out treasury subsidies to BNDES – the country’s development bank – and increase the use of market-based references for BNDES’s lending rates, thereby helping to restore fiscal health and eliminate distortions in financial intermediation.
For its part, the IMF would give the adjustment program its stamp of approval and make its own resources available, so that Brazil does not have to tap international capital markets for a reasonable period.
This would greatly enhance Brazil’s chances of success.
To be sure, calling in the IMF carries a considerable stigma.
But the reality is that helping countries in situations like Brazil’s is an area where global financial institutions like the IMF – which, it should be noted, is more flexible and open today than it was a decade ago – can play a constructive role.
More to the point, Brazil has run out of good – let alone easy – options.
The only alternatives to an IMF program are an inflationary spiral to dilute the real value of debt and other nominal liabilities, or a downward economic spiral that may cause a need for debt restructuring.
Either outcome would threaten the reforms and social gains that the country has made since the Plano Real stabilization program was launched in 1994.
Given this, and despite the potential political difficulties and the risk of a social backlash, Brazil has little choice but to pursue an IMF-sponsored adjustment program.
It may taste bitter, but only the IMF can provide the medicine Brazil needs.
Brazil’s Way Out
WASHINGTON, DC – Now that impeached Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff is out of office, it is up to the newly empowered administration of President Michel Temer to clean up Brazil’s macroeconomic mess.
Can Temer’s government save Brazil’s crumbling economy?
The situation is certainly dire.
In fact, Brazil has lately been experiencing the most powerful economic contraction in its recent history.
Its per capita GDP will be more than 10% smaller this year than it was in 2013.
Brazil’s primary government expenditures as a proportion of GDP rose from 22% in 1991 to 36% in 2014.
Much of that spending can be explained by a commitment to tackling endemic poverty – an effort that included the world’s largest conditional cash-transfer program, among other things – without reducing the privileges enjoyed by Brazil’s better-off citizens.
For some time, Brazil’s government was able to fund higher expenditure with tax revenues, which also rose as a result of levies on rising consumption and labor-market formalization.
And high global commodity prices helped sustain GDP growth of around 4.5% per year from 2003 to 2010, which also bolstered government revenues.
But, of course, the formal labor force cannot expand forever, and commodity prices always fall eventually.
Unfortunately, Brazil failed to take advantage of the good times to reap productivity growth.
Indeed, only 10% of Brazil’s GDP growth in 2002-2014 can be attributed to total factor productivity gains, while two-thirds was the result of an increase in slightly better-educated workers entering the labor force.
So when Brazil’s tax-revenue boosters finally collapsed, legally mandated increases in public spending drove Brazil rapidly toward a fiscal cliff.
Today, counter-cyclical policies are not an option; there simply isn’t enough fiscal or monetary space.
This leaves Brazil’s government with only one real option for restoring business confidence and reviving economic growth: tackling Brazil’s structural weaknesses.
The good news is that Temer’s government seems to recognize this imperative.
Already, it has proposed to Brazil’s Congress a constitutional amendment forbidding for the next 20 years nominal annual increases in public expenditures, including at the subnational level, that exceed the previous year’s inflation rate.
Provided that inflation stabilizes at some lower level, such a cap would cause public expenditure as a share of GDP to decline as soon as the economy began to grow again.
If increases in tax revenues accompany GDP growth, fiscal imbalances and the accumulation of public debt would automatically be addressed.
At a time when Brazil has little flexibility in its budget, such a rule could turn out to be a fiscal game changer.
Of course, a cap on expenditure growth would not by itself eliminate the need to address existing budget rigidities.
Temer’s government has declared its intention to present to Congress a pension reform plan for precisely this reason.
As for productivity, the government is focused on reducing waste caused by insufficient infrastructure construction in recent decades.
Scaling up infrastructure investment also promises to spur private investment in other sectors.
The key will be to fine-tune the division of responsibilities between the private and public sectors – including independent regulatory agencies – in the various segments of infrastructure services.
Temer’s government also hopes to tap investment in human capital as a source of productivity growth.
As it stands, private companies in Brazil invest less in personnel training than those in other countries with similar per capita incomes, owing largely to disincentives embedded in tax and labor laws – incentives that Temer’s government has proposed to change.
To maximize the impact of these efforts, Temer’s government should also focus on reducing waste in the private sector caused by other problems with the business environment.
The more efficient use of human and material resources would make firms more competitive and boost Brazil’s total-factor productivity, especially if Brazil’s human capital were enhanced.
Add to that efforts to facilitate foreign trade, and Brazil’s “animal spirits” of entrepreneurship could be unleashed, enabling Brazil to escape the current crisis and move toward a more prosperous future.
The views expressed here are the author’s own and do not necessarily reflect those of the World Bank or any of the governments he represents.
Brazilian Lessons for Industrial Policy
SAO PAULO – Few economic ideas are more lauded and reviled than that of industrial policy.
Proponents, such as those who studied the rise of the East Asian economies, swear by it.
Opponents see red at its very mention.
The former point to economic development; the latter maintain that tens, even hundreds, of billions of dollars have been squandered.
One recent theatre of (dis)content is that of renewable fuels.
Worldwide, $184 billion is being allocated in public stimulus investments to promote clean energy, led by the United States ($67 billion) and China ($47 billion).
Of course, there is some progress – wind power meets 20% of the electricity demand in Denmark and about 15% in Spain and Portugal, for example – but the recipe for success remains elusive.
In this vein, Brazil’s experience at promoting renewable fuels, beginning in the 1970’s, is directly relevant to today’s polarized views of industrial policy.
A 10-year industrial policy program called Pro-álcool was crucial in the development of the industry.
Today, Brazil is the world’s most competitive producer of renewable fuels, based primarily on bioethanol.
Ethanol accounts for more than 50% of current light-vehicle fuel demand in the country, and Petrobras – Brazil’s energy giant and one of the largest companies in Latin America – expects this share to increase to more than 80% by 2020.
Our research shows that industrial policy was successful in promoting a competitive bioethanol industry in Brazil.
A massive stimulus package, prompted by the 1970’s rise in oil prices, gave rise to an entirely new industry.
But it would not have worked without the crucial role played by competition.
Brazil was attempting to become energy self-sufficient in a manner similar to modern efforts by other countries.
But, as opponents of industrial policy are right to remind us, freebies never lead to a good outcome.
The aftermath was the key.
As world energy prices collapsed, Brazil fortuitously turned off its subsidy tap, whereupon a brutal Darwinian free-for-all ensued.
This competitive rationalization was the key to the policy’s success.
The details of Pro-álcool involved providing incentives to several parties to participate, without which they would have sat on the sidelines.
The Brazilian state offered low-interest loans and credit guarantees for the construction of distilleries, as well as tax incentives for the purchase of ethanol-powered vehicles.
Ethanol prices were manipulated to make it an attractive alternative to gasoline.
In addition, the government induced Petrobras to distribute the renewable fuel.
Gas stations installed ethanol pumps.
The government signed agreements with the major automobile companies to provide incentives to make vehicles that could run on 100% ethanol.
A visitor to Brazil today will see these flex-fuel cars everywhere.
The experience of filling these vehicles’ tanks is curious.
Just before entering a gas station, Brazilian drivers calculate whether conventional gasoline or ethanol is cheaper (bioethanol has 30% less energy content than traditional gasoline), then choose between a gasoline and an ethanol pump.
At the outset, Brazil’s policies attracted entrepreneurs of all sorts.
Some were talented and believed that the new subsidies and incentives rendered long-term investments in the industry highly attractive.
Entrepreneurs of dubious quality no doubt entered as well, thanks to the generosity of the state.
Fortunately, the government did not attempt the impossible task of trying to separate winners from losers.
By the 1990’s, the major subsidies and policies were abolished, and the industry was deregulated.
Our statistical analysis of the entry and exit patterns of entrepreneurs in the Brazilian ethanol industry shows that the more efficient acquired the less efficient.
Most underperforming ethanol companies went bankrupt or were taken over by entrepreneurs who had successful track records in running efficient operations.
The government did not bail out the underperformers, allowing market forces to restructure the industry during the post-subsidy phase.
Certainly, the beneficiaries of Pro-álcool’s subsidies lobbied the state to continue the protective policies even after their usefulness – inducing the development of the industry – had expired.
Brazil’s Institutional Limbo
SÃO PAULO – International investors are watching closely as Brazilians prepare to vote in the second round of the presidential election on October 26.
Their vote will not only decide who will be the country’s next president; it may also determine the future of the Central Bank of Brazil (BCB), and therefore the country’s macroeconomic trajectory.
While the incumbent president, Dilma Rousseff, supports the BCB’s existing institutional framework, her opponents contend that monetary policy is plagued by political interference, which would best be addressed by giving the BCB greater autonomy.
But no candidate has yet advanced a proposal for reform that would reduce the scope for political interference while ensuring greater accountability and promoting financial stability.
If Brazil is to sustain strong and stable economic growth, the central bank will need an overhaul.
Monetary policy has long played an important role in Brazilian politics.
During the democratization process of the 1980s and 1990s, successive governments tried to tame hyperinflation, which reached 2,477% in 1993.
The introduction of the “Real plan,” launched in 1994, managed to suppress annual price growth to an “acceptable” 22% by the following year.
Riding on the plan’s success, its architect, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former economy minister, was twice elected President (in 1994 and 1998), underscoring voter concern about price stability.
Today, as central bankers in developed countries fret about the threat of deflation, Brazilian politicians are once again forced to respond to widespread fears about slowing growth and a return to high inflation.
Unfortunately, the presidential candidates’ plans for the BCB fall short of what is required.
Historically, Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (PT) has resisted giving the bank formal autonomy, and she has played a distinctly populist card during the campaign, arguing that BCB autonomy would hand too much control to private bankers.
Marina Silva, the Socialist Party’s candidate, demanded formal bank independence – an argument subsequently adopted by the Social Democratic Party (PSDB) candidate, Aécio Neves, who now faces Rousseff in the election run-off.
But Neves wants de facto, rather than formal, operational autonomy for the BCB.
Like Cardoso, Neves is committed to inflation targeting, creating a primary surplus, and maintaining a floating exchange rate.
While such policies may promote price stability, his proposal neglects the two most important issues for the BCB: legal autonomy and institutional reforms that ensure accountability to citizens.
A legal commitment to BCB autonomy would contribute to currency confidence in a way that informal autonomy cannot.
Legal structures have a direct impact on inflation expectations, because law can provide institutional protection to public goods, such as price and financial stability.
Properly designed and executed, institutional reform could also increase BCB accountability to society at large while guarding against undue political influence and lobbying by the big banks.
The BCB is ripe for reform.
Price stability should be accompanied by other targets, especially financial stability, but also, possibly, employment.
Rousseff thwarted Congress’s attempts to introduce such targets in 2011, and they would, of course, need to be carefully designed to avoid past mistakes.
But, done right, an expanded range of criteria by which to assess BCB policies, by enhancing accountability, would strengthen the legitimacy of granting policymakers legal autonomy.
There is also scope for institutional reform to promote greater financial stability.
The 2008 financial crisis and its aftermath highlighted the consequences of the BCB’s outdated institutional design.
The Bank had insufficient legal backing for action needed to stabilize the financial system.
This left then-President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, to resort to a series of dramatic measures, including the use of the deposit-insurance fund and state-owned banks to bail out failed financial institutions.
Lula claimed that this ad hoc approach gave Brazil a degree of flexibility lacking in other countries; but it was not cost-free, as he claimed, and the results did not endure.
Rapid expansion of private debt raises other, larger concerns.
Other central banks have recognized the need for new instruments to ensure financial stability; so must the BCB.
Institutional clarity on the BCB’s mandate for financial stability and the instruments at its disposal could help Brazil avoid future crises – or at least weather them more effectively.
Brazil’s presidential election appears to offer two unsatisfying choices: a continuation of the status quo, with the BCB subject to political influence, under Rousseff; or an informally autonomous BCB with an outdated institutional apparatus, under Neves.
Only Silva’s initial proposal included calls for institutional reform of monetary policy and financial regulation; and it is far from certain that her endorsement of Neves in the run-off will sway his view should he win.
Brazil’s Economic Revolution
BRASILIA – Large emerging economies were hit hard in the past year – particularly in the first half – by the crisis in developed countries, with Europe in recession and the United States staging only a meager recovery.
But 2012 will also be remembered as the year when structural changes in the Brazilian economy were consolidated.
The global economic crisis that began in 2008 is similar to the Great Depression of the 1930’s not only in terms of its depth and duration, but also in view of advanced countries’ policy errors and hesitation.
It is worrying that European leaders find it so difficult to agree on fiscal adjustment policies that make room for the stimulus measures needed to revive economic growth.
Until now, European countries with fiscal leeway have insisted on spending and investment cuts that, together with tax increases, have reduced economic activity and increased unemployment, ultimately compromising tax collection – and thus fiscal consolidation.
In the US, despite a slight improvement, uncertainty lingers.
In addition to the risk posed by the “fiscal cliff” in 2013, the main problem remains: the lack of effective counter-cyclical fiscal policies – for example, a public-investment program – to boost economic activity.
Instead, the US has placed all of its chips on monetary easing, unleashing what I have called a currency war, in which global investors, chasing higher yields, flood into emerging countries, driving up their exchange rates.
The poor international environment hit Brazil’s economy mainly via foreign trade, aggressive competition in the Brazilian market, and echoes of the negative expectations prevailing in advanced countries.
To combat the downturn, Brazil’s government implemented measures that are now yielding clear dividends.
The main change was a large reduction in interest rates, in line with an inflation-targeting framework, which has led to a more competitive exchange-rate policy.
This was combined with a counter-cyclical fiscal policy has that kept deficits and public debt under control.
More important, the government’s policies will have a permanent – indeed, revolutionary – impact on Brazil’s economy.
This will become more obvious throughout 2013.
For a long time, Brazil’s interest rates were among the highest in the world.
Besides damaging public accounts and imposing a severe fiscal sacrifice on the country, the abnormally high level of the Selic rate (the Brazilian overnight interbank rate) inhibited the “animal spirits” of entrepreneurship, distorted resource allocation, and impeded the development of the real-estate and capital markets, while causing currency appreciation.
Over time, the persistence of these conditions undermined the competitiveness of domestic industry, impeding sales of Brazilian products not only internationally, but also in the robust and growing internal market.
The government’s macroeconomic stabilization efforts, coupled with policies that increased the country’s growth potential, allowed the interest rate to fall over the last decade.
Nevertheless, until 2011, the Selic remained at levels that were incompatible with the economy’s clear strengths and low risks.
Reducing borrowing costs without unleashing inflation was one of the main challenges faced by President Dilma Rousseff when she took office at the beginning of that year.
The resurgence of crisis conditions, particularly in the eurozone, had halted the resumption of global growth – and provided an added incentive to accelerate domestic reforms.
The process of reducing interest rates – anchored on a solid tax policy and enabled by the removal of institutional obstacles (such as the rule of remuneration of savings accounts) – was extended to the second half of 2012, leading to a real annual rate under 2%.
This resulted in a significant reduction in the interest-rate differential with other countries, which, together with a more active intervention policy in the spot and future markets, brought the exchange rate to a much more competitive level, despite the global currency war.
While these two fundamental changes are here to stay, Brazil’s government has gone even further.
We have pressed ahead on reducing the tax burden by decreasing various rates, particularly on payroll taxes, thereby reducing hiring costs without harming workers’ purchasing power – one reason why Brazil is now one of the world’s few major economies with low unemployment.
The fiscal bureaucracy, too, is being modernized, with the deployment of electronic tax notifications and other administrative reforms boosting revenue collection while diminishing the size of the informal economy.
To accelerate economic growth, the priority has been to stimulate investment and recovery in manufacturing, the sector that was hardest hit by the international crisis.
We have launched a program worth more than $60 billion for highway and railway concessions, to be followed by a similar program for ports and airports.
As a result of these measures, the Brazilian economy is returning to an annual growth rate of around 4%, which should be sustained in 2013.
More important, the structural changes that we have implemented still have much to contribute to future growth.
With low interest rates, price stability, a more competitive exchange rate, a lower tax burden, plentiful resources for investment, and the reduction of electricity tariffs, Brazil is strengthening its potential for more rapid expansion.
Here, it is also important to note our efforts to end the fiscal war among Brazil’s states.
With the ongoing reform of the interstate ICMS (a tax levied on the circulation of goods and services), investors will have greater legal clarity and security.
We will also seek to finalize the unification of the PIS/Cofins taxes, Brazil’s overly complicated – and much-criticized – federal taxes levied on businesses’ invoicing.
With these initiatives, Brazil’s government has sought to ensure that annual growth remains above 4% for many years, regardless of the challenges – which will certainly persist in 2013 – posed by the international environment.
Only through such sustained growth can per capita income approach the levels prevailing in the developed world.
What we hope for most is that rich countries – and not only the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) – also contribute to global recovery.
If we act together and pull in the same direction, we all will win.
Brazil’s Political Impasse
SANTIAGO – It was the kind of politics Brazilians thought they had left behind: One day the sitting president appoints a popular former president to her cabinet in order to save him from prosecution, and pundits are quick to conclude that he is in charge.
The next day, a federal judge blocks his appointment, claims and counterclaims are filed before the courts, millions take to the streets demanding the president’s impeachment, and no one is quite certain who is in charge.
Brazil is facing its biggest political crisis since the restoration of democracy in 1985.
President Dilma Rousseff has done much to earn her single-digit approval ratings.
Until recently, she seemed likely to muddle through to the end of her four-year term in 2018, if only because opposition parties were reluctant to clean up the economic mess her government created.
Today, no one is sure.
By trying to save her predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Rousseff made it harder to save her own presidency.
Now that the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB), once the largest government party, has quit the ruling coalition, the two-thirds vote in Congress needed to impeach Rousseff is within reach.
The good news is that certain institutions of Brazilian democracy are working well.
After all, it is not in every democracy that prosecutors and judges have the autonomy needed to go after billionaire businessmen or a once-popular former president.
The bad news is that the political leadership needed to pull Brazil out of its crisis is nowhere in sight.
Latin Americans everywhere are telling pollsters they are sick and tired of establishment politicians.
Brazil’s political legitimacy problem is particularly acute.
Not only are government leaders under fire; when opposition leaders joined the street protests two weeks ago, they were booed.
The dismal state of Brazil’s economy makes strong political leadership especially urgent.
The economic contraction of nearly 4% in 2015, together with a similar dip anticipated for this year, implies the deepest recession in a century.
Part of the problem is imported: The collapse in commodity prices and the tightening of international financial conditions hit Brazil hard.
Yet other commodity exporters in South America are in much better shape.
The contrast suggests that a good share of Brazil trouble is homemade.
The world applauded when Brazil stepped on the fiscal accelerator to offset the domestic effects of the 2008 financial crisis.
Being able to implement a counter-cyclical fiscal policy was rightly viewed as a sign of economic maturity.
But the Rousseff administration forgot to take its foot off the accelerator once the crisis was over.
Last year, the total fiscal deficit exceeded 10% of GDP.
Because Brazil has some of the highest nominal and real interest rates in the world (interest payments on the public debt exceed 7% of GDP), snowballing debt dynamics are particularly tricky.
Brazil may be the only country in the world where higher short-term interest rates can increase inflation, because they add to the fiscal deficit and to debt accumulation, in turn igniting fears of future monetization.
Fortunately, the debt is mostly denominated in domestic currency, making a run on the public debt (which would leave the government unable to fund itself) unlikely.
But this should not obscure the fact that Brazil’s fiscal situation is unsustainable.
As the American economist Herbert Stein famously put it, “If something cannot go on forever, it will stop.”
A corollary to Stein’s law is that the longer it goes on, the more likely it will end badly.
That could well be the case of Brazil.
Financial markets have celebrated each and every one of Rousseff’s travails.
The Brazilian real, which took a beating last year and during January 2016, has appreciated just as the government’s standing depreciates.
But investors betting on a quick reversal of fortune for Brazil are likely to be disappointed.
Even if Rousseff is impeached, it is far from clear that her successor would have the political will and support to make the necessary economic changes.
Investors like to fantasize of economic reforms carried out by a post-Rousseff government headed by current Vice President Michel Temer and supported by Temer’s PMDB and parts of the opposition Brazilian Social Democracy Party of former president Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
Such a government would be an improvement over the current one, but it might not have the will – or the votes in Congress – to pursue economic reforms.
And according to a recent poll, only 16% of Brazilians would support it.
Moreover, the size of the challenge is daunting.
Some trimming here and there will not be enough to solve Brazil’s structural fiscal difficulties.
A misconceived pension system is at the heart of the problem: Brazil spends more than 13% of GDP on pensions, more than any large industrialized nation except Italy, where the population is much older than in Brazil.
More than 70% of fiscal expenditure is linked to entitlements, and there is little or no room to increase taxes (total revenue as a share of GDP is already the highest in Latin America).
Fixing Brazil’s fiscal woes will require a team of politicians with as much talent, skill, and ambition as Brazil’s national football teams used to have.
Fixing fiscal policy is necessary not just to reassure investors.
Without a solution, there will be no sustained economic growth and job creation.
Dissaving by the government contributes to a dismally low national savings rate.
Every time investment picks up, the current-account deficit grows too large for comfort.
Once spooked foreigners begin to refuse to finance it, investment is forced down, impeding growth.
And spending so much on interest payments will leave Brazil’s government with few resources for much-needed infrastructure investments.
At a conference I attended in São Paulo last year, an academic expert compared the current scandals in Brazil with Italy’s mani pulite (“clean hands”) investigations in the 1990s.
In Italy, citizens wanted to be rid of a tainted political elite, but “got Berlusconi, who was worse than any of them!”
The message was clear: Brazil could face a similar fate.
Populism often thrives when the legitimacy of political institutions declines.
But Brazilians deserve better than a Berlusconi (or a Trump).
Brazil and Italy have met twice in World Cup finals (1970 and 1994) and both times Brazil outperformed Italy.
May the same happen again, this time off the football pitch.
Melepas Ketergantungan Bahan Bakar Fosil
BERN – Sekarang adalah waktu paling tepat untuk melepas ketergantungan dari bahan bakar fosil.
Kenaikan suhu global yang menciptakan rekor tersendiri, merosotnya harga bahan bakar fosil, investasi bersejarah pada energi terbarukan, dan tekanan global untuk menjunjung tinggi komitmen terhadap iklim, semuanya merupakan alasan yang mendorong terciptanya kondisi ideal menuju peralihan yang akan mengubah dunia.
Pergeseran ini semakin mendesak.
Perjanjian PBB tentang perubahan iklim yang disepakati di Paris bulan Desember lalu menegaskan suhu 2°C di atas tingkat pra-industri sebagai ambang batas pemanasan global, sehingga kenaikan yang melebihi angka itu akan menimbulkan malapetaka.
Namun perjanjian tersebut juga mencakup komitmen untuk “mengutamakan upaya” untuk menekan suhu hingga 1.5°C. Berdasarkan analisa data terkini yang diterbitkan oleh NASA, upaya menjaga ambang batas di bawah 1.5°C. harus diperlakukan sebagai kewajiban.
Data terbaru membuktikan bahwa tahun 2015 merupakan tahun terpanas dalam sejarah dan kenaikan suhu global yang melampaui rekor ini masih berlanjut di dua bulan pertama di awal 2016.
Menurut NASA, suhu global pada bulan Februari tercatat 1.35°C lebih tinggi dibandingkan rata-rata, berdasarkan baseline tahun 1951-1980.
Untungnya, keunggulan bahan bakar fosil nampaknya sudah melemah.
Faktanya, menurut International Energy Agency (IEA), terjadi pemisahan (decoupling) antara emisi gas rumah kaca dan pertumbuhan ekonomi secara global, dimana pelepasan karbon dioksida secara global yang berkaitan dengan energi (penyumbang terbesar emisi gas rumah kaca yang dihasilkan manusia) berada di tingkat yang sama selama dua tahun berturut-turut.
Hal ini menunjukkan bahwa bahan bakar fosil sudah tidak lagi menjadi jantung yang memicu perekonomian global.
Nampaknya penurunan harga minyak secara cepat – dua pertiga selama 18 bulan terakhir – tidak menyebabkan kenaikan konsumsi, seperti ketakutan banyak orang.
Akibatnya justru pukulan keras bagi profit yang dimiliki perusahaan-perusahaan besar seperti Shell, BP, dan Statoil.
Nasib batubara juga tidak jauh lebih baik.
Setelah Cina mengumumkan moratorium pada pembangkit listrik tenaga batubara baru di akhir tahun lalu, Peabody, perusahaan batubara terbesar di dunia, baru-baru ini mengajukan permohonan pailit di Amerika Serikat setelah gagal membayar utang, salah satunya alasannya ialah rendahnya permintaan akan batubara.
Sementara itu, sumber-sumber energi terbarukan menerima investasi besar-besaran – bernilai hingga $329.3 miliar pada tahun lalu, berdasarkan studi yang dilakukan Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
Hasilnya, terciptanya masa depan yang lebih cerah, bersih, dan berkelanjutan dengan penggunaan energi terbarukan mulai dipertimbangkan sebagai pilihan yang nyata.
Namun jalannya masih panjang.
Banyak pemerintah masih bergantung pada bahan bakar fosil yang bersifat merusak, belum lagi dengan harganya yang fluktuatif dan berdampak negatif pada lingkungan hidup, meskipun ketergantungan ini melemahkan perekonomian negaranya.
Pihak-pihak yang berkomitmen untuk melawan perubahan iklim – mulai dari organisasi internasional hingga masyarakat lokal dan individu – harus segera membangun momentum yang tercipta sejak tahun lalu dengan terus memberikan tekanan pada pemerintah dan perusahaan untuk mengutamakan kebijakan dan investasi yang diperlukan agar bisa hidup tanpa bahan bakar fosil.
Pemanasan bumi menimbulkan risiko bagi kita semua, tapi percepatan dan penguatan aksi akan menguntungkan banyak orang.
Pada akhirnya, setiap orang harus menuntut pemenuhan janji-janji para pemimpin di negaranya terhadap warganya dan ilmu pengetahuan.
Gerakan global seperti Break Free menjadi teladan dalam upaya ini.
Melalui dukungan terhadap kampanye dan aktivitas massal yang bertujuan menghentikan proyek-proyek bahan bakar fosil paling berbahaya di dunia – seperti pembangkit listrik tenaga batubara di Turki dan Filipina, tambang di Jerman dan Australia, teknik fracking di Brasil, dan sumur minyak di Nigeria – Break Free ingin menghentikan kekuasaan dan polusi yang diciptakan industri bahan bakar fosil, dan mendorong terbentuknya masa depan yang berkelanjutan.
Sadar akan skala dan urgensi tantangan yang dihadapi, Break Free siap menguatkan perlawanan damai terhadap proyek-proyek bahan bakar fosil kini dan nanti.
Kuncinya adalah ketahanan dan keberanian masyarakat dalam menuntut pembatasan bahan bakar fosil dan mendorong terciptanya dunia yang lebih sehat dimana semua orang memiliki akses pada energi terbarukan.
Kita hampir mewujudkan pergeseran historis dalam sistem energi dunia.
Guna mempercepat prosesnya, kita harus melawan pihak-pihak yang mengambil keuntungan dari perubahan iklim dan melindungi kepentingan warga.
Mobilisasi yang dilakukan bulan depan untuk menghentikan proyek-proyek bahan bakar fosil menjadi bagian penting dalam proses ini.
Kita tidak mampu menanggung akibat dari ketidakpedulian kita.
Breaking the Climate Deadlock
LONDON – On July 9, the leaders of the world’s largest economies will meet in L’Aquila, Italy, at the Major Economies Forum (MEF) to discuss progress towards a new global climate agreement.
In six months, a deal is supposed to be struck in Copenhagen, so the MEF meeting comes at a vital moment.
When many of the same leaders met in April to address the economic crisis, they rightly pledged to do “whatever is necessary.” The same spirit needs to animate the L’Aquila meeting.
There is enormous good will to do so.
The new US administration is supporting strong American action.
China is setting ambitious targets for reducing energy intensity and making massive investments in renewable energy.
India has put forward its own action plan.
Europe has set a goal of cutting emissions by 30% below 1990 levels by 2020 if there is an ambitious global agreement.
Japan has published its proposals for major carbon reductions.
Across the world, commitments are forthcoming.
But practical challenges remain.
What is being asked is that global emissions be less than half their 1990 levels by 2050, having peaked before 2020.
Since emissions from the developing countries are on the whole lower than those of the developed world – and will need to continue to rise in the short-term as they maintain economic growth and address poverty – it has been proposed that developed countries cut emissions by at least 80% relative to 1990 by 2050, with major steps towards this goal over the next decade.
Developing countries will also need to play their part, significantly slowing and peaking emissions growth in the coming decades.
For the US, such commitments would mean cutting emissions to around one-tenth of today’s per capita level, while for China it would mean creating a new low-carbon model of economic development.
For all countries, this is a major challenge – a revolution that implies a huge shift in policy.
The good news is that if we focus on clear, practical, and achievable goals, major reductions can be made in order to ensure that, whatever the precise interim target, the world will fashion a radical new approach within a manageable timeframe.
Implementing just seven proven policies – renewable energy standards (e.g., feed-in tariffs or renewable portfolio standards); industry efficiency measures; building codes; vehicle efficiency standards; fuel carbon content standards; appliance standards, and policies for reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) – can deliver these reductions.
All seven policies have already been successfully implemented in countries around the world, but they need scaling up.
While cap-and-trade systems or other means of pricing carbon emissions can help provide incentives for businesses to invest in low-carbon solutions, in the short term at least, these seven policy measures – and direct action and investment by governments – are needed to achieve the targets.
In the longer term, we also need technologies such as carbon capture and storage (CCS), expanded nuclear power, and new generations of solar energy, together with the development of technologies whose potential or even existence is still unknown.
The important thing for Copenhagen is that decisions are taken now for investments that will yield benefits later.
For example, the overwhelming majority of new power stations in China and India – necessary to drive the industrialization that will lift hundreds of millions out of poverty – will be coal-fired.
That is just a fact.
So developing CCS or an alternative that allows coal to become clean energy is essential for meeting the 2050 goal.
But we need to invest now, seriously and through global collaboration, so that by 2020 we are in a position to scale up CCS or be ready to deploy other alternatives.
Renaissance of nuclear power will require a big expansion of qualified scientists and engineers.
Electric vehicles will need large adjustments to infrastructure.
Smart grid systems can enable big savings in emissions, but require a plan for putting them into effect.
These measures will take time, but require investment now.
Meanwhile, in the short term, low energy lighting and efficient industrial motors may sound obvious, but we are nowhere near using them as extensively as we could.
So we know what we need to do, and we have tools available to achieve our goals.
MEF leaders can therefore have confidence in adopting the interim and long-term targets recommended by the scientific community: keeping warming to below two degrees Celsius; peaking emissions within the next decade; and at least halving global emissions by 2050 versus 1990.
Developed countries will be able to commit to reducing their emissions by 80% versus 1990 by mid-century, as many have already done, and provide the necessary financial and technology support for developing countries’ adaptation and mitigation efforts.
With that support, developing countries in turn will need to design and implement “Low-Carbon Growth Plans” that significantly slow and eventually peak their emissions growth.
By making these commitments, the MEF leaders, whose countries account for more than three-quarters of global emissions, would lay a firm foundation for success in Copenhagen.
Between L’Aquila and Copenhagen, there will undoubtedly be difficult discussions over interim targets for developed countries.
While such targets are important, what matters most is agreement on the measures that ultimately will set the world on a new path to a low carbon future.
For years, the emphasis has rightly been on persuading people that there must be sufficient “will” to tackle climate change.
But leaders, struggling to cope with this challenge even amidst economic crisis, need to know that there is also “a way.”
Only by combining the two will we succeed.
Fortunately, such a way – immensely challenging but nonetheless feasible – exists.
Breaking the Neoclassical Monopoly in Economics
For 25 years, the so-called “Washington Consensus” – comprising measures aimed at expanding the role of markets and constraining the role of the state – has dominated economic development policy.
As John Williamson, who coined the term, put it in 2002, these measures “are motherhood and apple pie, which is why they commanded a consensus.”
Not anymore.
Dani Rodrik, a renowned Harvard University economist, is the latest to challenge the intellectual foundations of the Washington Consensus in a powerful new book titled One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic Growth .
Rodrik’s thesis is that though there is only one economics, there are many recipes for development success.
Rodrik has rendered a major service by stating so openly the claim of “one economics.”
A critic who made the same claim that economics allows only one theoretical approach would be dismissed as paranoid, whereas Rodrik’s standing creates an opportunity for a debate that would not otherwise be possible.
The “many recipes” thesis is that countries develop successfully by following eclectic policies tailored to specific local conditions rather than by following generic best-practice formulas designed by economic theorists.
This challenges the Washington Consensus, with its one-size-fits-all formula of privatization, deregulated labor markets, financial liberalization, international economic integration, and macroeconomic stability based on low inflation.
But, while the many recipes thesis has strong appeal and empirical support, and suggests a spirit of theoretical pluralism, the claim of “one economics” is misguided, for it implies that mainstream neoclassical economics is the only true economics.
Part of the difficulty of exposing this narrowness is that there is a family split among neo-classical economists between those who believe that real-world market economies approximate perfect competition and those who don’t.
Believers are identified with the “Chicago School,” whose leading exponents include Milton Friedman and George Stigler.
Non-believers are identified with the “MIT School” associated with Paul Samuelson. Rodrik is of the MIT School, as are such household names as Paul Krugman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Larry Summers.
This split obscures the underlying uniformity of thought.
The Chicago School claims that real-world market economies produce roughly efficient (so-called “Pareto optimal”) outcomes on which public policy cannot improve.
Thus, any state intervention in the economy must make someone worse off.
The MIT School, by contrast, argues that real-world economies are afflicted by pervasive market failures, including imperfect competition and monopoly, externalities associated with problems like pollution, and an inability to supply public goods such as street lighting or national defense.
Consequently, policy interventions that address market failures – as well as widespread information imperfections and the non-existence of many needed markets – can make everyone better off.
None of this is about fairness, which is a separate issue.
Indeed, neither the Chicago School nor the MIT School say that market outcomes are fair, because actual market outcomes depend on the initial distribution of resources.
If that distribution was unfair, current and future outcomes will be unfair, too.
Chicago economists seem to believe that real-world outcomes are acceptably unfair and, more importantly, that attempts to remedy unfairness are too costly, because tampering with markets causes economic inefficiency.
They believe that government intervention tends to generate its own costly failures because of bureaucratic incompetence and rent-seeking, whereby private interests try to steer policy to their own advantage.
MIT economists tend to espouse the opposite: fairness is important, the real world is unacceptably unfair, and government failure can be prevented by good institutional design, including democracy.
These differences reflect the intellectual richness of neo-classical economics, but they provide no justification for the claim that there is one economics.
On the contrary, heterodox economists like Thorsten Veblen and Joseph Schumpeter long ago raised many of today’s cutting-edge issues in neoclassical economics, including the role of social norms and the relationship between technological innovation and business cycles.
Heterodox economics includes core theoretical concepts that are fundamentally incompatible with neoclassical economics in either of its two contemporary forms.
These concepts result in significantly different explanations of the real world, including income distribution and the determinants of economic activity and growth.