The resounding success of the Africa-China summit, which was attended by more African leaders than purely African gatherings; the diplomatic rapprochement between India and Japan; and the democratic alliance in the making between India, Japan, and Australia can only be interpreted as signs of China’s newly regained position.
Why would they jeopardize such real and symbolic gains with rash and untested moves?
There is no Bismarck at the helm of Chinese diplomacy, but there is no impetuous Kaiser either: just relatively prudent and competent technocrats.
In reality, what may threaten the stability of the region, and above all that of China, is not an excess of Chinese ambitions or a failure to democratize, but the Chinese regime’s inability to establish the rule of law.
In 1978, China’s newly installed leader, Deng Xiaoping, viewed Singapore as living proof of the superiority of capitalism over communism.
He remembered the impoverished backwater that Singapore was in the 1920’s, and now he saw the gleaming city that free enterprise – together with Lee Kwan Yew’s quasi-authoritarian leadership – had wrought.
It was after visiting Singapore that Deng introduced “special economic zones” in southern China.
But the rule of law, even Singapore-style, is far harder to implement than capitalism, and its absence represents the major obstacle to the establishment of an Asian community based on the EU model.
Twenty years ago, one of the main obstacles to creating an Asian Union was Japan – Asia’s most advanced and successful country, but one that did not feel Asian.
Moreover, the rest of Asia resented the Japanese for reveling in this difference.
That resentment remains, sustained in part by historical grievances, but the Japanese have now come to perceive themselves as Asians, helped by their realization that the economic miracle that they initiated in the region has gone well beyond them.
In Europe, transcending nationalism required not only two devastating world wars in the first half of the twentieth century, but also the prevalence of democratic regimes.
The rule of law is the equivalent for Asia today of what democracy was for Europe yesterday.
Without its gradual imposition, an Asian Union could at best remain only a pale and hollow copy of its European model.
Europe’s Divided Visionaries
BERKELEY – Europe’s leaders, unlike former US President George H. W. Bush, have never had trouble with the “vision thing.”
They have always known what they want their continent to be.
But having a vision is not the same as implementing it.
And, when it comes to putting their ideas into practice, the European Union’s leaders have fallen short repeatedly.
This tension between Europeans’ goals and their ability to achieve them is playing out again in the wake of the recent EU summit.
Europe’s leaders now agree on a vision of what the EU should become: an economic and monetary union complemented by a banking union, a fiscal union, and a political union.
The trouble starts as soon as the discussion moves on to how –&nbsp;and especially when – the last three should be established.
Banking union, Europe’s leaders agreed, means creating a single supervisory authority.
It means establishing a common deposit-insurance scheme and a mechanism for closing down insolvent financial institutions.
It means giving the EU’s rescue facilities the power to inject funds directly into undercapitalized banks.
Likewise, fiscal union means giving the European Commission (or, alternatively, a European Treasury) the authority to veto national budgets.
It means that some portion of members’ debts will be mutualized: individual governments’ debts would become Eurobonds, and thus a joint obligation of all members.
The Commission (or Treasury) would then decide how many additional Eurobonds to issue and on whose behalf.
Finally, political union means transferring the prerogatives of national legislatures to the European Parliament, which would then decide how to structure Europe’s fiscal, banking, and monetary union.
Those responsible for the EU’s day-to-day operations, including the Board of the European Central Bank, would be accountable to the Parliament, which could dismiss them for failing to carry out their mandates.
Vision aplenty.
The problem is that there are two diametrically opposed approaches to implementing it.
One strategy assumes that Europe desperately needs the policies of this deeper union now. It cannot wait to inject capital into the banks.
It must take immediate steps toward debt mutualization. It needs either the ECB or an expanded European Stability Mechanism to purchase distressed governments’ bonds today.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Over time, according to this view, Europe could build the institutions needed to complement these policies.
It could create a single bank supervisor, enhance the European Commission’s powers, or create a European Treasury.
Likewise, it could strengthen the European Parliament.
But building institutions takes time, which is in dangerously short supply, given the risk of bank runs, sovereign-debt crises, and the collapse of the single currency.
That is why the new policies must come first.
The other view is that to proceed with the new policies before the new institutions are in place would be reckless.
Mutualizing debts before European institutions have a veto over fiscal policies would only encourage more reckless behavior by national governments.
Proceeding with capital injections before the single supervisor is in place would only encourage more risk taking.
And allowing the ECB to supervise the banks before the European Parliament acquires the power to hold it accountable would only deepen the EU’s democratic deficit and provoke a backlash.
Europe has been here before – in the 1990’s, when the decision was taken to establish the euro.
At that time, there were two schools of thought.
One camp argued that it would be reckless to create a monetary union before economic policies had converged and institutional reforms were complete.
The other school, by contrast, worried that the existing monetary system was rigid, brittle, and prone to crisis.
Europe could not wait to complete the institution-building process.
It was better to create the euro sooner rather than later, with the relevant reforms and institutions to follow.
At the slight risk of overgeneralization, one can say that the first camp was made up mainly of northern Europeans, while the second was dominated by the south.
The 1992 exchange-rate crisis then tipped the balance.
Once Europe’s exchange-rate system blew up, the southerners’ argument that Europe could not afford to postpone creating the euro carried the day.
The consequences have not been happy.
Monetary union without banking, fiscal, and political union has been a disaster.
But not proceeding would also have been a disaster.
The 1992 crisis proved that the existing system was unstable.
Not moving forward to the euro would have set up Europe for even more disruptive crises.
That is why European leaders took the ambitious steps that they did.
Not proceeding now with bank recapitalization and government bond purchases would similarly lead to disaster.
Europe thus finds itself in a familiar bind.
The only way out is to accelerate the institution-building process significantly.
Doing so will not be easy.
But disaster does not wait.
Europe’s Dominos of Doom
BRUSSELS – The fear of contagion has spread over Europe. Many see Greece as the potential first domino to fall in a scenario that runs as follows: the Greek austerity measures do not suffice, the debt crisis deepens, and the risk of a sovereign default spreads to other European economies.
As the Greek domino falls, countries like Portugal, Spain, or Italy start tumbling, and a small economy’s crisis turns into a major European calamity.
This view suggests that other countries might be forced to rush and help their European “brothers in arms” – whether or not Berlin or other capitals want to.
Eventually, the sovereign debt crisis might hit the real economy, with Europe ending up in a vicious circle of even higher deficits, lower growth rates, exploding unemployment, and decreasing competitiveness.
Obviously, this is the scenario that everyone – with the possible exception of some speculators – wants to avoid.
And, after the recent EU summit agreed on an “ultima ratio” rescue plan for eurozone countries facing the danger of default, chances are high that it will not materialize.
But the prevailing domino theory is incomplete. The crisis could have social and the political spillover effects that go well beyond the economic realm.
For the sake of illustration, let us stick to the Greek case.
The economic situation in Greece is deteriorating quickly.
Some analysts have even predicted a “slow death” of the Greek economy.
Citizens themselves sense that the situation will most likely get (much) worse before it improves.
Most Greeks are aware that the country needs to be radically transformed.
But reforms will be painful, and it might take years before the country shows first signs of recovery.
In the meantime, Greek society will suffer from budgetary austerity, cuts in social expenditure, and an overall economic downturn.
Despite this bleak picture, Prime Minister George Papandreou’s Socialist government still enjoys support. At this stage, most Greeks do not believe that any other political party could manage the crisis more effectively.
But at the same time frustration is mounting in Greece.
In the absence of hope, the country seems to be falling into a collective depression.
Will this eventually lead to collective social unrest?
The country has already witnessed outbreaks of violence in its recent history.
Although Greece is still far from a radical outburst, one cannot exclude the possibility of fierce reactions on the streets of Athens or other major cities.
It can be argued that such a contingency is something that Greece – or any other country in a similar situation – should cope with on its own.
But this line of thinking is short-sighted.
A major outbreak of social unrest in Greece or elsewhere could affect the wider EU public in various and unforeseeable ways.
Some “friends of Greece” will decide to show active, though peaceful, solidarity with their European compatriots.
Others might follow the Greek example and go into the streets, not out of solidarity but out of frustration with conditions in their home country.
In the worst case, images of violent protests in one EU country might incite others to violence.
Some will hold the EU and the measures “imposed by Brussels” responsible for the outbreaks of social unrest.
In such a situation, the crisis will have triggered a social rather than an economic domino effect, which is no less worrisome.
The crisis and the reactions to it already have led to misunderstandings and bad feelings throughout the EU, doing more harm than expected.
Old stereotypes and inappropriate historical memories have reappeared. The confrontation between Greece and Germany has been particularly nasty.
Mutual accusations reached a level unworthy of the common history and the close personal, cultural and economic ties between both countries.
Indeed, it can be argued that the political dominos are already falling.
The crisis, and reactions to it, widened old cracks and opened new ones.
Distrust between EU countries seems widespread. All sides blame others for a lack of solidarity – openly or behind closed doors.
Those who suffer most from the crisis claim that the recent rescue plan should have come much earlier, and that economic imbalances in the EU have contributed to the debt crisis in some member states.
Others cannot understand why they should “bail out” countries whose irresponsible misconduct put not only themselves, but also the common currency, under strain.
Decision-makers and commentators need to take into account not only the economic but also the social and political consequences of certain policy responses or the transnational costs of not taking swift and decisive decisions.
If Europeans disregard Kant’s categorical imperative – i.e., don’t do to others what you don’t want others to do to you – they should not be astonished if the European Union comes to a standstill or even implodes.
It is up to European citizens and elites to avoid the worst.
Otherwise, future historians will ask why Europeans at the beginning of the twenty-first century chose division and international marginalization rather than unity and global relevance.
Europe’s Doubting Generation
PARIS – The contrast between the Schuman Declaration of May 9, 1950, which launched the European unification project through the Coal and Steel Community, and the fearful bid to save Greece and rescue the euro of May 9, 2010, could not be more stark.
Of course, in 1950 the Cold War was raging and recovery from World War II concentrated European minds.
It was urgent to be imaginative – and the right people were in the right positions.
Jean Monnet, who inspired the project, was pragmatic and daring.
Robert Schuman, who presented the idea of unification to Europe’s leaders, was animated by a deep Christian faith that helped create miracles.
Different times, different people, different spirit.
The seat of the College of Europe in Natolin, near Warsaw, is a near perfect barometer to test the morale of Europe.
If the young European elites being trained there to occupy positions within the European Union’s institutions no longer believe in the EU’s future, something is really wrong.
For if they don’t believe in Europe, who will?
On the Natolin campus, post-graduate students, representing more than thirty nationalities, live in what they themselves often describe as a “golden cage.”
They interact (or should) to become what many may already have been prior to their arrival: “Europeans.”
At least, this is the way things were and should be.
But, even in this uniquely protected environment, Europe is no longer the cause that it once was.
Students tend to group themselves by nationalities more than they did in the past, as if they want familiar reassurances against the uncertainties of the present and the future.
When I started teaching International Relations in Natolin in 2002, all the college’s students were infused with the hopes stemming from the EU’s enlargement to Eastern Europe.
They prepared for inclusion of eight former Communist countries (as well Cyprus and Malta) with almost quasi-religious fervor.
Students from “Old Europe” were energized by the idealism and confidence emanating from their Polish, Czech, Estonian, and other compatriots.
They all seemed full of optimism about their political and economic future.
The will to transcend the murderous trauma in the Balkans was also present.
Watching students from Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia confront their memories of the Balkan wars, “European students” had first-hand experience of what true “reconciliation” meant and what the rules of the game were in the greatest success the EU had known – transcending the Cold War and nationalist animosities.
On May 1, 2004, I celebrated EU enlargement with my students.
We embraced each other under the blue flag with its 12 yellow stars.
Of course, not everyone beyond the College of Europe’s campus shared this enthusiasm, especially not everyone in Old Europe, which often seemed to be accomplishing its “historical duty” with considerable reluctance.
Today, in fact, as the financial and economic crisis unfolds before our eyes, it is ironic to compare the relative strength of Central Europe, behind a strong Poland, to the extreme vulnerability of Southern Europe, behind Greece.
Nowadays at the College of Europe, the “culture of doubt” among students from Old Europe seems to prevail over what was once the pragmatic confidence of students from New Europe.
It is no longer the “good wind” from the East, but the “bad wind” from the EU’s South and parts of its West that carries the day.
Many students, if not the majority, are no longer on campus because they “believe” in Europe, but because they are full of doubts as to their capacity to find a job in their respective countries.
They wish to acquire an additional diploma, even though they are already overqualified.
They hope for an upturn in the economic climate, or to get a comparative advantage in the ferocious competition for first jobs.
They are, above all, gaining time.
Asked not about their motivations, but about their identities, the students from the College – with the exception of the Germans – do not naturally and spontaneously perceive themselves as Europeans first.
They listen with sympathy, and sometimes even emotion, to the testimonies of the generation for whom Europe was synonymous with the ideal of reconciliation and reconstruction. But they desperately need a new narrative.
The Union’s founding story is not their story, but the story of their parents or grandparents.
They do not ask themselves what they can do for Europe, but what Europe can do for them in terms of jobs and salaries.
And they are more dubious than confident.
Europe’s Empty Fiscal Compact
CAMBRIDGE – The driving force of Europe’s economic policy is the “European project” of political integration.
That goal is reflected in the European Union’s current focus on creating a “fiscal compact,” which would constitutionalize member states’ commitment to supposedly inviolable deficit ceilings.
Unfortunately, the compact is likely to be another example of Europe’s subordination of economic reality to politicians’ desire for bragging rights about progress toward “ever closer union.”
The plans for a fiscal compact have evolved rapidly in recent months, shifting from a politically unpopular “transfer union” to a dangerous plan for fiscal austerity and, finally, to a modified version of the defunct Stability and Growth Pact of 1997.
In the end, the agreement that will emerge later this year will do little, if anything, to change economic conditions in Europe.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel initially proposed the “transfer union,” in which Germany and other strong eurozone economies would transfer funds year after year to Greece and other needy countries, in exchange for the authority to regulate and supervise the recipient countries’ budgets and tax collections.
The German public rejected the idea of permanent transfers from German taxpayers to Greece, while Greek officials and the Greek public rejected the idea of German control over their country’s fiscal policy.
The next step was the fiscal plan that was agreed in Brussels at the end of last year, which completely abandoned the idea of a transfer union in favor of an agreement that each eurozone country would balance its budget.
Under this scheme, a financial penalty would “automatically” be imposed on any country that violated that obligation.
With balanced budgets everywhere, there would be no need for fiscal transfers.
But how, exactly, should the balanced budget requirement be defined?
In a letter to the officials negotiating the formal agreement, Jorg Asmussen, the German member of the European Central Bank’s Executive Council, stressed that a balanced budget meant just that.
Even if a country ran budget deficit because a cyclical downturn caused a fall in tax revenue and an increase in social transfers, it should be required to raise taxes or cut spending to restore a balanced budget.
If this proposal were actually implemented, it would have the effect of turning small recessions into major economic downturns.
Fortunately, this recipe for creating future European depressions was rapidly dropped.
The most likely form of the fiscal compact now seems to be a very mild agreement requiring each country to “balance its budgets over the business cycle.”
Although failure to comply would in principle lead to automatic financial penalties, it is difficult to imagine how such failure could be determined in a country like Spain.
At what future point would Spain, with a persistent unemployment rate of more than 15%, be required to raise taxes and cut social transfers?
Ordering Spain to do so might rest with the European Commission, making it a political decision, rather than the “automatic” technical requirement that its proponents promise.
If this is the essence of the fiscal compact that is eventually agreed, it will have no predictable effect on eurozone countries’ behavior.
Its only effect will be to allow the eurozone’s political leaders to claim that they have created a fiscal union, and thus that they have moved Europe closer to the political union that is their ultimate goal.
But a fiscal union conceived in this way is completely different from how most people understand the term.
In the United States, for example, the central government collects about 20% of the country’s GDP and pays out a similar amount.
That centralization of taxes and spending creates an automatic stabilizer for any region that experiences an economic downturn: the affected region’s residents send less money to Washington and receive more in transfers.
There is no similar process in the eurozone, where taxes and spending occur at the national level.
The centralized fiscal role in the US also allows all of the individual states to operate with true balanced budgets, modified only by relatively small “rainy day” funds.
But, although the current European political process will not create strong fiscal discipline, financial markets are likely to force eurozone governments to reduce their sovereign debts and limit their fiscal deficits.
During the single currency’s first decade, private investors’ belief in the equality of all eurozone sovereign bonds kept interest rates low in the peripheral countries, even as their governments ran up large deficits and accumulated massive debt.
Investors will not repeat that mistake: once bitten, twice shy.
For eurozone governments, that means that financial markets will now enforce what the political process cannot achieve.
The EU’s fiscal compact, whatever its final form, will be little more than a sideshow.
Europe’s English-Speaking Peoples
The European Union has a single currency, but what about a single language?
Since its inception, the EU has made each member state’s language one of its official tongues.
Recently, even Irish, spoken at home by only a tiny minority, was granted full official status.
Treating all EU languages on the same footing is a direct consequence of the formal equality of member states under the founding treaties.
It is also a matter of democratic principle that laws are written in the language of every land where they apply.
But the EU’s posture as a protector of linguistic diversity cannot hide the stampede toward English that is underway.
The more languages, it seems, the more English.
Yet, the European Commission still encourages young Europeans to learn as many different languages as possible.
It would be politically lethal to acknowledge the real state of affairs, even if the official policy merely increases the chances that Europeans, after all their efforts, still may not understand each other.
Such an outcome is unlikely, but only because Europe’s language problem is well on its way to solving itself.
Throughout the EU, as in much of the world, from the Indian subcontinent to large parts of Africa, English increasingly functions as the language of international communication.
To be sure, in EU institutions’ public and ceremonial meetings, interpretation and translation must be equally available, at least in principle, from every language into every other.
Each day, hundreds of interpreters literally pay lip service to this lofty precept, and millions of pages are translated annually so that citizens may consult EU law in their own language.
The EU initially invested heavily in the development of machine translation, but has essentially abandoned the project.
As a result, translation and interpretation increasingly proceed in two steps, from a lesser-used language to half a dozen “relay” languages, and from those into other, smaller languages.
This saves resources, but it also implies a considerable loss of meaning.
Moreover, fewer languages are used in the EU’s smokeless backrooms when meetings are less formal and the participants not all that prestigious.
When EU officials meet together or draft internal documents, they use only the “working languages”: French and, more often, English.
German, the EU’s most widely spoken native language, hardly makes a dent.
Representatives may demand interpretation into their home language, but a proposal to limit each country’s translation budget is likely to be accepted soon.
The predominance of English is even more pronounced in communications among the EU’s citizens, where it is the first foreign language in all countries of the “old” Europe.
Among the EU’s new members, English is rapidly replacing Russian as the most widely used foreign language.
Indeed, nine out of ten schoolchildren in the EU now learn English.
Roughly half as many learn French, a quarter German and an eighth Spanish, and these numbers are falling, despite the Commission’s efforts, because people tend to choose the foreign language that they believe is spoken and studied the most by others.
The process resembles the selection of a standard in, say, consumer electronics.
People tend to opt for the standard (VHS, Windows, DVD) that they believe will come out on top, and thus contribute to that victory.
English now seems to have reached the point of no return in its accelerating global expansion, competing with national languages in such diverse fields as popular music, transport, the Internet, banking, cinema and television, science, and sports.
But, while the presence and pressure of English has a striking impact on the vocabulary of the home language, it leaves the syntax, grammar, and pronunciation almost entirely unaffected.
Unlike the indigenous languages that were pushed aside by the languages of the European colonizers, the official languages of the EU are “robust”: they are equipped with grammars, dictionaries, archives, libraries, and linguistics faculties.
They have a centuries-old printed literature, and, above all, they are closely guarded by strong states.
As a result, English will not so easily marginalize European languages, even after a large majority of the population has learned it.
But English and national languages can co-exist only if the state protects the indigenous language and citizens do not allow English to take over all prestigious domains.
The diversity of Europe is indeed innate, but its unity is yet to be achieved.
The commitment to European integration requires a common vernacular, and that is English.
The challenge for Europe is to use English as such an instrument, while avoiding submersion in American and British culture.
Europe’s Ethical Eggs
PRINCETON – Forty years ago, I stood with a few other students in a busy Oxford street handing out leaflets protesting the use of battery cages to hold hens.
Most of those who took the leaflets did not know that their eggs came from hens kept in cages so small that even one bird – the cages normally housed four – would be unable to fully stretch and flap her wings.
The hens could never walk around freely, or lay eggs in a nest.
Many people applauded our youthful idealism, but told us that we had no hope of ever changing a major industry.
They were wrong.
On the first day of 2012, keeping hens in such cages became illegal, not only in the United Kingdom, but in all 27 countries of the European Union.
Hens can still be kept in cages, but they must have more space, and the cages must have nest boxes and a scratching post.
Last month, members of the British Hen Welfare Trust provided a new home for a hen they named “Liberty.”
She was, they said, among the last hens in Britain still living in the type of cages we had opposed.
In the early 1970’s, when the modern animal-liberation movement began, no major organization was campaigning against the battery cage.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the mother of all animal-protection organizations, had lost its early radicalism long before.
It focused on isolated cases of abuse, and failed to challenge well-established ways of mistreating animals on farms or in laboratories.
It took a concerted effort by the new animal radicals of the 1970’s to stir the RSPCA from its complacency towards the battery cage and other forms of intensive animal rearing.
Eventually, the new animal-rights movement managed to reach the broader public.
Consumers responded by buying eggs from free-ranging hens. Some supermarket chains even ceased to carry eggs from battery hens.
In Britain and some European countries, animal welfare became politically salient, and pressure on parliamentary representatives mounted.
The European Union established a scientific committee to investigate animal-welfare issues on farms, and the committee recommended banning the battery cage, along with some other forms of close confinement of pigs and calves.
A ban on battery cages in the EU was eventually adopted in 1999, but, to ensure that producers would have plenty of time to phase out the equipment in which they had invested, its implementation was delayed until January 1, 2012.
To its credit, the British egg industry accepted the situation, and developed new and less cruel methods of keeping hens.
Not all countries are equally ready, however, and it has been estimated that up to 80 million hens may still be in illegal battery cages.
But at least 300 million hens who would have lived miserable lives in standard battery cages are now in significantly better conditions, and there is great pressure on the EU bureaucracy to enforce the ban everywhere – not least from egg producers who are already complying with it.
With the ban on battery cages, Europe confirms its place as the world leader in animal welfare, a position also reflected in its restrictions on the use of animals to test cosmetics.
But why is Europe so far ahead of other countries in its concern for animals?
In the United States, there are no federal laws about how egg producers house their hens.
But, when the issue was put to California voters in 2008, they overwhelmingly supported a proposition requiring that all farm animals have room to stretch their limbs fully and turn around without touching other animals or the sides of their cage.
That suggests that the problem may not be with US citizens’ attitudes, but rather that, at the federal level, the US political system allows industries with large campaign chests too much power to thwart the wishes of popular majorities.
In China, which, along with the US, confines the largest number of hens in cages, an animal welfare movement is only just beginning to emerge.
For the sake of the welfare of billions of farmed animals, we should wish it rapid growth and success.
The start of this year is a moment to celebrate a major advance in animal welfare, and, therefore, for Europe, a step towards becoming a more civilized and humane society – one that shows its concern for all beings capable of suffering.
It is also an occasion for celebrating the effectiveness of democracy, and the power of an ethical idea.
The anthropologist Margaret Mead is reported to have said: “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world.
Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.”
The last part may not be true, but the first part surely is.
The end of the battery cage in Europe is a less dramatic development than the Arab Spring, but, like that popular uprising, it began with a small group of thoughtful and committed people.
Europe’s Fight Against Terrorism
Three years ago this month, international terrorism struck Europe.
In simultaneous bomb attacks on trains in Madrid, Islamist terrorists killed 191 people and wounded over 2,000.
Last month the suspects went on trial in a Spanish court.
Violent extremists claiming to act in the name of Islam have hit many countries around the world, before and after the attacks on America of September 11, 2001.
But the attacks in Madrid – and in London in July 2005 – showed that Europe is one of their prime targets, prompting European governments to respond by bolstering their defenses, including at the level of the European Union.
In the past three years, security standards at European ports and airports have been strengthened, biometric passports have been introduced, and terrorist financing targeted.
More than 2,000 terrorism suspects and those suspected of other major forms of crime have been arrested and extradited on the basis of a European Arrest Warrant.
Similarly, European security and intelligence services have pooled resources in a common center for threat analysis in Brussels.
Through Europol and Eurojust, European police forces and judicial authorities have intensified cooperation, and ministers are preparing to grant law enforcement agencies of other EU countries access to national databases of DNA and fingerprints.
For the first time, security-related research figures prominently in the EU budget, with €1.4 billion earmarked for this purpose.
European police and security agencies have prevented many terrorist attacks.
But, while Europe’s defenses have been considerably strengthened, the threat of terrorism has not diminished.
The risk of new attacks in Europe and worldwide is serious and will remain so for the foreseeable future.
To face this global threat, international cooperation must be improved.
In particular, Muslims and non-Muslims need to combine their efforts to defend the sanctity of human life.
First, the world must work from common standards.
Many countries still need to improve their defenses and implement the 16 counter-terrorism instruments established by the United Nations, including the convention against terrorist financing.
Reducing the risk of terrorists obtaining weapons of mass destruction equally requires stronger international cooperation.
To this end, the EU is working closely with its partners, from Morocco and Indonesia to Saudi-Arabia and other Gulf states.
The EU will extend support to the African Union’s Center for Counter-Terrorism in Algiers.
Cooperation with India, Pakistan, and Russia has also been strengthened, and the Union will continue to work closely with the US, Japan, and Australia.
Second, more must be done to address the international conflicts that terrorists seek to exploit.
Afghanistan remains a critical front-line state in the fight against terrorism.
The Taliban must not be allowed to bomb Afghanistan back in time.
The EU will increase its aid, notably in support of the Afghan police.
Likewise, efforts to bring peace to the Middle East remain essential.
While progress on the road to peace between Israel and the Palestinians would not by itself stop terrorism, it would deal a powerful blow to terrorist incitement and propaganda.
Javier Solana, the EU High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, will continue to press for results.
Third, we must counter the ideology of the terrorists.
Very few Muslims want to live under a seventh century-style caliphate.
They prefer to live in freedom and in parliamentary democracies.
What unites Muslims and non-Muslims is a commitment to basic human rights.
To respect and promote human rights is critical to winning the battle for hearts and minds, including in Europe.
This means that governments need to practice what they preach.
Detention without trial is counterproductive in the fight against terrorism.
So is torture.
To defeat the terrorists we must offer a vision of a more just and equitable world and act accordingly, at home and abroad.
Ultimately, the values of liberty and justice are our best defense.
Europe’s Financial Alchemy
CHICAGO – It is universally recognized that a key factor underlying the 2007-2008 financial crisis was the diffusion of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), the infamous special-purpose vehicles that transformed lower-rated debt into highly rated debt.
As these structures lost popularity on Wall Street, however, they gained popularity on the other side of the Atlantic.
After all, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), created by the eurozone countries last May, is the largest CDO ever created.
As with CDOs, the EFSF was marketed as a way to reduce risk.
Unfortunately, the outcome could be similar: the entire banking system sent into a tailspin.
CDOs are a form of financial alchemy: special-purpose vehicles that buy the financial equivalent of lead (low-rated mortgaged-backed securities) and finance themselves mostly with the financial equivalent of gold (highly sought-after AAA bonds).
This transformation is based on one sound principle and two shaky ones.
The sound principle is excess collateral.
If there is $120 of collateral guaranteeing a $100 bond, the bond is safer, no doubt.
How much safer, however, depends upon the returns on the pool of bonds that compose the CDO.
The first shaky principle is that if the return on these bonds is highly correlated, so that they all default at the same time, overcollateralization is not much help.
By contrast, if the returns are uncorrelated, it is extremely unlikely that they will all default at the same time, making overcollateralization sufficient to guarantee a safer return.
Unfortunately, no precise mathematical model can determine correlation across securities, which is always an educated guess based mostly (sometimes entirely) on past behavior.
Thus, the explosion of CDOs in the United States during the housing boom was predicated upon the shaky assumption that house prices never fall nationwide.
The second shaky principle is that, in order to validate these instruments, issuers of CDOs relied on credit-rating agencies.
Historically, these agencies had been reliable in predicting the risk of corporate defaults.
Much of their credibility, however, depended on a fragile balance of power.
Since each issuer represented a small fraction of their revenues, rating agencies were unwilling to compromise their reputation for the sake of any single issuer.
The CDO market, however, was concentrated: six or seven issuers controlled most of the market, and this market ended up representing 50% of the entire revenues to be gained through ratings.
All of a sudden, issuers had much more influence on the rating agencies, which, like any good seller, were ready to bend a little not to alienate important customers.
As a result, the CDO market did not so much spread risk as it shifted and hid it.
When the US housing market started to turn south, the biggest underwriters (such as Countrywide) did not go bankrupt right away, because they had sold the vast majority of their loans to the CDO market.
Eventually, however, the uncertainty created by these CDOs nearly brought down the entire US banking system.
Europe is following a similar path.
The EFSF, created to assist countries facing “illiquidity,” is designed exactly like a CDO.
The EFSF buys the bonds of the countries which find it difficult to finance themselves in the marketplace (for example, Ireland) and issues bonds that are AAA rated.
How is this alchemy possible?
Once again, it relies on overcollateralization, an assumption on the joint distribution of possible outcomes, and the inevitable seal of approval of the three major credit rating agencies.
With the EFSF, the overcollateralization takes the form of guarantees by other eurozone countries.
Among the major countries, however, only France and Germany have an AAA rating.
How can a bond guaranteed in large part by countries such as Italy and Spain (likely candidates for a fiscal crisis) provide AAA status to Irish bonds?
According to Standard and Poor’s, for example, “The rating on EFSF reflects our view that guarantees by ‘AAA’ rated sovereigns and freely available liquidity reserves invested in ‘AAA’ securities will, between them, cover all of EFSF’s liabilities.”
But the value of the guarantees depends on the situation.
As long as the only country to be rescued is Ireland, there is no problem.
But if the EFSF has to guarantee Spain, would Germany really be willing to step in and use its taxpayers’ money to cover Spanish banks’ losses?
And how compromised might French and German banks become – and thus how much more fiscal strain is in store for France and Germany?
Here, too, no mathematical formula can help, because what we need to test is the reasonableness of our assumptions.
This is why rating agencies’ opinions are so valuable.
Unfortunately, one must wonder to what extent these ratings are distorted by the eurozone countries’ political power.
Since the crisis, rating agencies have been under attack, and major regulation, which could severely affect their business, has been discussed on both sides of the Atlantic.
Given this, how free are credit rating agencies to express their opinion on the very institutions that will regulate them?
We will have to await the pricing of the credit-default swaps on EFSF debt, which will be issued in January, to see whether markets believe the ratings.
Independent of this test, however, Germany seems to have squared the circle: it helped the countries in trouble, without coughing up (for the moment) any euros.
As with CDOs, however, this might be a Pyrrhic victory.
The EFSF has bought short-term gain in exchange for much larger losses if the situation deteriorates: a fiscal crisis in Spain could bring down the entire edifice.
After the sub-prime mortgage crisis, politicians alleged that the market was short-sighted and irrational, and rushed to propose new regulations.
While some of the criticism might have merit, what gives politicians the moral authority to criticize?
After all, as the EFSF shows, their orientation can be more short term and irrational than the market’s, repeating the same mistakes because they seem not to have learned from them.
Like technological innovation, financial innovation is concerned with the perpetual search for greater efficiency – in this case, reducing the cost of transferring funds from savers to investors.
Cost reductions that represent a net benefit to society should be regarded favorably.
But as the current financial crisis demonstrates, where financial innovation is designed to circumvent regulation or taxation, we need to be more circumspect.
Sadly, the financial revolution has been mostly rent-seeking rather than welfare-enhancing in character.
It has been based on eliminating, or at least reducing, two key elements of banking
 costs closely associated with prudential arrangements.
One is the need for banks and other financial institutions to hold liquid reserves.
The less liquid a bank’s assets, the greater the need for such reserves.
But the yield on such reserves is small, so economizing on them is profitable.
Last year’s Northern Rock debacle in the United Kingdom will long remain an example of how not to manage such risk. 
Moreover, increasing a bank’s leverage can be very profitable when returns on investments exceed the cost of funding.
Reckless balance-sheet expansion in pursuit of profit is kept in check if financial companies adhere to statutory capital requirements, which mandate a capital-asset ratio of about 8%.
But many have sought to ignore this restriction, to their cost: the Carlyle Capital Corporation, a subsidiary of the United States-based Carlyle Group, was leveraged up to 32 times – it held one dollar of capital for every 32 dollars of assets – before adverse market developments wiped out the company.
Avoidance of prudential requirements is at the core of today’s financial crisis, exacerbated by the collapse of confidence in a system based on trust.
This has exposed the fragility of the banking system, including quasi-banking institutions, as revealed by Bears Sterns, Lehman Brothers, and other US investment banks, and in Europe by Northern Rock, UBS, WestLB, and many more.
Perhaps the most tragic aspect of this story is the exploitation of low-income families involved in the so-called sub-prime mortgage crisis, whereby variable-rate mortgages were offered to customers with a low credit rating.
In fact, “variable rate” is a misnomer, since these mortgages’ artificially low initial interest rates were pre-programmed to include a big rate hike after a couple of years.
Thereafter, rates would rise with market rates, but never fall when market rates declined.
This structure could only have been devised to suck in as many customers as possible with scant regard for long-term consequences.
With the property market booming, prospective capital gains promised untold wealth.
And most mortgage holders probably expected to refinance their mortgages before their rising interest-rate trebled or quadrupled monthly repayments.
Another hoped-for benefit was that capital gains could be converted into home equity loans, boosting homeowners’ living standards. 
The rude awakening came when property values began to decline.
For those without an equity cushion, refinancing was not a possibility, and rising interest rates have led to default, foreclosure, and homelessness.
Now we hear that sub-prime mortgage holders have only themselves to blame.
No one talks of the bank manager, under pressure to sell “financial products” and eager to sign up customers, even if the products were not in a customer’s best interest.
The banker did not question a bonus system that favors one year of super profits, followed by bankruptcy, over two years of moderate, but stable, results. 
It is astonishing that sub-prime mortgages and their like were repackaged and resold in securitized form.
That these collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs, or bonds backed by a pool of mortgages) found a ready market, both in the US and abroad, reflects failure on several fronts. 
The nature of these CMOs should have been apparent to risk managers.
This is why the global problem today is many times greater than the Savings &amp; Loan crisis of the 1980’s and 1990’s, which cost American taxpayers an estimated $150 billion to clean up.
Today, the global integration of financial markets means that problems can pop up anywhere, at any time.
Central banks are currently attempting to plug one leak as the next appears.
But if the financial system’s dykes collapse, we may be headed for a decade of severe deflation, rendering expansionary stimulus useless.
When the US Federal Reserve was created in 1913, its most important function was to serve as a lender of last resort to troubled banks, providing emergency liquidity via the discount facility.
The current crisis suggests that this is no longer enough.
Central banks worldwide are being forced to act as market makers of last resort in securities markets.
The signs are already visible.
The European Central Bank has also failed to tackle local bubbles in Europe. The justification was that the ECB is concerned with inflation, not relative price adjustments.
This means that monetary policy is geared towards the needs of large countries, like Germany, not to those of, say, Belgium.
But, given the scale of the threat to Europe’s economy from a full-blown financial crisis, this apologia for inactivity has outlived its usefulness.
Europe’s Financial Wasteland
PARIS – “April is the cruelest month,” wrote T.S. Eliot at the beginning of his great poem, “The Waste Land.”
But, if Eliot had been a professional investor who had observed European financial markets over the last few years, I am quite certain that his choice would have been August.
In August 2007, the decision by BNP Paribas to close two of its hedge funds exposed to the subprime sector precipitated a liquidity crisis for all European banks during that summer.
This year, BNP’s great rival, Société Générale, has been in the spotlight.
Its stock fell by more than 14% in one day in mid-August, plumbing depths not seen for two and a half years.
Rumors have swirled about a possible downgrade of France’s sovereign debt, accompanied by speculation about the consequences for French banks.
Since the French, of all continental Europeans, most respect the convention that no useful work should be done in the month of August, this is harsh treatment for their bankers.
They have not been slow to claim that they are being singled out unfairly.
They have a point.
France is not the epicenter of the eurozone crisis.
There is much – too much – competition for that position.
Greece was an early favorite in the race to claim it, but faced a stiff challenge for a time from Ireland.
Portugal made a sprint towards the front, but is now falling back a little, with Spain and Italy moving up.
France likes to think that it is at the back of the field, strolling leisurely in lockstep with Germany.
The evolution of the crisis has, however, thrown European banks’ balance sheets into sharp focus.
Eurozone governments have proven unwilling, or unable, to produce a solution that persuades markets that they are on top of the problem.
It seems inevitable now that either the eurozone will have to contract, with parts of the uncompetitive periphery dropping out, at least for a time, or that member countries’ debts will have to be collectively guaranteed, which implies some form of fiscal union.
Nothing less will persuade investors to go near debt issues from the eurozone’s fiscally challenged members.
The political problem is that the second solution cannot yet be sold to German voters, let alone to nationalist fringe parties like France’s National Front and Finland’s True Finns.
Perhaps it will be possible to persuade the Germans if the alternative is eurozone collapse, which would put the Deutschemark, or a Northern Euro, in the uncomfortable position that the Swiss franc occupies today – too strong for its own good.
But things might have to get worse before the political mood swings.
In the meantime, the European Council continues, as the Americans would put it, to “kick the can down the road.”
Of course, the can is not in the road; it is in the banking parlors.
EU banks are holding sovereign debt that clearly is not worth 100 cents on the euro.
But even the financial “stress tests” conducted by regulators did not require the banks to acknowledge that inconvenient truth.
Many eurozone banks have made far less progress in strengthening their capital adequacy and liquidity than have American and British banks since the financial crisis erupted.
The disparities were exposed in the IMF’s last Global Financial Stability Report, published in April, which contains a striking analysis that shows the changes in tangible common equity over the last two years, and the degree to which banks are reliant on wholesale funding.
One EU central banker described this to me as the “killer chart.”
What it shows is that banks in the United States have increased their equity from about 5.5% to about 7.5%, and have reduced their reliance on wholesale funding from 30% to 25%.
British banks have made less progress with tangible common equity, rising from just under 3% to a little over 4%, but they have significantly reduced their reliance on wholesale funding, from almost 45% in 2008 to less than 35% now.
By contrast, eurozone banks have almost stood still on both indicators.
Their capital has risen a little, but remains below that of banks in the United Kingdom (and well below that of US banks), and they continue to depend on the wholesale markets for almost 45% of their total funding.
That is why continuing uncertainty about the integrity of the eurozone, and the value of its members’ sovereign debt, is proving so damaging to its banks.
Will it be possible for them to rollover their market funding in these circumstances?
Already, the Greeks and the other countries subject to special measures have been shut out of the wholesale markets, and are reliant almost entirely on the European Central Bank.
Might that happen to banks elsewhere?
In 2007-2008, the sins of the bankers were visited on the politicians; now the reverse is true.
Perhaps there is a difference: the bankers’ sins were sins of commission, while the politicians’ sins – repeated failed efforts to produce a solution to match the scale of the problem – are sins of omission.
But the consequences are equally grave.
I have always assumed that the Germans would eventually recognize that their interests lie in preserving the eurozone intact.
As Churchill said of the Americans, “you can always rely on them to do the right thing... once they have exhausted all possible alternatives.”
The Germans have now almost run out of alternatives.
If they do not do the right thing soon, there will be some banking casualties, and European governments will once again be obliged to put in public money.
That will be just as unpopular as bailing out the Greeks, and probably much more expensive.
Europe’s Free Riders
In the United States, individual states that follow unsound fiscal policies face a penalty.
Their bonds sell at a discount relative to those of better-managed individual states. The higher debt service they must pay serves – to some degree – as a form of discipline against the temptation to spend now and pay later.
Of course, the discipline of the market is not perfect: the bond market does not “see” implicit future liabilities (like promised pension payments) to any great degree.
Nevertheless, this enforced fiscal discipline, combined with individual states’ own internal budgetary procedures, has prevented a large scale state-level fiscal crisis from occurring in the US since the Great Depression.
Let us now turn to Europe.
Before the advent of the euro, there were many fiscal crises in individual nation-states in southern Europe, which produced waves of high inflation.
But, with the single currency in place, the road to solving a fiscal crisis through inflation has been closed, as the European Central Bank (ECB) now stands watch over monetary policy.
Nevertheless, even with nation-states no longer able to rely on inflation to solve their unbalanced finances, the single currency allows them to use the debt capacity properly belonging to other members of the European Union to extend their spending sprees and postpone political accountability for periods of laissez les bons temps roulés.
To head off this possibility, the EU created the Stability and Growth Pact: government deficits had to be less than 3% of GDP.
Last week, the government of Germany – once the most fiscally prudent and disciplined EU country – broke the pact’s rules for fiscal discipline for the fifth consecutive year, and did so without (much) apology.
Finance Minister Peer Steinbrueck signaled that he expected the European Commission to apply some sanctions to Germany: the credibility of the pact would, he said, be at stake if no action were taken.
Thus, Germany would not block sanctions this time, as it did two and a half years ago.
But Steinbrueck also made it clear that he expects any sanctions in response to Germany’s predicted 3.4%-of-GDP fiscal deficit to be largely symbolic, not penalties that would cost its government or economy anything of significance.
The Stability and Growth Pact is not – or is not yet – working anywhere near the way it was intended to work.
What about market discipline?
Is the German government’s willingness to issue more debt and run bigger deficits limited because the market recognizes and penalizes nation states that allow their fiscal positions to weaken?
In a word, no.
The interest rates on the euro-denominated sovereign debt of the twelve euro-zone governments are all very similar. So the market does not seem to care that countries have different potentials to generate exports to fund the financial flows needed for debt repayments, or different current and projected debt-to-GDP ratios.
Willem Buiter of the University of Amsterdam and Anne Sibert of the University of London believe that it is the ECB’s willingness to, in effect, accept all euro-zone debt as collateral that has undermined the market’s willingness to be an enforcer of fiscal prudence.
As long as the marginal piece of German debt is used as collateral for a short-term loan or as the centerpiece of a repurchase agreement to gain liquidity, its value is much more likely to be determined by the terms on which the ECB accepts it as collateral than by its fundamentals.
The ECB’s treatment of all such debt as equally powerful sources of back-up liquidity now trumps any analysis of differences in long-term sovereign risk.
In the long run, this is dangerous.
Both market discipline and sound fiscal management are needed to create a reasonable chance of long-run price stability.
Omit either a market penalty now for behavior that may become reckless or the institutional levers that give a voice to future generations, and you run grave risks – perhaps not today or tomorrow, but someday, and for the rest of your life.
As time passes, the coming of the single currency and the way that the euro has been implemented is generating more and more unease.
Policy as a whole over the entire euro zone is too deflationary.
The necessary transfers are not being made to make the common currency bearable to regions that lose out and are already in recession when the ECB tightens policy.
The institutional foundations of stable long-run fiscal policy are being eroded.
And now, Buiter and Sibert argue convincingly, the ECB is giving the market less scope to reward the thrifty and penalize the profligate than it should.
There is no movement of the soil yet, and there will not be for some time.
But the ground under the euro may well begin to shift if things don’t change.
Europe\u0027s Groucho Problem
Groucho Marx once famously quipped that he did not want to join any club that would have him as a member.
But in today's European Union, Groucho need not apply.
The Union now does not want to accept 
 anybody
 who applies for membership, because the countries queuing up to join are too big or too poor, or both. 
On May 1, the EU formally admits ten new members, eight from central Europe.
All are far poorer than the EU average.
Bulgaria, Romania, and possibly Croatia are supposed to join in 2007.
By the end of this year, the EU is to decide whether to open membership talks with Turkey - a country that is not only poor and big, but Muslim.
If the EU is to talk about membership with Turkey, there is no legitimate reason for keeping out my country, Ukraine?
Current EU thinking, however, holds that Ukraine should be placed in the same framework as countries in North Africa and the Middle East.
The EU's "Wider Europe" strategy does call for closer ties to Ukraine, and for allowing us increased access to the EU's "single market."
But it does not view Ukraine as a candidate for EU membership, at least not in the foreseeable future.
One reason for this is that the EU does not want to pick a fight with Russia, which still sees us as its close ally, natural business partner, and as members of an enlarging Russian-led economic zone.
Indeed, last week Ukraine's parliament ratified a treaty creating "a single economic space" with Russia.
But this supposed free-trade zone seems more like a recipe to enrich oligarchs and stifle competition, not promote trade.
Of course, Russia won't look on happily if the EU tries to lure Ukraine.
But membership in the EU does not mean estrangement from Russia.
Besides, excluding Ukraine from eventual EU membership will encourage Russia's imperial ambitions.
This will diminish Russia's chances of ever becoming a full democracy, for it can rule an empire only as a militarized state.
It is the mark of a good club that people clamor to become members.
An ever-larger EU including Ukraine would create a political unit with a huge population, furthering the Union's ambitions to be a global power.
As the latest round of enlargement proves, the EU is very effective at molding the governance and behavior of would-be members.
Preparations for EU entry strongly motivated the eight former communist Central European states to entrench or restore democratic institutions and market economies. 
The further Europe export its laws and values, the more it expands a zone committed to peaceful, democratic, and prosperous co-existence.
A country equipped to join the EU is a country equipped to make its way in the world peacefully, if it chooses to do so.
Europe needs such countries on its border.
So far, the Union's actions have achieved the opposite.
For example, three years ago Ukrainians crossed the border with Poland six million times.
Most were small traders buying goods for resale at home, boosting the economy of eastern Poland, the poorest part of that country.
Others worked cheaply in Poland as cleaners and building workers.
As a step towards imposing EU border controls and visa rules, Poland began demanding visas from its neighbors.
Crossings at Polish border stations quickly fell by over two thirds.
Thus the new EU border with Ukraine is making its presence felt in the most negative way imaginable - by hurting business on both sides of the border.
In the EU, only Poland seems to want Ukraine as a prosperous, stable, and accessible neighbor, not as a poor and rickety one with a dodgy democracy and even dodgier nuclear power stations.
Poland worries that the more Ukraine is shut off from the Union, the more it will fall behind, economically and politically.
But today's other EU members view the prospect of an ever-expanding Union to include Ukraine with fatalism and dread, for several reasons.
The first, inevitably, is money.
The EU redistributes billions of euros from rich to poor members: more poor members mean more claimants on that purse.
A second is immigration.
One of the Union's fundamental principles is that there should be freedom to move from one member country to another.
But anti-immigration parties are gaining ground across western Europe; they could make huge political capital out of potential Ukrainian membership.
There is also a feeling that a larger EU might simply be unable to function. 
Manufacturing plausible-sounding objections to Ukrainian membership is easy.
We are not really European, we are too poor, we are too different.
But the Union has consistently rejected the idea of insisting on a minimum income level for members.
Its only serious economic demand - rightly so - is that members should have a "functioning market economy."
As for whether we are European, I submit that Balzac would never have asked that question during the years he lived here.
Where Europe, Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus rub up against one another, an economic fault line is forming.
What the EU does now to bridge this fault line will determine whether these countries westernize or stagnate.