For future neo-conservatives, however, the 1960’s produced a “trauma” that transcended the humiliation of a lost war and the disgrace of Richard Nixon.
What in the 1950’s had seemingly been a culture of contentment was transformed into what Podhoretz called an “adversary culture.”
New social movements, seeking to de-mythologize history, rejecting platitudes justifying the policies of elite interests, and demanding greater institutional accountability, seemingly threatened the entire “establishment.”
Nevertheless, it was not until Ronald Reagan forged an alliance between conservatism’s two traditionally warring factions that the political foundations of neo-conservatism’s triumph were secured.
One faction primarily comprised elites opposed to state intervention in the market.
Its members cared little about the verities associated with “community” or “family values.”
Their best intellectual arguments derived from Milton Friedman, Friedrich von Hayek, and Robert Nozick, who sought to challenge collectivist theories of society in general and “socialism” in particular.
The other faction was rooted in nineteenth-century “know nothing” populism, with its flights of nationalist hysteria, defense of traditional prejudices, and resentment of intellectual and economic elites.
However, its members do not necessarily oppose social legislation that benefits working people – especially when white workers are privileged – and some even retain a positive image of the New Deal.
Neo-conservatism thus cannot be reduced to advocacy of the free market or right-wing populism, since its ideological specificity consists in the fusion of these contradictory outlooks.
The question was how to package elites’ interest in free-market capitalism with the provincial temperament of a parochial constituency.
What sold best was an image of oppressive “big government,” reflected in a tax system that was increasingly burdensome to ordinary people, combined with anti-communist nationalism and barely veiled racism.
After all, everyone understood who the “welfare cheat” was, and who Kristol had in mind when he famously quipped that a neo-conservative is “a liberal who has been mugged by reality.”
But, with the demise of communism, neo-conservatism’s two factions once again seemed fated to clash.
Economic globalization risked provoking a backlash by provincial populists, while the external enemy – the glue that held the neo-conservative movement together – had disappeared.
Then came the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
From the beginning, senior Reagan era officials were wary of pursuing a unilateral response.
It was clear to many that Islamic fundamentalism was not comparable to communism, and, particularly in Iraq, military leaders saw the dangers in stretching American forces too thin.
But their arguments did not carry the day.
For the neo-conservative enterprise, 9/11 helped create a new context for linking the quest for American hegemony abroad with intense nationalism – and an even more intense assault on the welfare state – at home.
Employing a crude form of “realism,” which has traditionally viewed the state as the basic unit of political analysis, neo-conservatives portrayed al-Qaeda in terms of familiar enemies, namely fascism and communism, with backing from “rogue” states that must not be “appeased.”
Thus, the “axis of evil” and the “pre-emptive strike.”
This new “hyper-realism” has little in common with old-style realism.
Churchill and Roosevelt did not lie to the international community about the threat of fascism, construct an artificial “coalition of the willing,” or employ violence without accountability: these were the tactics of their totalitarian enemies.
Today, a meaningful realism calls for recognizing the constraints on building democracy: suspicion of western values generated by imperialism, the power of pre-modern institutions and customs, and the still-fragile character of the state system in most of the world.
But genuine realism, unfortunately, is beside the point.
Given the inherent tension implied by neo-conservatism’s simultaneous embrace of secular free-market capitalism and “traditional” values, its strategy, perfected since the Reagan era, has been to re-draw the lines of division: then, as now, the West is “at risk,” which requires nurturing a strongly emotional distinction between “us” and “them.”
That strategy’s popular appeal will not end with the Bush administration, because neo-conservatism feeds on a set of public fears that are deeply rooted in American history.
Changing that will require not merely confronting a new ideological outlook, but also deciding which policies reflect what is best about the American political tradition.
Is Obama Losing Iraq?
BAGHDAD – The Obama administration’s Iraq policy is in chaos. Seven months after Iraq’s national elections, the United States has publicly denied taking sides in the wrangling over who will be prime minister.
Privately, however, the US is backing the incumbent, Nouri al-Maliki.
The US has applied tremendous diplomatic pressure on Iraq’s Arab neighbors to get them to accept another Maliki term.
Most have refused.
Initially, the US backed Maliki in order to keep the Sadrist bloc from gaining a share of power.
However, that has now backfired, since the Sadrists are the only group other than Maliki’s coalition of Shia parties that supports him.
One unsettling consequence of US diplomacy is that it has reinforced Iran’s role in Iraq, because Maliki is Iran’s preferred candidate for Prime Minister.
Thus, at the very moment that the US is leading a global campaign to isolate Iran over its nuclear program, it is strengthening Iran’s regional position.
The US-Iranian dispute is not limited to the nuclear issue.
American efforts to re-start Israeli-Palestinian peace talks have faced adamant opposition from Iran, which maintains its 30-year-old policy of opposing any effort to promote peace in the region.
Iran exerts significant influence on both state and non-state actors whose support is indispensible to any long-term peace in the Middle East.
First among these is Syria. Post-election Iraq was an obvious opening for the US to place a wedge between Iran and Syria.
While Iran promotes the Shia religious parties in Iraq, Syria’s interests there tilt toward secular nationalism, as represented by former prime minister Ayad Allawi’s coalition, which actually defeated Maliki in the parliamentary elections held earlier this year.
Indeed, Syria has supported Allawi for the past seven years. Yet, in the wake of intense US and Iranian diplomatic pressure in favor of Maliki, Syria has apparently shifted its support accordingly.
The impact of this American misstep has already been felt, emboldening Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad on his provocative visit to Lebanon, which included a public appearance on Hezbollah-controlled territory near Israel’s northern border.
The Gulf States, especially Saudi Arabia, have so far resisted US pressure to endorse Maliki.
They cannot forget that Maliki was in charge during the ethnic cleansing of Baghdad’s Sunni Muslims.
They regard Iran – and thus Maliki’s closeness to it – as an existential threat.
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrain, in particular, perceive Iran as inciting unrest among their own substantial Shia populations.
Iraq’s political elites have resisted Maliki’s desire for a second term for two reasons. First, they are weary of renewed Iranian attempts to destabilize Iraq.
Security forces recently intercepted suicide bombers entering Iraqi Kurdistan from Iran, with, Kurdish leaders believe, the support and training of Iranian intelligence.
Second, Maliki’s tenure has been worrying to those who believe in democracy and the peaceable transfer of power.
He has created security forces – some of which have reportedly acted as death squads – that are answerable directly to him, thus bypassing the constitutional chain of command.
He has also replaced career army and security officers with cronies.
Last March, as rumors circulated that he was losing the vote, Maliki asserted that state security would be threatened if he lost, noting his responsibility to maintain order.
When he did lose, he demanded a recount, not as a candidate, but in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief.
The fact that Maliki, despite his incumbency, has been unable to secure a second term seven months after the elections attests to the widespread opposition to his continued rule among Iraq’s political class.
There is only one way to explain the US administration’s decision to exert such diplomatic pressure in favor of Iran’s favorite in Iraq: Obama’s pledge during his presidential election campaign to disengage from Iraq during his first term.
In this, Obama is following the example of President George W. Bush, who let the US electoral agenda, rather than American – not to mention Iraqi – national interests, dictate Iraq policy.
The Bush administration insisted that Iraq achieve various “milestones” – elections for which the country was not ready and completing a constitution in six weeks, to name two – simply to create the appearance of substantive achievements ahead of the 2004 presidential election or the 2006 mid-term elections.
Similarly, the Obama administration is trying to force what it perceives as the easiest path to a new government in Iraq – even if it is pro-Iranian – not because it is in the US national interest, but to enable it to head for the exits more quickly in advance of the president’s re-election campaign.
The administration’s policy in Iraq is now strengthening Iran regionally at the expense of America’s Arab allies, undermining America’s own efforts to forge a Middle East peace, and weakening Iraq’s nascent democracy.
It is difficult to imagine a worse set of outcomes for US national security interests in this vital region.
Apakah Minyak menjadi “Stranded”?
LONDON – Kebijakan konvensional mengenai terpuruknya harga minyak belakangan ini adalah kita tengah menyaksikan pengulangan krisis tahun 1985-1986 lalu ketika Arab Saudi menggenjot produksinya akibat perselisihan dengan anggota kartel OPEC lainnya.
Kali ini, Arab Saudi melakukan tindakan yang sama untuk merespon kehilangan pangsa pasar akibat produksi shale-oil di Amerika Serikat.
Namun ada persamaan lain yang bahkan lebih relevan – yang berdampak besar bagi harga minyak jangka panjang.
Krisis ini menjadi pengingat atas kemerosotan yang pernah menimpa harga batubara – jatuh dari ketinggian $140 per ton pada tahun 2008 menjadi harga sekarang $40 per ton – mengakibatkan beberapa deposit menjadi “financially stranded” yang berarti biaya pengembangannya melebihi potensi keuntungan (return).
Penurunan tersebut merupakan konsekuensi dari kebijakan lingkungan jangka panjang, termasuk program-program yang bertujuan memitigasi perubahan iklim, sehingga menurunkan permintaan batubara.
Seluruh upaya meningkatkan kualitas udara di Cina, penetapan standar-standar emisi karbon dan merkuri, ketersediaan gas alam yang lebih murah, dan pertumbuhan investasi energi terbarukan telah mengikis pangsa pasar batubara di pasar energi.
Mekanisme serupa mungkin bisa berhasil di pasar minyak.
Ketika tekanan semakin besar dan memaksa pemerintah untuk bertindak demi melawan perubahan iklim, kemungkinan besar permintaan bahan bakar fosil akan turun, menyebabkan harga melemah dalam waktu lebih lama dibandingkan perkiraan industri – bahkan mungkin selamanya.
Yang pasti, beberapa kritikus – termasuk ekonom asal Inggris, Dieter Helm – mengabaikan kemungkinan bahwa aset bisa tersingkirkan (stranded).
Mereka berpendapat bahwa tidak adanya upaya internasional yang serius untuk menurunkan emisi, sifat pasar minyak bumi yang berdasarkan siklus, investasi jangka pendek, dan fakta bahwa sebagian besar aset minyak adalah milik negara akan menjadikan kebijakan-kebijakan mitigasi perubahan iklim tidak berdampak pada harga minyak.
Argumen ini dapat dibantah dengan mudah.
Pertama, meskipun masyarakat internasional hampir tidak mungkin dalam waktu dekat akan menyepakati mekanisme global untuk menetapkan harga emisi karbon dioksida, bentuk kebijakan lingkungan lainnya sudah berdampak pada permintaan atas minyak.
Ini merupakan perkembangan besar, sebab pergeseran kecil saja dalam pasokan atau permintaan dapat menyebabkan perubahan pada harga minyak.
Penurunan dari $120 per barel pada tahun 2014 menjadi harga sekarang $35 merupakan akibat dari perubahan 2% (sekitar dua juta barel per hari) dalam keseimbangan pasokan-permintaan.
Hal ini mencerminkan kenaikan output Arab Saudi sebanyak lebih dari satu juta barel per hari, serta upaya efisiensi wajib di Uni Eropa, yang sebagiannya didorong oleh upaya menurunkan emisi karbon, juga telah berkontribusi pada penurunan permintaan – sekitar 1,5% per tahun.
Upaya-upaya serupa dapat ditemukan di negara lain, seiring dengan kerja keras pemerintah untuk memenuhi target yang ditetapkan dalam perjanjian Paris.
Kedua, meskipun harga minyak bersifat cyclical, perubahan struktural dalam pasar energi akan melemahkan kenaikan harga.
Teknologi transportasi alternatif, termasuk mobil listrik, baterai statis, dan solusi hybrid, menjadi ancaman bagi kebutuhan akan minyak.
Ketiga, meskipun banyak investor memiliki jangka waktu investasi yang pendek, pengembangan sumber daya di industri minyak dapat dengan mudah bertambah hingga lebih dari satu dekade.
Ini berarti aliran kas yang “aman” dari aset sekarang ujung-ujungnya dapat diinvestasikan pada generasi aset berbiaya tinggi berikutnya yang memiliki risiko stranding lebih besar.
Pada akhirnya, fakta bahwa sebagian besar aset minyak adalah milik negara, tidak melindungi investor yang telah menaruh uang mereka ke aset yang sudah terdaftar di bursa efek.
Pemerintah mungkin memiliki alasan-alasan strategis untuk mempertahankan aset-aset yang tidak menguntungkan, tetapi investor yang memiliki saham di perusahaan-perusahaan yang hanya diprivatisasi sebagian tidak akan bersikap seperti itu.
Selain itu, korban pertama dalam setiap penurunan harga jangka panjang adalah high-cost producer, banyak diantaranya adalah perusahaan yang sudah go public, sehingga investor akan semakin terkena dampaknya.
Pasar komoditas telah berulang kali terbukti rentan terhadap ekspektasi bahwa harga akan jatuh.
Mengingat tekanan politik untuk mengurangi dampak perubahan iklim, investor cerdas akan mengawasi dengan cermat adanya indikasi kebijakan yang akan menyebabkan penurunan permintaan dan kemungkinan aset-aset mereka menjadi financially stranded.
Jangan pernah menganggap stranding ini terjadi hanya dalam kondisi jangka panjang saja.
Sikap tersebut akan menempatkan investor pada posisi yang sama dengan pemegang saham terakhir di Peabody Energy, perusahaan batubara swasta terbesar di dunia yang kini berada di ambang kebangkrutan.
Fakta bahwa Peabody Energy masih beroperasi dan secara teknis tidak mengalami stranding, masih sedikit menenangkan para pemiliknya.
Not So Splendid Isolation
PARIS – At the end of the nineteenth century, the British Empire pursued a policy of what it called “splendid isolation,” reflecting its leaders’ determination to stand aloof from international engagements.
With the strength of its economy and the superiority of its navy, the United Kingdom could afford to avoid entanglement in others’ affairs.
Today, as recent events have shown, isolation is – more often than not – a mistake, an unenviable condition resulting from failed policies.
Cuba’s emergence from decades of forced isolation is a victory for the island, while North Korea’s pariah status has led it to the brink of collapse.
Similarly, Israel’s controversial policies and diplomacy risk leaving the Jewish state unprecedentedly alone.
And inward-looking policies in Russia and Turkey, driven largely by their leaders’ egos, are unlikely to produce anything but harm.
By beginning to normalize relations, Cuba and the United States have snatched victory from the jaws of a double defeat: the failure of the embargo and the failure of the Cuban economy.
The deal struck in December allows Cuban President Raúl Castro to claim success in mending ties without making significant political concessions.
For US President Barack Obama, the breakthrough is a chance to cement his legacy as a transformative president, like his models Abraham Lincoln and Franklin D. Roosevelt – even if, in ending nearly six decades of failed policy, he more closely resembles Richard Nixon, who presided over the opening to China.
Though Pope Francis, the first Latin American pontiff, was instrumental in facilitating the resumption of diplomatic ties, so was the plunging price of oil.
Continued isolation would have left the Cuban regime dangerously exposed, given the declining financial fortunes of its primary sponsor, petroleum-rich Venezuela.
North Korea stands in stark contrast to Cuba’s successful policy of engagement.
With its alleged involvement in the recent cyber attack on Sony Pictures, the regime has backed itself further into its tiny corner.
The result can only be deeper – and ultimately more painful – isolation.
Even China, North Korea’s main patron, is losing patience with its client state.
In an interdependent world, isolation is no longer a source of pride; on the contrary, it is a cause for concern.
Nowhere is that more evident than Israel.
Not even the country’s technological wonders or its vibrant civil society can make up for its unappealing politics and policies.
The result has been a dangerously rapid diminution of much-needed Western support.
Equally worrisome is the recent drift of former imperial powers Russia and Turkey.
Both countries’ leaders, Russian President Vladimir Putin and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, place their own power above their citizens’ interests, and both are fanning the flames of misguided nationalism and religious chauvinism, surrounded by frightened courtiers whose main function has been to keep reality at bay.
Turkey is more dynamic and energetic than Russia, and its economy certainly is faring much better, but both regimes are overestimating the strength of their position and underestimating the cost of their autocratic turn.
Just four years ago, Turkey was seen as a model to follow, particularly for the Muslim world.
Today, the country is on the defensive, fearful even of its own journalists.
During the early stages of the Islamic State’s siege of the Kurdish town of Kobani, just across the border in Syria, Turkey seemed to be replicating the Soviet Union’s tactic during the 1944 Warsaw uprising, when Nazi German troops fought Polish resistance fighters: Let the belligerents exhaust each other as much as possible before intervening.
Such policy may be brutally effective in the short term; in the long term, it is certain to be costly for Turkey.
Meanwhile, in Russia, the further the economy plunges, the more defiant Putin becomes.
The great unanswered question is how long Putin will be able to rely on nationalist kitsch to overwhelm Russians’ rational calculation of their interests.
What is certain – as every recent example shows – is that, in an increasingly transparent and interdependent world, isolation is less a splendor than a blunder.
Is Open Diplomacy Possible?
Is this an ideal that we should take seriously?
Is Wikileaks founder Julian Assange a true follower of Woodrow Wilson?
Wilson was unable to get the Treaty of Versailles to reflect his fourteen points fully, although it did include several of them, including the establishment of an association of states that proved to be the forerunner of today’s United Nations.
But Wilson then failed to get the US Senate to ratify the treaty, which included the covenant of the League of Nations.
Writing in The New York Times earlier this month, Paul Schroeter, an emeritus professor of history, argued that open diplomacy is often “fatally flawed,” and gave as an example the need for secret negotiations to reach agreement on the Treaty of Versailles.
Since the Treaty bears substantial responsibility for the resurrection of German nationalism that led to the rise of Hitler and World War II, it has a fair claim to being the most disastrous peace treaty in human history.
We have also learned more about the level of corruption in some of the regimes that the US supports, like those in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and in other countries with which the US has friendly relations, notably Russia. We now know that the Saudi royal family has been urging the US to undertake a military attack on Iran to prevent it from becoming capable of producing nuclear weapons.
Here, perhaps, we learned something for which the US government deserves credit: it has resisted that suggestion.
Knowledge is generally considered a good thing; so, presumably, knowing more about how the US thinks and operates around the world is also good.
In a democracy, citizens pass judgment on their government, and if they are kept in the dark about what their government is doing, they cannot be in a position to make well-grounded decisions.
Even in non-democratic countries, people have a legitimate interest in knowing about actions taken by the government.
Nevertheless, it isn’t always the case that openness is better than secrecy.
If governments did not mislead their citizens so often, there would be less need for secrecy, and if leaders knew that they could not rely on keeping the public in the dark about what they are doing, they would have a powerful incentive to behave better.
I was visiting Israel as Australia’s foreign minister to argue the case for rapid implementation of the Oslo peace accords – all the way through to negotiated acceptance of Palestinian statehood.
I concluded my pitch by saying, with perhaps a little more cheek than was appropriate, “But of course I’m preaching to the converted.”
Rabin’s response is etched in my memory.
He paused, then said with a little half-smile: “To the committed, not the converted.”
For all his deep emotional attachment to the idea of Israel embracing all of historical Judea and Samaria, Rabin knew that the only way to ensure a democratic Jewish state with viable, secure borders was to accept a Palestinian state alongside it, equally secure and viable.
They would share Jerusalem as a capital, and find a mutually acceptable solution to the enormously sensitive issue of the return of Palestinian refugees.
Rabin’s murder was a catastrophe from which the peace process has never recovered.
No Israeli leader since has shown anything like his far-sighted vision, commitment, and capacity to deliver a negotiated two-state solution.
Ehud Barak and Ehud Olmert came close, but not close enough.
And since then Binyamin Netanyahu has lived down to every expectation of his statesmanship.
His routine capitulation to the demands of the most extreme elements of a manifestly dysfunctional Knesset, and his continuing support of his impossibly divisive and pugnacious foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, have earned him little praise at home or abroad.
One need not be naïve or in denial about the Palestinians’ multiple problems and missteps over the years to recognize that most of the recent obstacles to progress have been erected in Israel.
Now, with negotiations at an impasse, settlement building continuing unabated, no end in sight to the never-ending humiliation of occupation, and all other forms of leverage evidently exhausted, the Palestinians are going to the United Nations to seek recognition in some form of their statehood.
They want full UN membership, but – facing inevitable veto of that option by the United States in the Security Council – are willing to accept as a fallback a majority vote by the General Assembly recognizing Palestine as a non-member “observer state,” the status now enjoyed by the Vatican.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and his colleagues know perfectly well that UN recognition by itself will not deliver an end to occupation and the full realization of a sovereign Palestine.
Only negotiated agreement on all of the critical outstanding issues – boundary definition, Jerusalem, security guarantees for Israel, and refugees – can do that.
But they have persisted on this course in the face of a fierce campaign to dissuade them – including threats of Israeli sanctions and a cut-off of financial support to the Palestinian Authority by the US Congress – owing to their wholly understandable lack of confidence that anything will move without some new spark.
Despite frantic efforts by the US and the European Union to find some compromise that would head off a UN vote by kick-starting real negotiations, it is much more probable that, even after a US veto in the Security Council, an early UN General Assembly vote will deliver a strong majority for observer-state status.
The question for Israel and its friends to address is what the downside risks of that outcome really are, and to calibrate their reaction accordingly.
The argument has been made that recognition as a state, even in limited form, will give Palestine the standing that it probably lacks currently to seek prosecutions in the International Criminal Court for alleged violations of international law.
Even if right, it is difficult to see why Israel and its friends should accept that as a make-or-break argument.
The ICC is not a kangaroo court, and allegations without substance can be expected to be treated accordingly.
Recognition as a state will not change the situation with respect to Hamas.
Of course, its current ideological hostility to Israel’s very existence is a serious issue; but Israel and the West should not compound their grievous mistake of not recognizing the legitimacy of its electoral victory in Gaza by rejecting any Palestinian state in which Hamas plays a governing role.
The door to dialogue with Hamas should remain open.
The more positive argument – as Rabin would certainly have understood – is that it is overwhelmingly in Israel’s own interest to defuse this issue by accepting, once and for all, that Palestinian statehood is an indispensable requirement of its own long-term peace and security.
Indeed, Israel should treat the UN vote as an opportunity for a new start to negotiations, rather than an excuse for renewed confrontation.
Such a constructive outcome has become more urgent than ever, given the Middle East’s new geopolitical realities following the Arab Spring.
Moreover, a perceived change of direction on the Israeli-Palestinian issue would be hugely beneficial for the West in its relations with the Islamic world.
Recent polling to mark the 10th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks has shown alarming persistence of the animosity generated by the interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan.
It is difficult to imagine Israel’s leadership changing course at this stage, and it is probably too late for the Obama administration to escape from the domestic political vice in which it seems pinned on this issue.
But being on the wrong side of history is never a comfortable position.
And that is exactly where the US, Israel, and its closest friends – including my own country, Australia – will be if they resist the tide of international sentiment in favor of moving now to recognize Palestinian statehood.&#160;
Israel and NATO – Between Membership and Partnership
MADRID – The idea of integrating Israel into NATO has frequently been advanced as bait to encourage the Jewish state to make the necessary concessions for an Arab-Israeli peace settlement.
And some Israeli leaders – Foreign Minister Avigdor Liberman, for example – are convinced that joining NATO would act as a vital deterrent against Iran.
But it is highly unlikely that Israel’s full integration into the Alliance is feasible from NATO’s standpoint.
The Alliance would not be happy to apply Article 5 of the NATO charter, which would oblige its members to fight for Israel if it were attacked by any of its many potential enemies in an endemically dangerous region.
Nor is it clear that membership would be in the best interest of Israel, a country whose defense doctrine has been always based on self-reliance and freedom of maneuver in security matters. Israel’s unwritten alliance with the United States is a more convenient alternative.
Cooperation and even partnership with NATO – an interim stage potentially leading to membership – is another matter.
Notwithstanding the stalled peace process and the adverse effect that Israel’s conflict with the Palestinians is having on its international standing, NATO and Israel have been incrementally strengthening their cooperation in recent years.
It also changed the theater of operation, and forced the Alliance to shift its attention from Europe to the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and beyond.
NATO’s Mediterranean emphasis was inaugurated in 1994 through the Mediterranean Dialogue, which linked countries like Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Mauritania, Algeria, and Tunisia in security discussions with the Alliance.
The Dialogue was not exactly an edifying success, however.
The Istanbul Cooperation Initiative of 2004, triggered by the trauma of the 9/11 attacks, holds far greater potential, for it transforms NATO’s relations with friendly states in the Middle East from dialogue to partnership – a level comparable to the Partnership for Peace program used to promote Central and Eastern European countries to full membership.
Under this framework, multilateral cooperation in combating terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction was offered to the region’s main actors.
The Initiative also envisages the promotion of regional defense reforms and the improvement of interoperability among military forces in the region.
Nevertheless, both the Mediterranean Dialogue and the Istanbul Initiative suffer from the lack of a real multilateral culture of cooperation in security matters among the main regional players.
The Arab-Israeli conflict is a major political obstacle, but by no means the only one.
Morocco, Algeria, and Libya are hardly partners for such regional cooperation, which is also the case for most Arab countries in the Middle East.
Not surprisingly, then, of all the states in the region, it is Israel that has established the closest links with NATO. This reflects the benefits that NATO believes can be drawn from Israel’s unique military experience.
Israel recently became the first country to conclude an Individual Cooperation Program with NATO, through which it conducts an ongoing strategic dialogue with the Alliance covering a wide array of areas, including terrorism, intelligence sharing, nuclear proliferation,
Both sides seem eager to expand the scope of their partnership, with the objective of    reaching a high level of interoperability.
Recently, in anticipation of a hypothetical confrontation with Iran, a major military maneuver – the Juniper Cobra exercise – was conducted to test Israel’s integration into US ballistic missile defenses.
American sources described the drill as “the most complete air missile defense system we’ve ever done anywhere in the world.”
It was a major contribution, they said, to the development of a planned NATO missile shield for Europe.
The options for further cooperation are many, ranging from intelligence and procurement to the development of an updated anti-terrorism doctrine (including cyber-terrorism), a domain to which NATO is a newcomer.
David Ben-Gurion’s dream of Israel becoming a NATO member might not materialize, but the developing partnership reflects the Alliance’s unequivocal recognition that Israel shares the challenges facing the West and is a vital partner in developing responses to them.
Israel and Palestine After Oslo
RAMALLAH – On September 13, 1993, Shimon Peres and Mahmoud Abbas met on the South Lawn of the White House to sign the Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles, or the Oslo Accords.
PLO leader Yasir Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin then sealed the agreement with a historic handshake.
The Oslo Accords – the result of secret talks that had been encouraged by the Norwegian government and conducted in the country’s capital – called for a five-year transitional period during which Israeli forces would withdraw from the Gaza Strip and unspecified areas of the West Bank, and a Palestinian Authority would be established.
Letters of recognition between the PLO and Israel accompanied the agreement.
The ultimate aim, though never explicitly stated, was to create a Palestinian state roughly within the 1967 borders.
But the goals laid out in the Oslo Accords remain unfulfilled.
In fact, the agreement is unlikely to survive 89-year-old Peres and 77-year-old Abbas, who are now presidents of Israel and the Palestinian Authority, respectively.
Several factors contributed to the deterioration of prospects for lasting peace.
Perhaps the most important factor has been the continuation – and, at times, acceleration – of Israeli settlement activities in occupied Palestinian territories.
Some Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza objected to the Accords’ failure to call explicitly for the end of illegal Israeli settlement building.
But, given the PLO’s weakness and lack of support in the Arab world after its refusal to oppose Iraq’s occupation of Kuwait, its leaders accepted the flawed agreement, arguing that Palestinian borders would be agreed upon during the transition period.
But, 19 years later, the Washington-based Foundation for Middle East Peace reports that more Jewish settlements have been built in the occupied Palestinian territories since the Oslo Accords than before they were signed.
As a result, the need for Israel to freeze settlement activities has become an international – not just a Palestinian – requirement for effective peace talks.
Another crucial factor is continued violence.
Since Rabin and Arafat shook hands, roughly 7,500 Palestinians and 1,400 Israelis have been killed, and many more have been injured or jailed.
Israel’s unilateral policy of demolishing homes in Palestine has resulted in scores of Palestinians being deported or made homeless in Jerusalem, Hebron, the Jordan Valley, and elsewhere.
While killings have declined sharply in recent years, hardly a day passes without some form of violence, often against civilians – including children.
Fueling this violence is growing hopelessness in the absence of a diplomatic agreement.
While international leaders fill the airwaves with talk of peace, they have failed to address the conflict boldly and resolutely.
For example, US President Barack Obama’s election four years ago revived hope that negotiations would resume.
But Obama’s peace envoy, George Mitchell, resigned, and the quartet (the United Nations, the European Union, Russia, and the United States) was sidelined.
Meanwhile, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s conditional promise to support Palestinian statehood has been rendered meaningless by his government’s provocative settlement policies in the areas that were supposed to comprise the Palestinian state.
The Oslo Accords divided the occupied territories into three regions.
Palestinians took charge of the most densely populated urban areas, while Israel maintained total military and administrative control over the largest territory, “Area C,” which makes up 61% of the West Bank.
Many Palestinians believe that this serves a long-term Zionist aim to keep the land without the people.
Indeed, Israeli settlements have amounted to de facto Israeli annexation of territory into which Palestinians seek to expand their state.
As a result, without a clear agreement on borders, Area C will witness the most serious confrontations.
The Oslo Accords have also failed to put Palestinians on a path toward economic independence.
According to the World Bank and other international agencies, slow and complicated bureaucratic and security processes, including hundreds of checkpoints, make Palestinian economic development impossible.
Palestinian dependence on Israeli goods exacerbates the problem, as does Israeli control over the movement of goods and people to, within, and between the West Bank and the blockaded Gaza strip.
The 1994 Paris Protocol, one of the most important annexes to the Oslo Accords, was intended to define economic relations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
But it has been hijacked by Israel for the benefit of its businesses.
The symbolic decision on statehood, followed by Abbas’s exit, will mark the end of the process that began in Oslo, and that has been undermining Palestinian aspirations for nearly two decades.
With the Oslo Process now clearly dead, two options remain: chaos, extremism, and violence, or a new peace process – ideally one that can end the occupation and allow for Palestinian independence and freedom alongside a safe and secure Israel.
Israel’s Government Hawks and Military Doves
PRINCETON – Those who lead Israel’s defense establishment often come to consider peace with the Palestinians a necessary condition for the country’s security.
Being tasked with maintaining the territories Israel has occupied since the Six-Day War in 1967 evidently causes the military and security brass to support political measures that would end the occupation.
And yet the government shows no interest in pursuing a permanent settlement.
To appreciate this divide, consider the late Meir Dagan, who served as Major General of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and then as Director of Mossad, Israel’s intelligence agency.
Several years ago, I sat on a panel at a conference in Jerusalem convened by then-Israeli President Shimon Peres.
To my right sat Dagan, who had just completed eight years as head of Mossad; to my left sat Dore Gold, a former academic and former Israeli ambassador.
The two men held very different views about how best to guarantee Israel’s security, and it is worth recapitulating their respective arguments.
Gold argued that returning to pre-1967 armistice lines would leave Israel without “defensible borders.”
He insisted that Israel could guard against threats from the east only if it maintained a military presence in the West Bank and controlled the Jordan River – which runs along the border separating Jordan from Israel and the West Bank.
Dagan countered that the military’s role is to safeguard Israel’s borders, regardless of where those borders are drawn.
While the IDF would certainly prefer to operate with the strategic advantages that holding more territory can confer, it would fulfill its mission under whatever conditions the Israeli government set for it.
But Dagan went further, describing the principle of “defensible borders” as a canard that ignores the intentions and capabilities of the party on the other side of the border.
With an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, the burden of defending the border would be vastly reduced, because Israel would have a serious cross-border partner with a mutual interest in avoiding armed conflict.
A Palestinian security force would by default provide a significant measure of security for Israel as well.
Dagan’s dovish position has a long tradition in Israel’s defense establishment.
Peace Now, a nongovernmental organization that represents Israelis who support a political resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, was founded in 1978 when 348 IDF reservists sent a letter to then-Prime Minister Menachem Begin urging him to conclude the peace process with Egypt.
Similarly, in the aftermath of the first Intifada, the Palestinian uprising that lasted from 1987 to 1993, the defense establishment led the effort for peace.
In 1991 Yitzhak Rabin – a former IDF chief of staff, prime minister, and defense minister who at the time served on the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee of the Knesset, Israel’s legislature – argued for a comprehensive regional peace effort.
Like Dagan, Rabin considered the Arab-Israeli conflict to be a burden on Israel’s security, and both active and retired military officers have since then led or participated in negotiations with the Palestinians and with Syria.
Most recently, many prominent former defense figures supported the deal reached between Iran and the so-called P5+1 (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, plus Germany) over Iran’s nuclear program – an agreement that Israel’s government bitterly opposed.
Indeed, the divide between the security establishment and the politicians now governing Israel seems wider than ever.
Most former senior defense officials echo Dagan’s argument, while government officials sound more like Gold.
A number of advocacy organizations have emerged to push for peace.
The Peace and Security Association, which includes hundreds of veterans of the IDF, Mossad, Shin Bet (Israel’s domestic security agency), and the National Police Force, says its mission is, “to promote a sustainable political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a critical component of Israel’s national security and social resilience.”
The nongovernmental organization Commanders for Israel’s Security (CIS), with more than 200 members from Israel’s security elite, just published a paper titled “Security First” with a comprehensive set of proposals to revitalize efforts to share peacefully the land west of the Jordan River.
CIS maintains that terror against Israel cannot be defeated by military means alone, and that any peace process must improve Palestinians’ quality of life.
Senior former Israeli security officials also participated actively in a study undertaken by the Center for a New American Security that produced a detailed security plan for an Israeli-Palestinian agreement.
Some former officials have gone even further: Former Mossad Director Efraim Halevy argues that Israel should accept “the political reality of Hamas” and open a dialogue with the organization that governs the Gaza Strip.
Likewise, in the 2012 documentary The Gatekeepers, six former heads of Shin Bet reflect on the lessons of the past few decades and issue a call for peace with the Palestinians.
Remarkably, Israel’s political leadership has not suffered electorally for ignoring the views of the defense establishment.
There was no public reaction when, after The Gatekeepers was released, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s office issued a statement saying he had not seen the documentary and had no intention of doing so.
Given the public’s high regard for the Israeli defense establishment, particularly relative to the government, voters’ indifference is a mystery.
In a 2015 survey conducted by the Central Bureau of Statistics, 93% of Israeli Jews expressed trust in the army, compared to only 40% in the government, and only 22% in Israeli political parties.
One answer is that, after so many failed efforts, the Israeli public is disillusioned with the peace process.
Moreover, acts of incitement and terrorism emanating from the occupied territories have intensified.
This allows the current governing coalition to justify policies – such as enabling expanded settlement activity in the West Bank – that further deepen the conflict.
Against this backdrop, Netanyahu has portrayed himself as Israel’s protector, appropriating the esteem afforded to the defense establishment.
Those calling for a renewed peace process will now have to make their case to the public and reclaim that title.
Whether they can do that in a context of regional turmoil and domestic insecurity remains uncertain, to say the least.
Israel at Sixty
Tel Aviv – Ten years ago, on Israel’s 50th anniversary, the peace process begun by the path-breaking Oslo accord, reached by Israel and the Palestinian Authority in 1993, established the legitimacy of two peoples’ national existence in their shared homeland on the basis of territorial compromise.
There was a general feeling that this long conflict was being resolved.
Unfortunately, the past ten years have witnessed a painful setback in many areas.
Individuals and peoples are capable of enduring difficulties if there is a sense that the future will be better and conflicts resolved.
But a sudden backward regression can lead to despair, which we feel today.
Why is it that struggles far more complex than the Israel-Arab conflict – apartheid in South Africa, the partition of Germany, or the collapse of the Soviet Union – all seem to have been resolved, usually without bloodshed, whereas the Middle East conflict, after more than a century, claims more victims every day?
One reason is that this conflict is unparalleled in human history.
There is no other example of a nation that returned after a 2,000-year absence to a territory that it never stopped regarding as its homeland.
So it is no wonder that the Arabs, especially the Palestinians, remain unable to comprehend, existentially or morally, what has befallen them. 
The Jews’ return to Israel was not colonialism, as the Arabs thought.
Not only did the Jews lack a mother country, but in Europe they lived as a foreign nation, leading to expulsion and annihilation.
The Jews did not come to exploit Palestine’s resources or subjugate its residents in order to transfer the economic benefits elsewhere.
Nor did they come like the American or Australian settlers in order to build a new identity and assimilate the natives into it. 
Zionism aimed at renewing and deepening an old identity.
From the beginning, there was no intention to damage the identity of the native-born Arabs, or to merge it with the traditional Jewish identity.
Because the Arabs had no corresponding historical model from which to learn how to relate to the phenomenon that had overtaken them, they tried to interpret Zionism as colonialism, and thought that other nations’ fight against colonialism provided a model for resistance.
Thus, the legitimacy of Israel’s right to exist remains an open question.
Indeed, never before has the question of legitimacy been so fundamental to a conflict between nations.
Although recognition of Israeli nationality is increasingly widespread, even among most nations of the Middle East, it remains obstructed by two closely related – and dangerous – notions.
The first is the growing shift in the Middle East, and elsewhere, from rejection of Israel’s legitimacy to rejection of Zionism’s legitimacy.
The second is the growing tendency among Palestinians, other Arabs, and many Europeans to prefer a bi-national Israeli-Palestinian state to the original two-state solution.
Hamas spokesmen speak not of “Israelis” but of “Zionists,” as does Iran’s President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad.
Discussion about the “de-Zionization” of Israel can also be heard at universities worldwide and even among Jewish leftists.
In Israel, too, there are people, though not many, who call themselves “post-Zionist” or “non-Zionist.”
But the sole practical expression of Zionism nowadays is the Law of Return, which is not a racist law but a moral law.
When the world’s nations decided in favor of the creation of an independent Jewish state, they did not designate it only for the 600,000 Jews then living there.
Rather, they intended that Israel would help solve the Jewish problem everywhere in the world by enabling every Jew who wished to leave the diaspora to do so.
The idea of a bi-national Israeli-Palestinian state embodies the dangerous illusion that two peoples who are utterly different in their language, religion, culture, and history, who are divided by a deep economic chasm and connected to their own external worlds – the Palestinians to the Arab world and Israelis to the rest of world Jewry – can be combined in the framework of a single state.
Moreover, these are two peoples that have been intensely engaged in a bloody and intractable conflict for the last century.
Both Palestinians and Israelis, as two different nations, deserve their own states.
There must be a clear border between the two.
In Israel, an Israeli Arab-Palestinian minority has full citizenship, even if much remains to be done to afford it full social and economic equality.
It is possible that in the Palestinian state there would be a small Jewish minority, consisting of West Bank settlers whose attachment to the Biblical homeland is so intense that they would be willing to live under Palestinian control – provided that the Palestinians would grant them Palestinian citizenship.
During the early years of Zionism, the great Jewish scholar Gershom Scholem – who was born in Berlin – said that the Jews were embarking on a difficult journey, a return to history.
In other words, the Jews, who based their identity in the diaspora on mythological memory and time, were now returning to its clear-cut elements: a territory defined by borders, and a detailed chronological understanding of their own history.
Sixty years later, the Arab-Israeli conflict reminds us that the Jews’ journey back to history continues.
A Yellow Star for the Jewish State?
PARIS – The world has recently seen a rapid succession of efforts to delegitimize Israel.
Earlier this month, the CEO of French telecommunications company Orange declared at a press conference in Cairo his desire to part ways with an American partner that is too closely tied to Israel.
In May, Palestinians tried to have the Israeli soccer federation expelled from FIFA.
And Britain’s National Union of Students recently approved a resolution supporting boycotts and sanctions against Israel.
Meanwhile, a campaign to ban Israeli products has been gaining strength in the United States and Europe.
And then there are the many performers who – following the lead of Brian Eno, Elvis Costello, Vanessa Paradis, Roger Waters, and others – wonder out loud whether or not to appear in “occupied Palestine.”
None of these developments is, in itself, of great moment.
But, taken together, they create a climate – and perhaps form a watershed.
And this is no accident.
All of the recent episodes can be traced, more or less directly, to the global Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) movement, established in 2005 by 171 Palestinian nongovernmental organizations. So they provide a good occasion to remind those who support this campaign of its true nature.
BDS is supposedly a worldwide civil-society movement embodying respect for law, democracy, and human rights.
If that is true, why target the only country in the region that was founded on those values, and that has continued, for better or worse – and despite a nearly 70-year state of war with its neighbors – to be broadly faithful to them?
How is it that these scrupulous humanists have had nothing whatsoever to say about the 200,000 victims of Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad, the crimes of the Islamic State, or the massive deportation of Christians from the Plain of Nineveh, to name just a few contemporaneous issues?
BDS is an “anti-apartheid” movement, comes the reply, adopting the methods and spirit of Nelson Mandela in South Africa.
That sounds splendid.
But then, once again, why the focus on Israel?
With its multiethnic polity and society – a mix of Western and Eastern Europeans, Americans and Russians, Ethiopians and Turks, Kurds, Iranians, and Arabs (17 of whom sit in the Knesset) – Israel is precisely the opposite of an apartheid state.
By contrast, in Qatar, whose foundations (together with Saudi think tanks) provide most of the financing for the BDS movement, 95% of the labor force consists of Asian non-citizens working in slave-like conditions under the kafala system, which is a close cousin to apartheid.
Perhaps the goal is to pressure Israel to conclude a peace deal with the Palestinians, which surely is worth a little accommodation with Qatar.
In that case, it is a peculiar peacemaking strategy that puts pressure on only one of the belligerents, and that, instead of strengthening the hand of the many Israelis who favor negotiation, imposes collective punishment in the form of exclusion from the community of nations.
Only one real formula for peace exists, and everyone knows it.
That formula, enshrined in the Oslo Accords, is the two-state solution.
One has only to read the declarations of Omar Barghouti, Ali Abunimah, and other promoters of the BDS movement to see that this solution is precisely what they do not want.
They prefer a “one-state solution” (Abunimah’s term) – under a Palestinian flag, of course.
Is this just a detail that can be safely ignored on the grounds that BDS targets “only” the territories, the Jewish settlements being built there, and the goods that the settlers produce?
This is another sucker trap.
Here, too, it is enough to read the movement’s founding declaration of July 9, 2005, which specifies that one of its “three objectives” is to “protect” the “rights of Palestinian refugees to return to their homes and properties as stipulated in UN resolution 194.”
In fact and in law, that would amount to establishing on those lands a new Arab country that could be counted on, in short order, to undergo an ethnic cleansing that would make it judenfrei.
And, finally, how can I refrain from reminding those whose memory is as full of holes as their thinking that the idea of boycotting Israel is not as new as it appears?
In fact, it is older than the Jewish state, having emerged on December 2, 1945, from a decision by the Arab League, which then wasted no time in relying on that decision to reject the United Nations’ dual resolution to establish two states.
Among the promoters of this brilliant idea were Nazi war criminals who had settled in Syria and Egypt, where they gave their new masters lessons in marking Jewish shops and businesses.
A comparison is not an argument.
And the meaning of a slogan does not reside entirely in its genealogy.
But words do have a history. As do debates.
And it is better to know that history, if we wish to avoid repeating its ugliest scenes.
The truth is that the BDS movement is nothing more than a sinister caricature of the anti-totalitarian and anti-apartheid struggles.
It is a campaign whose instigators have no aim other than to discriminate against, delegitimize, and vilify an Israel that in their mind never stopped wearing its yellow star.
To activists of good faith who may have been taken in by duplicitous representations of the movement, I would say only that there are too many noble causes in need of assistance to allow oneself to be enlisted in a dubious one.
Those worthy causes include fighting the jihadist decapitators, saving the women and girls enslaved by Boko Haram, defending the Middle East’s imperiled Christians and Arab democrats, and, of course, striving for a just peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Israel’s Terrorist Aid
NEW YORK – The decision by Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s government to demolish the family home of Abdelrahman al-Shaludi, a Palestinian who rammed his car into a group of pedestrians, killing two (including a three-month-old baby), was both callous and counterproductive.
By punishing people whose only known offense was being related to a criminal, Israel inadvertently shifted the focus from the attack, the perpetrator of which was killed immediately after his crime, to Israel’s apparent embrace of a policy of collective punishment.
If Israel’s principal concern is deterring terrorist attacks, it should be doing everything in its power to ensure that such acts are universally condemned.
This includes making sure that people who carry out attacks, and those who aid and abet their crimes, are lawfully punished.
Punishing terrorists’ families and neighbors, or those who share their ethnic and religious identity, has the opposite effect, intensifying hostility toward Israel and dissipating the moral outrage that should be mobilized against the actual perpetrators of terrorism.
As observers increasingly equate the two sides, regarding both as victims and victimizers alike, international support and sympathy for Israel wanes.
This is not the first time that Israel has been accused of collective punishment.
Israel’s government regularly destroyed the family homes of alleged terrorists for years before acknowledging that the policy was damaging its image – without deterring terrorist acts.
The latest house demolition seems to confirm that Israel’s government is resuming the practice of collective punishment that it abandoned a decade ago.
Why would Netanyahu’s government resume a failed policy?
The most likely explanation is that Netanyahu wants to reassure the Israeli public that no act of terrorism will be tolerated – even if that means a vindictive and cruel response.
In fact, such domestic political considerations were probably also a major driver of the killing and destruction that took place in Gaza over the summer.
Of course, Israel has the right to defend itself against indiscriminate rocket barrages like that launched from Gaza into its territory, and to punish lawfully those responsible.
But Israel did more than defend itself.
It mounted a demonstrably disproportionate response, killing a large number of noncombatants, including hundreds of children, and destroying thousands of homes and commercial enterprises.
While the initiative may have appeased Israeli public outrage over the rockets, it damaged Israel’s standing in many other countries considerably.
More problematic, Israel’s actions in Gaza probably increased its vulnerability to terrorist attacks, not only by fueling animosity toward Israel, but also by suggesting that Netanyahu’s government will most likely discredit itself with its response.
That propensity to act against its own interests to appease an enraged and emotional public was underscored by the recent destruction of al-Shaludi’s family home.
To be sure, Israel is not alone in responding irrationally to terrorist provocations.
Some aspects of the United States’ response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, reflect the same tendency – but on a significantly larger scale and with more far-reaching consequences.
While the attacks were immensely costly in terms of lives lost and material damage, the US-led war in Iraq that followed was beyond disproportionate; it was truly devastating.
And its consequences continue to unfold, as the brutal predations of the Islamic State attest.
It is time for governments in Israel, the US, and elsewhere to recognize that by allowing their citizens’ outrage to drive their responses to terrorist attacks, they are offering themselves as the terrorists’ best weapon.
Only by adopting a pragmatic and legal approach can they galvanize support against their enemies and reduce their citizens’ vulnerability to attack.
That, rather than slaking the public’s thirst for vengeance, should be their primary objective.
Bibi’s Big Surprise
NEW YORK – Binyamin Netanyahu proved the pollsters wrong – not once, but twice.
In the weeks and days leading up to Israel’s election, his defeat was widely predicted.
Then, in the hours after the vote, exit polls suggested parity between his Likud party and the center-left Zionist Union, led by his chief rival, Yitzhak Herzog, with a slight edge for the right-wing bloc.
Several hours after the polls closed, it turned out that Likud was the big winner, gaining 30 of the Knesset’s 120 seats, compared to 24 for the Zionist Union.
As a result, Netanyahu will have no real difficulty in forming a right-wing government coalition.
The kingmakers in the event of parity – the smaller parties and electoral lists in the center of the political spectrum – have lost most of their bargaining power.
It was a crucial election in two respects: The outcome reflected the Israeli electorate’s sharp turn to the right and has reinforced Netanyahu’s political dominance.
As recently as 2006, Ehud Olmert had won an election in Israel on a dovish platform, pledging to extend Ariel Sharon’s unilateral withdrawal from Gaza to the West Bank.
In the 2009 election, the Kadima party, under his successor, Tzipi Livni, received one seat more than Likud, but was unable to form a government coalition.
Netanyahu did, and went on to win the 2013 election.
Now he has won yet again.
The turn to the right derives from both structural and circumstantial factors.
Israel’s right-wing parties draw support from the Orthodox and ultra-Orthodox communities, West Bank settlers, and a large part of the Sephardic and Russian communities.
When the center left won elections in the past two decades, it did so under a powerful security-oriented leader: Yitzhak Rabin, Ehud Barak, Sharon (after his conversion), and Sharon’s successor, Olmert.
Though Herzog and Livni – who formed the Zionist Union by merging Herzog’s Labor party and Livni’s Hatnuah party – possess several attractive qualities, they do not match the prototype preferred by today’s average voter.
These structural elements have been reinforced by developments in the region, which have reinforced the sense among Israeli voters that they are threatened by numerous enemies: Iran and its nuclear ambitions; Hezbollah and Hamas and their missiles; the rise of ISIS amid state failure in Iraq, Syria, and elsewhere.
Against this backdrop, it is easier to defend the status quo than to advocate accommodation involving territorial concessions.
Netanyahu’s victory was clearly an impressive personal comeback.
In the weeks leading up to the elections, it seemed that the public had grown weary of a prime minister who had been in office long enough to be corrupted by the arrogance of power and tainted by a raft of petty scandals.
He conducted a campaign that relied on his eloquence and charisma, as well as on scare tactics.
Most significantly, he swung sharply to the right, out-flanking his rivals.
Thus, two days prior to the election, he rescinded his formal acceptance, in 2009, of a two-state solution, vowing that his government would never allow Palestinian statehood.
The formation of a right-wing government will have a profound impact on the country’s foreign and domestic policies.
Netanyahu has already destroyed his relationship with US President Barack Obama, and Israel’s relationship with the European Union is not much better.
A government that continues to settle the West Bank and refuses to negotiate with the Palestinians will face erosion of its international legitimacy, boycotts, and sanctions.
Relations with Egypt and Jordan will also be affected, and hopes of collaboration with the moderate Arab camp will be frustrated.
On the home front, attempts by Likud and its right-wing allies to tamper with the legal system, the press, and other institutions identified with the “old elite” are likely to gain momentum.
Netanyahu knows how risky this course will be at home and abroad, which is why he is likely to invite Herzog to join the government as a junior partner.
Herzog would then confront the same dilemma that his predecessors faced in 2009 and 2013.
The arguments for and against joining the government are well known.
Doing so is the responsible thing to do, offering the opportunity to moderate the government’s policies and reduce the danger of a disaster.
And, by holding a major portfolio, a junior partner can avoid marginalization and strengthen its position for the next election.
But, as Livni and Barak know, a junior partner more often ends up having no real impact on the core issues, merely providing window dressing for the status quo.
Nor are Herzog and Livni free to make that choice on their own.
Some party members are eager for cabinet portfolios and the other trappings of power; but many more would rather stay out and fight.
When Netanyahu traveled to Washington, DC, to deliver his controversial speech on Iran to the US Congress, he was described by his American supporters as “Churchillian,” the lonely courageous voice warning a complacent world against an evil force.
One can only hope that now Netanyahu will be Churchillian in a more profound sense, by using his empowered position to make the bold decisions needed to lead his country out of its current predicament and paralysis.
Isolating Israel
RAMALLAH – Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu certainly has reason to celebrate.
He surprised nearly everyone by securing a decisive electoral victory, winning a third consecutive term in office after his right-wing Likud party gained a five-seat advantage in the Knesset over its main rival, the center-left Zionist Union.
But the celebration is likely to be short.
The way Netanyahu finagled this outcome – renouncing his commitment to a two-state solution with Palestine and pledging to continue building settlements on occupied land – will almost certainly have serious political and diplomatic consequences for Israel.
In recent years, Netanyahu’s hardline stance has increasingly undermined Israel’s international credibility, while convincing the Palestinians living in the occupied territories that a genuine agreement with Israel is impossible.
(Indeed, Palestinians showed little interest in the outcome of this election.)
Now that Netanyahu has intensified his right-wing rhetoric – and been rewarded with another term in power – the international movement to isolate Israel will only gain momentum.
After all, support for direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine no longer makes sense, even for Israel’s main ally, the United States, because the assumptions underlying this approach have been demolished.
The first such assumption was that both parties accepted the two-state solution as the general basis for a compromise agreement.
And, indeed, at Bar Ilan University in 2009, Netanyahu declared his willingness to accept the creation of a Palestinian state, on the condition that it be demilitarized and that the Palestinians recognize Israel as the homeland of the Jewish people.
This is no longer the case: two days before the election, Netanyahu explicitly vowed that his government would never allow Palestinian statehood.
The second key assumption underlying peace negotiations was that Israel, as a democratic country, would not want to rule another people through military occupation – thereby denying them their basic human right of self-determination – in perpetuity.
But Netanyahu has now shown that Israel is a democracy only for its Jewish citizens, dismissing Israel’s Arab citizens, who comprise 20% of the country’s population, in blatantly racist terms.
In the last hours of the election, Netanyahu called on Jewish Israelis to turn out, because “the Arabs are voting in droves.”
By eliminating the two assumptions critical to negotiations with the Palestinians, Israel’s current leadership – and, indirectly, the majority of Israelis – has destroyed the thin veneer of legitimacy that the international community had erected around a country that has been occupying another people for nearly five decades.
The justification for not censoring Israel too harshly in international institutions or using boycotts to punish Israel for war crimes is no longer valid.
Obviously, some groups have long recognized the need for sterner measures.
Most notably, in 2005 Palestinians living in the diaspora and others launched the international boycotts, divestment, and sanctions (BDS) movement, with the goal of compelling Israel to stop violating international law, particularly with its settlement policies.
The BDS movement has met significant resistance in many parts of the world, owing to the belief that its tactics are unnecessary and unhelpful.
That will now change.
Similarly, the US opposed the move by Palestine – a United Nations-recognized non-member observer state – to join the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Despite the lack of progress in peace negotiations, American leaders continued to believe in Israel’s democracy and willingness to pursue a two-state solution.
That, too, will change.
Simply put, now that Israel’s leaders have renounced their commitment to a negotiated peace with Palestine, the international community can no longer justify the prevailing approach.
Instead, it must live up to its professed values by isolating Israel politically and economically.
Moreover, world leaders should support Palestine’s efforts to resolve its conflicts with Israel through neutral international agencies like the ICC.
And international forums like the United Nations Security Council must condemn Israel’s refusal to end its 47-year occupation, making it clear that the country will no longer benefit from a diplomatic double standard.
In 1990, when Saddam Hussein sent Iraqi forces to occupy Kuwait, claiming that he was retaking lost territory, the UN Security Council voted, based on chapter seven of the UN charter, to punish Iraq by imposing a strict financial and trade embargo.
Likewise, when apartheid South Africa refused to provide its black majority with their fundamental human rights, the international community supported a major campaign of divestment and sanctions.
Today, Israel is relying on historical claims to occupy another people.
Its government, which has revealed its racist underpinnings, is denying four million Palestinians basic rights, and even using military force against them.
The international community needs to respond accordingly, intensifying boycotts, divestments, and sanctions, until Palestinians are allowed to live freely in a truly independent state alongside Israel.
Israel Unbound
TEL AVIV – Israel’s persistent occupation of Palestinian lands is irreparably damaging its international standing – or so the conventional wisdom goes.
In fact, Israel currently enjoys a degree of global influence unprecedented in its history, as a slew of new international challenges give its foreign policy, long held hostage by the single issue of Palestine, significantly more room for maneuver.
Recognizing mounting popular opposition to unequivocal support for Israel in the West, Israel has been looking elsewhere for economic, and ultimately political, partners.
From 2004 to 2014, Israeli exports to Asia tripled, reaching $16.7 billion last year – one-fifth of total exports.
Israel now trades more with the once implacably hostile Asian giants – China, India, and Japan – than it does with its leading global ally, the United States.
Neither Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who visited Israel a few weeks after his reelection in December 2014, nor the leaders of China, now Israel’s third-largest trading partner, bother to link their economic ties with Israel to the success of peace talks with the Palestinians.
With India, defense cooperation is the order of the day.
Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Ya’alon visited India in February last year, and Indian President Pranab Mukherjee reciprocated with a historic visit to Israel in October.
The election of the Hindu nationalist Narendra Modi as Prime Minister in May 2014 may be accelerating cooperation.
Already, Israel is India’s second-largest supplier of military technology.
Beyond Asia, Israel is cozying up to Russia, purely on the basis of strategic considerations.
With Russia now setting the geostrategic tone in the Middle East through a show of nineteenth-century-style power diplomacy, Israel has pursued an understanding with the Kremlin concerning the lines that must not be crossed in Syria.
(That understanding was undoubtedly facilitated by Israel’s neutrality on Russia’s annexation of Crimea and arming of separatists in Ukraine.)
Earlier this month, speaking before the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, Israel’s ambassador to Moscow praised the “flourishing in an unprecedented manner” of the bilateral relationship.
Even Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, an irascible interlocutor in the past, is now seeking reconciliation.
Turkey – locked in conflict with Russia, estranged from Egypt and Iran, and pursuing policies on Syria, the Islamic State (ISIS), and the Kurds that clash with those of its NATO allies – has lately found itself increasingly isolated in a sea of chaos.
Having drawn no strategic benefits from the Palestinian cause, Erdoğan finally admitted in January that Turkey needs “a country like Israel.”
Interestingly, that statement came upon Erdoğan’s return from a visit to Saudi Arabia, another key regional actor that maintains discreet security links with Israel on the basis of a similar logic.
For Saudi Arabia, Iran’s escape from global isolation, losses in proxy wars in Syria and Yemen, the specter of an ISIS onslaught, and America’s non-committal regional policies are far higher priorities than the Palestinians.
Other Sunni Gulf monarchies and Egypt are also cooperating with Israel to contain Islamist terrorism and Iran’s regional rise.
Even European countries have found new reasons to engage with Israel.
Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, who was fiercely hostile to Israel while in opposition, has become a close ally, having visited the country twice within three months in 2015.
In exchange for gas, defense technology, and military intelligence, Greece is now offering its airspace for Israeli air force training.
Moreover, Greece and Israel are cooperating with Cyprus in creating a geostrategic counterweight to Turkey.
So strong is Greece’s interest in building its relationship with Israel that Foreign Minister Nikos Kotzias has declared that the country will not honor the European Union’s latest guidelines regulating the labeling of goods produced by Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
No wonder Nabil Shaath, a former Palestinian foreign minister, complained to the Israeli newspaper Haaretz in January about Greece’s “betrayal of Palestine.”
But Greece is not alone in opposing the EU’s new labeling guidelines: Hungary, too, has come out against them.
And, in fact, as Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu edges Israel toward illiberal democracy, he is counting on Eastern Europe’s increasingly illiberal governments to help shield Israel from adverse EU initiatives.
Clearly, Israel faces a multitude of new foreign-policy opportunities, which offer far-reaching potential benefits.
But Israel’s new friends simply cannot replace its Western allies.
With the Asian giants, Israel lacks the shared global outlook that is essential for a true strategic alliance.
As for the Palestinian question, Israel’s new alliances surely will not help advance a resolution.
On the contrary, they reflect a changing global political agenda that has relegated the question to a lower tier of importance, which is likely to weaken Israel’s incentive to rethink its suppression of Palestine.
As a result, the possibility of a two-state solution is more remote today than at any time since the start of the peace process 25 years ago.
This is no reason for Israel to rejoice.
After all, the suppression of Palestine has, and will continue to have, fatally corrosive effects on Israeli society.
Insofar as Israel’s new foreign-policy opportunities allow for the continuation of that suppression, they are not good for Palestine or Israel.
Israel’s Election in a Bubble
TEL AVIV – Forty-five years into Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territories, and four years after Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s government became the undertaker of the two-state solution, an electoral campaign run in utter denial of Israel’s Palestinian conundrum has just ended with yet another Netanyahu government in office.
Yes, Netanyahu was humbled by the electorate, but his loss of support was not a victory for the peace camp.
The victors were an amorphous political center, focused on domestic issues, and the annexationist religious right.
A country whose modern economy is fully integrated into the global system and whose conflict with the Palestinians has for decades drawn the attention of the global media and the major world powers has gone to the polls as if it were a separate, secluded planet.
Parties in the center campaigned for “social justice,” for ultra-religious students to “share the burden” of military service (from which they have been exempt since Israel’s founding), and in defense of the country’s struggling middle class.
With opinion polls indicating that only 18% of the electorate was concerned with the Palestinian problem, Labor, the party of Yitzhak Rabin and the Oslo Accords, refrained from even mentioning the peace process, lest it alienate potential voters.
Labor’s current leader, Shelly Yachimovich, superseded the fatalism of her predecessor, Ehud Barak, who maintained that the Palestinian conflict has no solution, with the politics of denial; she refused even to acknowledge that there is a problem.
Israel’s life in a bubble was also exemplified by the two major religious parties in the elections.
Shas, led by a 92-year-old rabbi, combined its traditional defense of the have-nots with its fight for stricter rules for conversion to Judaism, an undisguised allusion to Israel’s masses of Russian immigrants with doubtful Jewish credentials.
Meanwhile, Jewish Home, a party linked to fanatical, messianic rabbis for whom Zionism should now be imbued with eschatological meaning, challenged Netanyahu to adopt a more resolute expansionist policy in Palestinian territories.
Demographers warn that the Jewish and Arab populations between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean will reach parity this year.
From that point on, the specter of a Jewish minority ruling over an Arab majority in an apartheid state is bound to become a reality, turning Israel into an international pariah, unless a more sober coalition replaces Netanyahu’s suicidal alliance with religious fundamentalists and extreme nationalists.
The good news is that these elections make such a change of alliances politically inevitable.
Always a politician in search of a platform to sustain his lust for power, Netanyahu is now forced to change course and form a centrist government.
The remarkable success of Yair Lapid’s new centrist party, Yesh Atid (“there is a future”), makes it practically impossible for Netanyahu to form a right-wing coalition with his traditional allies from the lunatic fringe.
Will this be enough to revitalize the moribund peace process and reach a settlement with the Palestinians?
Not really.
The “Tea Party” radicalization of Netanyahu’s Likud party does not augur well for the chances of a robust peace process.