But, if this is to become a decisive turning point in the eurozone crisis, three things must happen.
First, the ECB’s renewed bond purchases must express the clear intention of reducing sovereign interest rates to sustainable levels, which are at least 200 basis points below their July averages.
A high-level German diplomat reportedly dismissed Spain’s 6.5-7% interest rates recently, on the grounds that Spain borrowed at nearly the same rates in the 1990’s.
But that statement, amazingly, ignored Spain’s higher pre-euro inflation – thus confusing real and nominal rates – and more rapid GDP growth.
For countries that are following agreed reform programs, the ECB should commit itself to bringing down interest rates to levels compatible with projected inflation and growth rates, and announce how long (say, nine months) this will continue.
A sporadic program without such announced objectives is unlikely to work, and could even be counterproductive, as private investors might well demand even higher returns because the growing ECB share of the debt would be considered senior, augmenting their risk.
That would not happen if the ECB announced – and demonstrated – its determination to bring down interest rates, whatever it takes, for a significant period of time.
Doing so would allow the eurozone to establish the institutional and legal means to achieve greater cooperation and integration, as agreed at the European Council’s meeting in June.
The second thing that must happen is that eurozone leaders and parliaments, with the cooperation of the courts, must be seen to push ahead with institutional reforms to establish not only the ESM, but also a banking union and partial debt mutualization.
But, while greater merging of economic sovereignty is the only long-term solution to the eurozone’s woes, such reforms cannot happen very quickly, which is why the ECB’s role is so crucial.
The eurozone can no longer sustain continued uncertainty and high real interest rates in the peripheral countries, so the ECB must provide a solid and credible bridge to the future.
Finally, the adjustment programs themselves must be carefully re-calibrated.
It should be clear by now that excessive, front-loaded austerity measures tend to be self-defeating, because they trigger a downward spiral of output, employment, and tax revenues.
Indeed, the International Monetary Fund’s most recent report on the eurozone says as much (if cautiously).
The pace of deficit reduction must be slowed, particularly in Spain, because output is determined in the short run by demand, and private demand cannot replace public demand until a degree of faith in the future is restored.
This move toward support of effective demand must be combined with the kind of structural reforms that will allow more rapid, supply-side growth in the longer term.
If these three steps – an ECB bond-buying program to hold down sovereign interest rates, concrete progress on establishing a real economic union, and realistic revision of current adjustment programs – could be achieved as a package, the resources that the ECB would need to use for its bond purchases would drop, because credibility would be restored.
Even if there is further bad news for Europe – from Greece, for example, or from a sharper-than-expected slowdown in China – the eurozone could begin to move out of crisis mode this month.
But that is possible only if, this time, the “big bazooka” really is put in place.
Otherwise, the eurozone’s position – financially, politically, and socially – will soon become undefendable.
Brilliant Blunders
BALTIMORE – Thomas Edison is reputed to have said, “I have not failed.
I’ve just found 10,000 ways that won’t work.”
This statement sums up a fundamental – but often misunderstood – truth about scientific inquiry.
Progress in science – as in any creative discipline – is not a direct march to the answer, but a complex, zigzag path, involving many false starts and blind alleys.
Blunders are not only inevitable; they are essential to innovative thinking, because they point the way for other explorers.
One may wonder whether today’s highly competitive, funding-starved scientific atmosphere, in which publications and citations have become a primary criterion for success, can accommodate such mistakes.
The simple answer is yes.
Indeed, they are as important as ever – and not only in academia.
In fact, the entire scientific method is based on the notion that discovering what does not work is vital to learning what does.
Any scientific theory must be falsifiable – that is, based on existing observations or experimental results.
For a theory to be considered scientific, it must yield specific predictions of future observations or experimental results.
If those observations or results contradict the predictions, the theory is discarded, or at least must be modified.
The mistakes that are integral to scientific progress are not those that result from haste, sloppiness, or inexperience.
Rather, they are the mistakes that arise from thoughtful, meticulous experimentation based on bold ideas – the kind of ideas that can lead to major breakthroughs.
Fred Hoyle, one of the twentieth century’s greatest astrophysicists, provided a perfect example of such a “brilliant blunder.”
Hoyle and two of his colleagues proposed what became known as the Steady State model of the universe, according to which the universe did not evolve following the so-called “big bang” (a term that Hoyle coined); instead, it was constant, remaining the same throughout eternity.
The idea was brilliantly elegant: just as our universe is homogeneous (the same at every point in space) and isotropic (looking the same in all directions), it remains the same at every point in time.
While the Steady State theory was eventually falsified – our universe is expanding, and it most likely started from a big bang – it energized the entire field of cosmology, because it brought into sharp focus the questions that had to be addressed.
In fact, currently fashionable models of the multiverse – the concept that our universe is but one of a huge ensemble of universes – are consistent with the idea that they are collectively in a kind of steady state.
The nineteenth-century physicist William Thomson, later known as Lord Kelvin, made his own brilliant blunder when he calculated that the Earth was less than 100 million years old – about fifty times younger than the age deduced from modern radiometric measurements.
Though Kelvin’s estimate was seriously flawed, the effort remains central to the history of knowledge, because it applied real science – the laws of physics – to what had long been a subject of vague speculation.
Kelvin’s insights helped to launch a fruitful dialogue between geologists and physicists – a dialogue that eventually resolved even problems related to the length of time needed for Darwin’s theory of evolution to operate.
And the oversight that warped Kelvin’s estimate – the possibility that fluid motion could efficiently transport heat within the Earth’s interior – turned out to be critical to understanding plate tectonics and continental drift.
Startup companies exemplify the potential benefits of risk-taking.
While only about 49% of manufacturing startups and 37% of information startups survive for four or more years, those that do have managed to produce breakthrough innovations.
Tom Watson, Jr., who led IBM through decades of strong growth, is known for having supported brilliant blunders.
As he put it, “We should have the courage to take risks when they are thoughtful risks….We must forgive mistakes which have been made because someone was trying to act aggressively in the company’s interest.”
Funding agencies for academic research should adopt a similar philosophy, awarding a certain share of financing to thoughtful, unconventional proposals – those deemed risky, owing to a relatively low probability of success, but that could lead to important discoveries.
Such a scheme would create opportunities to take advantage of serendipity – a major component of scientific discovery.
Until about a decade ago, the Space Telescope Science Institute adopted a similar policy for allocating observation time for the Hubble Space Telescope.
In addition, each year, the institute’s director was allotted a certain amount of discretionary time to grant to special projects that he or she deemed worthwhile.
In 1995, Robert Williams used that time to take a major risk: he aimed the telescope at a seemingly uninteresting area for nearly ten days.
The result was an image of more than 3,000 galaxies some 12 billion light-years away – the so-called Hubble Deep Field.
Likewise, closer to home, as many as half of our discoveries of new medicines have originated from accidents.
For example, isoniazid was initially tested as a tuberculosis drug; iproniazid, one of its derivatives, later proved to be effective in the treatment of depression.
Space for brilliant blunders is vital to achieving the kind of creative breakthroughs that drive scientific progress.
It is time for funding institutions to recognize that.
The Bank of England’s Knockout Artist
LONDON – In Canada, if you say you come from London, the natives often ask if you mean London, Ontario, or London, England.
I always find the question somewhat irritating, perhaps revealing the persistence of an arrogant imperial mindset.
But soon, perhaps, they will no longer need to ask: in London, we are all Canadians now.
With what one commentator described as “his rock star looks and PR charm,” Mark Carney, the former governor of the Bank of Canada, has taken the city by storm in his first weeks as Governor of the Bank of England.
Change is the order of the day at the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street.
Out goes the fusty old inflation-targeting regime, with its fixation on the consumer price index and disregard for financial-sector imbalances.
In comes a brave new world of “state-contingent threshold-based forward guidance,” complete with three conditional “knockouts” that would cause the guidance to be changed.
We have had to learn a whole new lexicon of central-bank speak.
These are heady times at the BoE (in the heart of the financial district of Ontario-on-Thames).
The simple point that Carney made in his first policy pronouncement was that interest rates will remain unchanged, and the BoE’s variant of quantitative easing will remain in place, at least until unemployment falls below 7% (from its current rate of 7.8%).
Though it all sounded straightforward, markets were confused.
The pound initially fell sharply, and then recovered, while long-term government borrowing rates have risen by around 30 basis points.
This outcome may not have been what the new governor intended, but it is perhaps not surprising.
Though forward guidance is a useful part of the modern central banker’s tool kit, the Anglo-Canadian version on display in London is highly complex, mainly because it has been shoehorned into a policy framework designed for another purpose.
There are four related problems.
The first is that the United Kingdom retains policymaking by committee.
To his credit, Carney has succeeded in persuading most of his new colleagues on the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to sign up to the new approach (we now know there was one holdout).
That could not be taken for granted.
Their views have often been split in recent years.
But individual voting remains in place, so Carney is not in sole charge of policymaking, as he was at the Bank of Canada.
Any future commitments are conditional on keeping a majority of the committee in line.
That leads to the second problem: the so-called knockouts – the other factors that can change the direction of policy – are clearly matters of judgment, not of fact.
The first knockout would occur if, “in the MPC’s view, it is more likely than not that CPI inflation 18 to 24 months ahead will be 0.5 percentage points or more above the 2% target.”
The second is that “medium-term inflation expectations no longer remain sufficiently well anchored.”
There is plenty of scope for different judgments on both issues, neither of which lends itself to definitive answers based on solid numbers.
And, sadly, when it comes to forecasting inflation, the BoE’s record has not been very good.
The final knockout – which would occur if “the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) judges that the stance of monetary policy poses a significant threat to financial stability” – points to the third problem.
The FPC is part of the complex new UK regulatory structure, in which the former Financial Services Authority has been split in two: a prudential and business-conduct regulator and a new body to monitor financial stability.
The new FPC must give its advice publicly to the MPC when it has concerns.
The FPC, it should be emphasized, is chaired by the BoE’s governor, so there is an element of smoke and mirrors here.
But its composition is different from that of the MPC, so its view on a particular policy stance may be different as well, and here, too, the governor has only one vote.
Some argue that it would have been simpler to merge the two, and the unwieldiness of the new means of articulating policy suggests that this might indeed have been a good idea.
The BoE’s governor is now in the odd position of being invited to knock himself out – and in public, too.
That would be fun to watch.
The fourth problem is the most fundamental.
The government has chosen not to change the BoE’s formal mandate.
Its prime objective remains price stability, with real-economy factors relegated to the second order of importance.
By contrast, the US Federal Reserve has a dual mandate: price stability and full employment.
Of course it must continuously balance the two, but both have equal weight.
It is the failure of the UK government to amend the statute that dictates the complex structure of knockouts that the BoE’s ingenious staff has been obliged to devise.
The unemployment threshold, linked to forward guidance, can be seen as a backdoor way of adding a second objective.
But one would surely not start from there if that were the long-term policy aim.
It would have been far clearer to address the issue head on and change the BoE’s mandate.
That would have painted the new regime with a veneer of democratic legitimacy, giving it greater authority.
The government, however, decided not to open up the issue in parliament.
The objectives of the new monetary-policy approach are admirable.
The UK economy, while moving forward, is still operating well below capacity.
But to keep all these balls in the air, and avoid knocking himself out, Carney will need all the creativity and agility of that other great Canadian export – Cirque du Soleil.
Marketing Nationalism in China
Explanations abound for the fevered anti-Japanese protests that broke out across China last month.
From the Chinese perspective, of course, the blame falls on the Japanese government for its reluctance to apologize for the crimes Japan committed in WW II.
But the Chinese media also played an ignominious role, publishing slanted articles on Japan that helped to fan the fire.
Nationalism has been a prominent element in Chinese media in recent years.
Strident articles critical of the United States, Japan, and Taiwan appear with increasing frequency and receive ever more prominent placement.
Many see the government’s hand behind this trend, but focusing on official influence risks overlooking how market pressures have pushed China’s media in this direction.
Before China began opening its economy in 1978, all newspapers and magazines were “Party newspapers” and “Party magazines.”
Media bosses were appointed and controlled by the government.
Journalists and editors were, in effect, government officials.
Needless to say, all operating costs were born by the Communist Party and the state, and nobody was much concerned about making money.
The main concern was not attracting readers, listeners, and viewers, but avoiding political mistakes.
For newspapers and magazines, circulation was guaranteed by the government, which urged people to “study the Party newspapers” and forced work units to buy them.
Radio and TV enjoyed the same built-in audience.
In the 30 years following the establishment of the People’s Republic of China, no media outlet ran even a single commercial advertisement.
As Deng Xiaoping’s reforms evolved, and especially after Deng’s “tour of the South” in 1992, when he signaled permission for high-speed marketization of the economy, China’s media changed beyond recognition.
Whereas in 1978 there were only 186 newspapers and a handful of magazines and broadcast outlets, today China has roughly 2,200 newspapers, 9,000 magazines, 1,000 radio stations, and 420 TV stations, plus a growing proliferation of cable TV outlets.
Most of these outlets no longer receive full financial support from the government and must rely on advertising revenue to survive and grow.
What topics do consumers most care about?
One is government corruption.
As economic inequities and social conflict in China have grown more acute, ordinary people have become increasingly angry.
In these circumstances, many on the business side of the Chinese media regard critical reports on crime and official corruption as a powerful weapon in the fight for greater market share and profitability.
Owing to great sensitivity about stories that cast China’s leadership in a bad light, these popular reports are frequently banned, editors are fired, and media outlets that publish or broadcast them are often punished.
In some cases, they are shut down.
Prevented from criticizing the country’s leaders and reporting fully and objectively on domestic affairs, China’s media often finds it expedient to turn its critical gaze outwards.
This is politically safe, since, in one sense, to criticize the outside world, especially countries such as Japan and the US, is to praise China’s government.
It is also profitable.
Even as China’s position in the world continues to rise and its people become more self-confident, China’s history of weakness before the Western powers and Japan sustains a “victim culture” that leaves most Chinese sensitive to any foreign challenge.
Publishing jingoistic, anti-foreign articles plays to national sensitivities that always simmer, and thus can easily be brought to a boil, with obvious benefits for the bottom line.
A personal anecdote serves to illustrate how the market, as much as government censorship by the Department of Propaganda and the Press and Publications Administration, is often responsible for this type of editorial decision.
A few years ago, the editors of a Beijing-based weekly with which I am acquainted were deadlocked over which article to put on their front page.
The choice was between a minor story critical of Taiwan and a larger piece about a domestic issue of potentially historic significance.
Unable to get his staff to reach a consensus, the chief executive decided to ask the newspaper’s distributor for his opinion.
The distributor had not graduated from high school, but he knew readers’ tastes well.
“Condemn Taiwan, of course,” he said.
The chief executive issued his order accordingly.
While reports that cater to the sometimes virulent nationalist sentiments of readers, viewers, and listeners can succeed in garnering a larger market share – as in any other capitalist country – they can also mislead.
The media may make money, but as the recent anti-Japan protests suggests, an excess of such market-driven jingoism can damage a nation’s interests and international standing.
As the old Chinese expression goes, qihu, nanxia : “Once one gets on the back of a tiger, it is hard to get off.”
Mengatasi Hambatan Pasar terhadap Antibiotik Baru
LONDON – Dari sudut pandang beberapa investor, manajemen finansial yang bijak yang dilakukan perusahaan untuk meningkatkan harga sahamnya adalah hal yang baik.
Berdasarkan logika sederhana ini maka seharusnya kita tidak merasa prihatin akan industri obat-obatan ketika harga saham firma obat-obatan terdorong bukan karena temuan-temuan baru melainkan hasil dari manuver finansial seperti pembelian kembali saham atau taxinversion.
Tetapi industri obat-obatan berbeda dari industri lainnya.
Di dalam sejarah industri ini telah menyediakan inovasi medis yang penting bagi kemampuan masyarakat untuk mengatasi penyakit sehingga secara intrinsik industri ini terikat dengan kepentingan publik.
Terlebih lagi, meskipun pasien adalah konsumen, pembeli yang sesungguhnya sering kali adalah pemerintah.
Bahkan di negara seperti Amerika Serikat, akun pembeli publik setidaknya berjumlah 40% dari pasar obat keras atau obat yang hanya dapat dibeli dengan resep.
Pemerintah juga membiayai banyak penelitian yang melandasi keuntungan industri.
Pemerintah AS adalah penyandang dana terbesar untuk penelitian dan pengembangan medis; secara global, pembayar pajak mendanai sepertiga pengeluaran penelitian kesehatan.
Oleh sebab itu, tidaklah mengherankan ketika pembuatan kebijakan berkeras agar upaya industri untuk menghasilkan inovasi harus diarahkan ke bidang yang menyediakan keuntungan terbesar bagi para pembayar pajak dan pasien, dari pada ditujukan bagi keuntungan yang paling menguntungkan bagi industri dalam jangka pendek, misalnya melalui manuver finansial.
Industri obat-obatan berada dalam keadaan paling prima ketika keuntungan swasta dan keuntungan sosial saling terkait, seperti ketika obat baru yang bermanfaat menarik pangsa pasar yang besar.
Namun, sayangnya, hal ini tidak selalu terjadi dan bahkan bisa berupa hasil yang tragis.
Secara khusus dalam bidang pengembangan antibiotik, perbedaan antara perilaku mencari keuntungan dan upaya melindungi kepentingan publik membuat dunia menjadi rentan krisis.
Ketika antibiotik pertama kali digunakan secara umum pada tahun 1840an, kondisi yang sebelumnya berbahaya, seperti pneumonia atau luka yang terinfeksi, dmenjadi kondisi yang mudah diobati.
Antibiotik menjadi landasan obat modern; tanpanya, tindakan bedah dan kemoterapi menjadi semakin berisiko.
Tetapi antibiotik kehilangan efektivitas seiring dengan berjalannya waktu.
Berbeda dengan generasi peneliti sebelumnya yang dengan cepat dapat menemukan penggantinya, saat ini, dalam banyak kasus, dokter sering kali harus menggunakan pertahanan terakhirnya.
Untuk berbagai infeksi – termasuk strain pneumonia, E. coli, dan gonorrhea – tidak ada cadangan untuk penggantinya.
Orang mungkin berpikir bahwa hal ini dapat menyebabkan para perusahaan obat-obatan dan para investornya bersaing untuk mengembangkan antibiotik baru.
Tetapi banyak dari industri obat-obatan telah menelantarkan usaha ini.
Pengembangan antibiotik yang baru adalah hal yang sulit dan mahal untuk dilakukan, dan terlebih lagi tidak terlalu menguntungkan ketika dibandingkan dengan investasi di bidang lainnya yang penting, seperti kanker dan diabetes.
Salah satu penyebab dari masalah ini adalah arti penting obat-obatan ini yang unik.
Perusahaan tidak selalu dapat mendapatkan kembali investasi mereka dengan memasang harga yang tinggi bagi antibiotik yang dipatenkan.
Ketika antibiotik baru ditemukan, otoritas kesehatan masyarakat memiliki alasan yang kuat untuk menjadikan temuan tersebut sebagai cadangan supaya hanya digunakan ketika seluruh pilihan yang lain telah gagal.
Hasilnya, antibiotik yang baru mungkin baru digunakan secara luas setelah jangka waktu patennya telah kadaluarsa dan para investornya dipaksa untuk bersaing dengan produsen obat generik.
Pada bulan Januari, industri obat-obatan mengambil langkah besar untuk menyelesaikan masalah ini ketika lebih dari 100 perusahaan dan asosiasi dagang di lebih dari 20 negara menandatangani sebuah deklarasi yang menuntut pemerintah untuk mengadopsi model pengembangan antibiotik yang baru.
Sebagai bagian dari model baru ini, para penandatangan berkomitmen pada diri mereka sendiri untuk menyediakan akses ke obat-obatan baru bagi semua orang yang membutuhkan, meningkatkan investasi Riset dan Pengembangan serta memenuhi kebutuhan kesehatan publik di seluruh dunia, dan membantu memperlambat pengembangan resistensi obat pada manusia dan hewan.
Pemerintah sebaiknya mendukung dan membantu industri untuk memenuhi sasaran ini.
Salah satu caranya adalah untuk mengadopsi sebuah proposal yang Saya buat tahun lalu dan menawarkan imbalan sebesar USD 1 miliar atau lebih bagi para industri yang mengembangkan jenis antibiotik yang paling dibutuhkan.
Pendekatan seperti ini dapat menyeimbangkan keuntungan komersial dengan keterjangkauan, akses global, dan konservasi, seraya menghemat dana pemerintah untuk jangka panjang.
Biaya yang dibutuhkan untuk mengisi kembali stok pipa antibiotik dengan pendekatan ini adalah sekitar USD 25 miliar untuk sepuluh tahun.
Apabila biaya ini ditanggung bersama oleh negara anggota G-20 maka kemungkinan besar jumlah yang ditanggung sangat kecil, dan akan menjadi investasi yang sangat baik terutama ketika biaya yang ditimbulkan dari resistensi antibiotik saat ini telah membebani sistem perawatan kesehatan di AS saja sebesar USD 20 miliar per tahun.
Pemerintah dapat menawarkan insentif bagi Riset &amp; Pengembangan antibiotik yang dibiayai dari aliran dana yang telah ada atau dari aliran dana baru yang inovatif dan mandiri.
Salah satu pilihannya adalah akses kecil ke biaya pasar yang dapat dikumpulkan oleh pengatur obat-obatan di pasar-pasar yang besar.
Sistem ini mengakui antibiotik adalah sumber daya bersama dan tidak terbarukan; berbagai produk obat-obatan dan peralatan medis, dari kemoterapi hingga penggantian sendi, bergantung padanya.
Hal ini sebanding dengan pendekatan dalam sektor seperti energi, air, atau perikanan, dimana alat pengaturan digunakan untuk memastikan sumber daya dan infrastruktur bersama dikelola dan dipulihkan demi kepentingan konsumen dan produsen yang bisnisnya bergantung pada industri ini.
Dana sebesar USD 2.5 miliar per tahun hanya merupakan 0.25% dari penjualan obat-obatan di dunia – jumlah ini tidak akan membebani industri yang, sebagian besar, berada dalam keadaan keuangan yang sehat.
Dan skema tersebut akan menjadi sangat menarik jika dapat diterpakan dengan landasan pay-or-play, yaitu perusahaan dapat memilih untuk berinvestasi dalam Riset &amp; Pengembangan atau berkontribusi untuk mendanai industri yang upayanya menghasilkan obat-obatan yang diharapkan.
Ini adalah waktu untuk mengubah ide menjadi tindakan yang efektif dan menyelesaikan masalah resistensi obat.
Oleh sebab itu, perusahaan dan pemerintah harus mengakui bahwa antibiotik adalah komoditas yang unik yang berbeda dari komoditas yang lain.
Markets and School Quality
SANTIAGO – Around the world, private schools are booming, especially in developing countries.
The Economist reports that in 2010, there were an estimated one million private schools in the developing world, and the figure has since risen quickly.
From Latin America to Africa and South Asia, private schools have been moving into communities – mostly poor – where the state has been slow to provide services.
This trend has proven controversial.
The marriage of education and markets attracts three main criticisms.
The first focuses on distributive justice: if everything – including education – is for sale, those who have more money will buy more of it.
Inequality in knowledge (and therefore income) in one generation will be transmitted to the next, perhaps in amplified form.
This is an important concern, especially given the increasingly skewed income distribution in developed countries.
But economists have long understood that the distribution of wealth, as John Stuart Mill put it in his Principles of Political Economy, is “a matter of human institution solely.”
In other words, market-based production is one thing; distribution is quite another, and it can be influenced by policy.
Vouchers are one example.
Pupils receiving a voucher, such as those used in Sweden or Chile, can obtain as much education as the voucher – not their family’s income – will allow.
There are valid criticisms of such schemes, including, as in Chile, that the vouchers may be too small to purchase a quality education; but, at least in principle, vouchers and other forms of financial aid can make a private education, if desired, accessible to all.
A second criticism is that education markets perform poorly.
We know from research in the economics of imperfect information that markets run into trouble when what is bought and sold cannot be observed or measured.
Education would seem to be rife with such problems.
Pupils, especially young ones, cannot observe a teacher’s pedagogical effort.
Parents, especially if short of education themselves, cannot easily evaluate the quality of their children’s schooling.
So for-profit schools may deliver low teacher effort and insufficient quality.
Much research has gone into measuring how serious these problems are in practice, and therefore whether private schools perform better or worse than public schools.
There are abundant examples, in rich and poor countries alike, of fly-by-night for-profit schools that dupe parents and neglect students (Donald Trump’s sham Trump University being a case in point).
But such research is inconclusive for several reasons, not least that public schools face incentive problems of their own, leading to low effort, absenteeism, and frequent strikes.
Moreover, it is difficult to separate statistically the educational value added by the school from the characteristics of the families whose children attend.
If motivated families choose private schools, for example, their kids will perform better, but not for any reason having to do with private schooling.
The third criticism is that education can be degraded by being sold and bought.
Harvard’s Michael Sandel has argued that there should be limits to markets, and that there are things that money cannot (or should not) be allowed to buy.
We all intuitively know, for example, that hiring someone to act like a friend is not the same as having a friend.
Because of the inherent dignity of human beings, modern societies do not allow people to sell themselves, or their children, into slavery.
And democracies do not allow citizens to sell their votes, because that would debase elections.
Is education in the same category?
Professors (I have long been one) would like to think that we do our job because of our love of learning and teaching, and that our effort and dedication is not something money can easily buy.
Critics claim that the commodification of education somehow degrades it.
Parents in poor countries, who have been flocking to private schools, may beg to differ.
In Chile today, 53% of all children attend voucher-financed private schools (many of them until recently run for profit), despite the top-up fees they often charge.
Parents are willing to make the extra effort simply because the local public schools are not good enough.
Nor is it obvious that education is so different from health care, another essential service where issues of dignity and respect loom large.
Private (sometimes for-profit) clinics are common worldwide, yet do not confront the opposition that for-profit schools elicit.
Conditional cash transfers are also widely accepted in poor countries, and de facto they involve paying mothers to do such things as send their children to school or take them to clinics to be vaccinated.
A more damning charge is that market incentives change behavior in socially damaging ways.
Sandel mentions the much-cited study of Israeli daycare centers where parents, once they faced fines for late pickups, began showing up even later to fetch their kids.
The apparent explanation is that parents treated the fines as fees, and did not feel guilty about paying them.
But market incentives may also have the opposite effect, improving motivation or other valuable traits.
A 2012 paper examined what happens when students are allowed to choose (presumably better) schools after winning a lottery.
It finds that truancy rates go down as soon as students learn about the lottery outcome; and once they move to the new school, their test scores rise significantly.
Contrary to what zealots in either camp claim, neither public nor private schools perform better than the alternative at all times.
So it makes sense to consider how to combine the virtues of both systems, instead of simply choosing between them.
In the area of college education, a recent paper by Harvard’s David Deming, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz concludes that in the US “for-profits appear to be at their best with well-defined programs of short duration that prepare students for a specific occupation.”
In other areas, traditional not-for-profit colleges perform better, with higher completion rates and superior labor-market outcomes.
Finally, despite legitimate concerns about “teaching to the test,” there is evidence that properly designed teacher evaluations can improve incentives and performance in public and private schools alike.
More broadly, recent research makes clear that many factors affecting education outcomes have nothing to do with whether schools are public or private.
A recent World Bank report calls on countries to leave behind the “great schooling wars” and adopt a “pragmatic approach” to education reform.
That seems like an approach worth trying.
When Financial Markets Misread Politics
CAMBRIDGE – When Turkey’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) defied pundits and pollsters by regaining a parliamentary majority in the country’s general election on November 1, financial markets cheered.
The next day, the Istanbul stock exchange rose by more than 5%, and the Turkish lira rallied.
Never mind that one would be hard pressed to find anyone in business or financial circles these days with a nice thing to say about Recep Tayyip Erdoğan or the AKP that he led before ascending to the presidency in 2014.
And make no mistake: Though Turkey’s president is supposed to be above party politics, Erdoğan remains very much at the helm.
Indeed, it was Erdoğan’s divide-and-rule strategy – fueling religious populism and nationalist sentiment, and inflaming ethnic tension with the Kurds – that carried the AKP to victory.
Arguably, it was the only strategy that could work.
After all, his regime has alienated liberals with its attacks on the media; business leaders with its expropriation of companies affiliated with his erstwhile allies in the so-called Gülen movement; and the West with its confrontational language and inconsistent stance on the Islamic State.
And yet financial markets, evidently placing a premium on stability, hailed the outcome.
A majority AKP government, investors apparently believed, would be much better than the likely alternative: a period of political uncertainty, followed by a weak and indecisive coalition or minority administration.
But, in this case, there was not much wisdom in crowds.
It is true that the AKP had a few good years after first coming to power in late 2002.
But the party’s room for mischief was constrained by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund abroad and secularists at home.
Once those limits were removed, Erdoğan’s governments embraced economic populism and authoritarian politics.
Investors’ apparent optimism following the AKP’s victory recalls Einstein’s definition of insanity: doing the same thing over and over and expecting a different outcome.
Turkey certainly isn’t the only case where financial markets have misread a country’s politics.
Consider Brazil, whose currency, the real, has been hammered since mid-2014 – much worse than most other emerging-market currencies – largely because of a major corruption scandal unfolding there.
Prosecutors have revealed a wide-ranging kickback scheme centered on the state-owned oil company Petrobras and involving executives, parliamentarians, and government officials.
So it may seem natural that financial markets have been spooked.
Yet the most important outcome of the scandal has been to highlight the remarkable strength, not weakness, of Brazil’s legal and democratic institutions.
The prosecutor and judge on the case have been allowed to do their job, despite the natural impulse of President Dilma Rousseff’s government to quash the investigation.
And, from all appearances, the probe has been following proper judicial procedures and has not been used to advance the opposition’s political agenda.
Beyond the judiciary, a slew of institutions, including the federal police and the finance ministry, have taken part and worked in synch.
Leading businessmen and politicians have been jailed, among them the former treasurer of the ruling Workers’ Party.
Financial markets are supposed to be forward-looking, and many economists believe that they allocate resources in a way that reflects all available information.
But an accurate comparison of Brazil’s experience with that of other emerging-market economies, where corruption is no less a problem, would, if anything, lead to an upgrade of Brazil’s standing among investors.
Going back to Turkey, leaked recordings of telephone conversations have directly implicated Erdoğan and his family, along with several government ministers, in a hugely lucrative corruption ring involving trade with Iran and construction deals.
It is an open secret that government procurement is being used to enrich politicians and their business cronies.
From all indications, corruption reaches higher and is more widespread than in Brazil.
But today it is the police officers who led the corruption probe against Erdoğan who are in jail.
Some of the media outlets that supported the probe have been closed down and taken over by the government.
The AKP argues that the police officers are adherents of the Gülen movement and that the investigation was politically motivated, aiming to unseat Erdoğan.
Both claims are most likely true.
But neither justifies the blatant lawlessness with which the AKP government has clamped down on the corruption allegations.
The upshot is that Turkey’s institutions, unlike Brazil’s, are being captured and corrupted to an extent that will hamper economic growth and development for years to come.
Nor is Turkey the only country where large-scale corruption is left unchecked.
In Malaysia, Prime Minister Najib Razak has been at the center of a major political scandal since nearly $700 million in unaccounted funds was found in his bank accounts.
Billions of dollars are said to be missing from the government investment fund 1MDB, which Najib controlled.
Najib has promised a full reckoning, but he has sacked Malaysia’s attorney general, who was investigating 1MDB.
In Latin America, Argentina and Mexico both rank among the bottom half of countries in controlling corruption and maintaining transparency – much lower than Brazil.
The dramatic abduction and gruesome killing in 2014 of 43 students north of Mexico City is only the latest example of collusion among the country’s criminal gangs, police, and politicians.
We know from painful experience that financial markets’ short-term focus and herd behavior often lead them to neglect significant economic fundamentals.
We should not be surprised that the same characteristics can distort markets’ judgment of countries’ governance and political prospects.
The fall in oil prices – together with market illiquidity, the rise in the leverage of US energy firms and that of energy firms and fragile sovereigns in oil-exporting economies – is stoking fears of serious credit events (defaults) and systemic crisis in credit markets.
And then there are the seemingly never-ending worries about Europe, with a British exit (Brexit) from the European Union becoming more likely, while populist parties of the right and the left gain ground across the continent.
These risks are being magnified by some grim medium-term trends implying pervasive mediocre growth.
Indeed, the world economy in 2016 will continue to be characterized by a New Abnormal in terms of output, economic policies, inflation, and the behavior of key asset prices and financial markets.
So what, exactly, is it that makes today’s global economy abnormal?
First, potential growth in developed and emerging countries has fallen because of the burden of high private and public debts, rapid aging (which implies higher savings and lower investment), and a variety of uncertainties holding back capital spending.
Moreover, many technological innovations have not translated into higher productivity growth, the pace of structural reforms remains slow, and protracted cyclical stagnation has eroded the skills base and that of physical capital.
Second, actual growth has been anemic and below its potential trend, owing to the painful process of deleveraging underway, first in the US, then in Europe, and now in highly leveraged emerging markets.
Third, economic policies – especially monetary policies – have become increasingly unconventional.
Indeed, the distinction between monetary and fiscal policy has become increasingly blurred.
Ten years ago, who had heard of terms such as ZIRP (zero-interest-rate policy), QE (quantitative easing), CE (credit easing), FG (forward guidance), NDR (negative deposit rates), or UFXInt (unsterilized FX intervention)?
No one, because they didn’t exist.
But now these unconventional monetary-policy tools are the norm in most advanced economies – and even in some emerging-market ones.
And recent actions and signals from the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan reinforce the view that more unconventional policies are to come.
Some alleged that these unconventional monetary policies – and the accompanying ballooning of central banks’ balance sheets – were a form of debasement of fiat currencies.
The result, they argued, would be runaway inflation (if not hyperinflation), a sharp rise in long-term interest rates, a collapse in the value of the US dollar, a spike in the price of gold and other commodities, and the replacement of debased fiat currencies with cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin.
Instead – and this is the fourth aberration – inflation is still too low and falling in advanced economies, despite central banks’ unconventional policies and surging balance sheets.
The challenge for central banks is to try to boost inflation, if not avoid outright deflation.
At the same time, long-term interest rates have continued to come down in recent years; the value of the dollar has surged; gold and commodity prices have fallen sharply; and bitcoin was the worst performing currency of 2014-2015.
The reason ultra-low inflation remains a problem is that the traditional causal link between the money supply and prices has been broken.
One reason for this is that banks are hoarding the additional money supply in the form of excess reserves, rather than lending it (in economic terms, the velocity of money has collapsed).
Moreover, unemployment rates remain high, giving workers little bargaining power.
And a large amount of slack remains in many countries’ product markets, with large output gaps and low pricing power for firms (an excess-capacity problem exacerbated by Chinese overinvestment).
And now, following a massive decline in housing prices in countries that experienced a boom and bust, oil, energy and other commodity prices have collapsed.
Call this the fifth anomaly – the result of China’s slowdown, the surge in supplies of energy and industrial metals (following successful exploration and overinvestment in new capacity), and the strong dollar, which weakens commodity prices.
The recent market turmoil has started the deflation of the global asset bubble wrought by QE, though the expansion of unconventional monetary policies may feed it for a while longer.
The real economy in most advanced and emerging economies is seriously ill, and yet, until recently, financial markets soared to greater highs, supported by central banks’ additional easing.
The question is how long Wall Street and Main Street can diverge.
In fact, this divergence is one aspect of the final abnormality.
The other is that financial markets haven’t reacted very much, at least so far, to growing geopolitical risks either, including those stemming from the Middle East, Europe’s identity crisis, rising tensions in Asia, and the lingering risks of a more aggressive Russia.
Again, how long can this state of affairs – in which markets not only ignore the real economy, but also discount political risk – be sustained?
Welcome to the New Abnormal for growth, inflation, monetary policies, and asset prices, and make yourself at home.
It looks like we’ll be here for a while.
The Anti-Globalization Brexplosion
SEOUL – Populism, nationalism, and xenophobia all contributed to the victory of the “Leave” campaign in the United Kingdom’s recent referendum on membership in the European Union.
But these forces float on the surface of a larger sea change: a fundamental shift worldwide in the relationship between the state and the market.
Since the birth of modern capitalism, these two frameworks of human activity have generally been at odds.
While the market tends to expand geographically as its participants pursue economic benefits, the state seeks to keep orderly everybody and everything within the territory it controls.
A merchant may recognize market opportunities in a foreign country, but he will run into the state – most immediately, that country’s immigration authorities – if he pursues them.
How to reconcile the tension between the market and the state is the central concern of political economy today, just as it was for Adam Smith in the eighteenth century, Friedrich List and Karl Marx in the nineteenth century, and John Maynard Keynes and Friedrich von Hayek in their long debate on the topic through the middle decades of the twentieth century.
Let’s consider two hypothetical extremes in the state-market relationship.
The first is a seamless global market in which individuals can maximize their material benefits without any state intervention.
The problem with this scenario is that you may live in a country that is vulnerable to all the negative consequences of no-holds-barred globalization, such as currency devaluation, labor exploitation, the flouting of intellectual property laws, and so forth.
The other extreme is a world comprising entirely isolated autarchic states, where individuals are protected from external economic forces and the state has full autonomy over domestic affairs.
In this scenario, you will have to forgo all the well-known economic benefits of the global division of labor.
Between these two extremes lies most of the world as it is, characterized by regional integration projects like the EU or the North American Free Trade Agreement.
We can identify important swings during the history of capitalism over the last two centuries, either toward the market or the state.
For example, the repeal of the Corn Laws in the UK in 1846 favored a free market in international trade and accelerated globalization until the outbreak of World War I.
After WWI, the pendulum swung back toward the state.
Financial capital in the West was weakened politically, and a mobilized working class took the opportunity to demand jobs and social-welfare programs that ran counter to the logic and rules of a globalized market.
In the run-up to World War II, beggar-thy-neighbor policies and rampant protectionism ensued – with Britain leaving the gold standard in 1931 in response to a run on the pound.
The Economist declared that Monday, September 21, “the definite end of an epoch in the world’s financial and economic development.”
After the passage of Brexit, the same journal warned, “Britain is sailing into a storm with no one at the wheel.”
The 1944 Bretton Woods conference marked another swing back toward the market, but this time allowed for some degree of national autonomy.
Until the late 1960s, a harmonious balance of international openness and national autonomy allowed for widespread prosperity.
Turbulence returned in the 1970s, however, as the slow growth and high prices of “stagflation” and a global energy crisis pushed the pendulum back toward fully liberalized markets – a shift from the Keynesian to the Hayekian world, helped along by Margaret Thatcher in the UK and Ronald Reagan in the United States.
This brings us to the present.
The economic crisis of 2008, and the global economy’s failure to recover from it fully, put an end to the project begun by Thatcher and Reagan.
As in the post-WWI period, workers came to see themselves as left behind by globalization, with political leaders favoring financiers and big business at their expense.
In the case of Brexit, the “Leave” camp voted for more national autonomy, even though it will have a clear material cost.
An American version of Brexit may not be far behind if the next US president scraps the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal with 11 Pacific Rim countries, signed in February of this year.
At a time when global trade negotiations are almost dead, the TPP should seem like a reasonable approach to boosting multilateral trade.
And yet both presumptive US presidential candidates say they oppose it, promising what would be tantamount to an “Amexit” from the global trading system.
We are at an interregnum.
Social and political discontent will continue to bubble up around the world until we return the state-market relationship to a healthy equilibrium.
The problem is that no one knows how best to do this.
Some propose re-harmonizing international markets with national autonomy, as occurred under Bretton Woods.
But the post-war international economic order was built for the pre-globalization age, and we cannot put the genie back in the bottle, even if it were possible to do so.
Brexit marks the beginning of the end of the latest era of globalization.
What comes next is anyone’s guess, but we can be certain that it won’t be the final destination.
Another Way to Make Finance Safer
CAMBRIDGE – Since the financial crisis erupted in 2008, policymakers have sought to make the world’s banks safer, mainly via detailed instructions: use more capital, avoid specified risky activities, provide more transparency, and punish reckless behavior.
But this approach to financial regulation, while laudable, requires officials to make, or shape, banks’ most important strategic decisions: capital levels, liability structure, and the scope of their business activities.
And, while regulators often target bank executives’ incentives, they often leave intact the organization’s incentives to take risks – but then command them, via regulation, not to take those risks.
This command-and-control approach has shortcomings: regulators may mistake which activities to regulate and how; banks resist; and bankers and their advisers – some of the smartest businesspeople around – innovate to free themselves from many of the imposed constraints.
High-quality economic talent could be better used elsewhere.
Worse, many command-and-control efforts have become too complex to implement well.
In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act’s famous “Volcker rule,” which seeks to limit banks’ proprietary trading, has swollen to hundreds of pages, and its introduction has been repeatedly delayed.
There is a simpler, mostly untried approach to financial regulation.
Instead of relying primarily on command-and-control rules, regulators should focus on what motivates the organization as a whole and align those incentives with financial safety.
Doing so could both change banks for the better and increase the effectiveness of ongoing command-and-control regulation.
The recent massive fine of $13 billion imposed by the US government on JPMorgan Chase fits this mode of financial regulation.
But, because such fines are erratic and difficult for banks and banking executives to predict, their impact on long-term organizational incentives is unclear.
The best opportunity to align overall organizational incentives is to be found in tax rules.
Yet reforms in this area are not only untried; they are not even under discussion.
That needs to change.
Like other corporations, financial institutions are taxed on their income, with expenses – including the firm’s financing costs, like interest payments to its creditors – deducted from revenues.
Interest on debt lightens the tax burden and increases profits; returns to equity do not.
As a result, safe equity becomes more expensive than riskier debt financing.
In the mainstream understanding of finance, a firm’s debt level is primarily a trade-off between the benefits of the tax deduction for interest paid and the increased probability of bankruptcy or operational degradation.
So taxing banks on their debt, not their equity, would fundamentally alter organizational incentives.
Two basic options are available.
The most straightforward is to eliminate the deductibility of interest from a bank’s tax bill.
The bank, its shareholders, directors, and executives would no longer have tax reasons to prefer debt over equity, because the bank’s total pre-interest-expense income would be taxed (at a lower rate than the tax on profit), without benefiting from deducting interest expenses on its debt.
However, this tax structure’s impact would vary over time, as interest rates rise and fall.
With today’s interest rates at historical lows, the impact of adjusting the deduction for interest on debt would be small.
When interest rates return to more normal levels, the impact would be greater.
Alternatively, the authorities could levy an excise tax on bank debt in exchange for repealing the corporate tax.
The tax should be calibrated so that banks would pay the same amount, on average, before and after the change.
The tax rate would be low.
A bank financed with 8% equity should be indifferent to paying an excise tax of 0.5% of its debt or paying today’s corporate tax.
But, though the total tax paid would be the same, the incentives for the bank, its board, and its executives to make the bank and the financial system safer would be strengthened.
The tax would make debt more expensive, because it would be taxed, while making equity cheaper, because profits would not be taxed.
Banks would want to use more safe equity and less risky debt.
Tax reform would not solve everything needed to ensure systemic financial safety.
Bank debt receives other subsidies, such as from the implicit too-big-to-fail guarantee.
Nor would the size of the tax be tied to the damage that major bank failures do to the rest of the economy.
And there would be implementation and avoidance issues, as is true of all taxes.
Nevertheless, the tax would better align financial firms’ incentives with the goal of minimizing the risk of systemic crises.
Moreover, because the shift to taxing debt instead of equity would reduce the corporate tax for financial firms, policymakers could hope that it would not generate the resistance that the post-crisis command-and-control rules have.
Regulatory styles have diminishing returns.
Much of what can destroy a bank is not headstrong recklessness, but ordinary day-to-day failures.
Command-and-control regulation, which can generate more pushback by its targets as the regulatory commands get stronger, is by now well developed for banks and finance.
Addressing banks’ and financial firms’ organizational incentives should play a more prominent role in the financial-policy mix than it does today.
Why Pick on BNP Paribas?
CAMBRIDGE – To Europeans with whom I speak, the $8.9 billion fine imposed on the French financial-services company BNP Paribas for violating American sanctions against Cuba, Iran, and Sudan seems excessive.
Yes, BNP did something seriously wrong.
But $8.9 billion?
Isn’t that extremely disproportionate for an otherwise highly responsible bank?
French President François Hollande asked US President Barack Obama to intervene to have the fine reduced, as did the European Union’s commissioner for the internal market and services, Michel Barnier.
The fine is indeed much higher than those levied before.
Hefty fines for currency-trading violations are not new (HSBC, for example, was hit with a $1.9 billion fine in 2012); but a fine close to $10 billion is.
Three factors, not all of which are being discussed, seem to explain the size of the penalty.
First, BNP’s infraction was part of a pattern of deliberate and repeated behavior.
Second, the settlement came at a time when the American authorities faced heavy criticism for being soft on big banks during and after the 2008 financial crisis.
Finally, and more speculatively, the United States’ effort to make finance a more efficacious foreign-policy tool could have affected its treatment of BNP.
On the first issue, European businesspeople and media organizations need to appreciate fully how US prosecutors of financial crimes think.
Once an investigation shows clearly that wrongdoing has occurred, the authorities expect the target to come clean, cooperate, and restructure the firm to ensure that the infractions do not recur.
But BNP continued the banned transactions and knowingly sought to cover its tracks.
The transfer documentation reportedly was regularly stripped of key details such as the destination of wire transfers, so that the transaction would be harder to investigate and less likely to provide evidence of malfeasance.
In American corporate criminal actions, the targeted US firm often brings in a prominent figure – a former prosecutor or a former judge – to investigate the behavior and people involved and report to the target’s board of directors.
The latest example of this practice now in the news is that of General Motors, which hired Anton Valukas, a prominent former prosecutor who examined and reported on the dealings of the failed investment bank Lehman Brothers to the bankruptcy court.
Valukas’s task for GM was to investigate and report on the company’s faulty ignition switches, which have been linked to 13 deaths.
The targeted firm then typically fires the most egregious wrongdoers and puts management-control systems in place to reduce the chance that similar problems will arise in the future.
Perhaps the investigation interprets ambiguity in a way most favorable to the organization and its senior management, but it is understood that the investigation will indeed uncover the core facts and lead to effective reforms.
Some might view this way of proceeding as moralism, though some of it results from under-staffed, under-funded prosecutors economizing on resources.
The target pays for its own investigation.
BNP did not seem to do any of this with gusto; its investigation did not match the effort made, for example, by GM.
It did not prevent subsequent violations by implementing effective controls to detect problems.
The second factor is that BNP’s case came to a head at a time when US prosecutors were being accused of treating banks as “too big to jail,” for fear that pressing charges against them would weaken them too much and thus undermine the real economy.
BNP just happened to be one of the next banks in line for prosecution and thus found itself in the crosshairs.
BNP did lobby European authorities to make a too-big-to-jail plea to the US authorities.
The European authorities made the plea, claiming that the large fine would cripple BNP; it did not work.
Finally, bear in mind that the case coincided with the crises in Ukraine and elsewhere, with the major US enforcement action being financial and economic sanctions on Russia, the largest of which are still being threatened.
Recall BNP’s transgressions: the US barred financial transactions with Sudan, Iran, and Cuba through banks that touched US soil (or the US dollar) in their dealings.
Most banks complied. BNP did not, engineering secret transactions involving all three countries.
At a time when the US is reluctant or unable to project military might to back up its foreign-policy goals, it is seeking to use financial might as a surrogate.
The effort might induce a financial backlash in the future, but BNP’s problems emerged when effective sanctions were at the forefront of policymakers’ minds – and, one suspects, not absent from prosecutors’ minds.
If the US is to make its financial weaponry an effective foreign-policy tool, big banks cannot blithely proceed to do what US authorities have prohibited.
It would take only a few noncompliant banks to render financial sanctions ineffective.
And it is difficult to detect which banks are not complying and to what extent.
So when one miscreant is discovered, the enforcement authorities hit it hard, to signal to others that, while they might not get caught, the financial penalties will far exceed the limited benefits of disobeying the government’s foreign-policy edicts.
This general move for criminal enforcement – greater penalties to account for the difficulties of detection – is a standard prosecutorial move in the US and around the world.
Thus, European critics of the fine imposed on BNP Paribas are right to emphasize its disproportionate nature. What they overlook is that this was precisely the point.
Empowering Financial Bankruptcy
CAMBRIDGE – Four of the world’s most important financial regulators – the Bank of England, Germany’s Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), the US Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority – recently asked the world’s derivatives industry to change the way it does business.
The question now is whether the regulators can make that happen with a request, as opposed to something more substantial.
That will not be easy.
With the recent missive to the derivatives industry, they are now starting to deal with bankruptcy – and well they should.
Until now, bankruptcy has played a second-tier role in reform efforts, even though bankruptcy law does for industrial firms much of what regulators want for financial firms.
By restructuring a failed industrial firm’s debts, saving its profitable businesses, and selling its loss-making ones, bankruptcy can minimize a failed firm’s knock-on costs for its creditors and the economy as a whole.
But, though US bankruptcy law usually does a good job of restructuring industrial firms, it cannot restructure financial firms, because bankruptcy’s basic rules – which allow the court to consolidate the firm’s assets, redeploy them, and sell the rest – do not apply to most financial contracts, like derivatives.
So, bankruptcy is both part of the problem and part of the hoped-for solution – if it can be fixed and made to work for financial firms.
Consider the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
When then-US Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson decided not to bail out Lehman, the firm filed for bankruptcy and quickly sold off its brokerage operations.
But, ominously, it could not sell its large portfolio of derivatives contracts – deals based on movements of interest and currency rates.
By most accounts, Lehman’s derivatives portfolio was a winner when it went bankrupt, but bankruptcy exemptions for derivatives allowed Lehman’s counterparties to close out their positions rapidly, in ways that were costly for Lehman, chaotic for financial markets, and damaging to the real economy.
The derivatives market is exempt from rules that stop creditors from grabbing collateral and terminating their contracts when the debtor files for bankruptcy.
They are also exempt from rules that impede better-informed creditors from seizing assets and running off just before a bankruptcy, even if their positions are needed, say, to sell a portfolio intact to another business, and even if the fleeing creditor would eventually be paid in full, with interest.
Regulators’ push for sounder finance has so far focused on requiring more capital, creating safer products, and establishing more resilient business structures.
These are indeed the right priorities.
But the US Congress and regulators have said all along that bankruptcy is the preferred way to restructure failed financial firms.
If a judicial bankruptcy process could work, the thinking goes, it would minimize the likelihood of taxpayer-financed bailouts and disruption of financial markets and the real economy.
The problem is that bankruptcy today is no more capable of restructuring a failed financial firm than it was in 2009; a failed Lehman in 2014 would be no less disruptive to the world economy.
US regulators, for example, cannot first try bankruptcy before deploying their expanded powers under the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation; if they did, the bankrupt firm’s counterparties in the derivatives and repo markets would close out their contracts and dump their collateral as soon as they could.
Once that happened – probably within hours of the bankruptcy filing – the firm would be beyond repair.
Regulators could not go back and fix it with their new Dodd-Frank powers, because the firm would already be ripped asunder.
So, as it stands now, regulators need to preempt bankruptcy, not rely on it, because as soon as any failed financial firm files for bankruptcy, it has signed its own death warrant.
The regulators’ letter to the ISDA asked the derivatives industry to rewrite its standard contracts, so that a bankrupt firm’s portfolio is not ripped apart as soon as it files.
This is a big step in the right direction.
But, as regulators reflect further, they will recognize that they cannot rely on the derivatives industry to revise its contracts any more than industrial bankruptcy relies on creditors’ contracts to stop failed firms from being ripped apart.
Many simply will not use the contract terms.
Perhaps regulators will find that they must require that the regulated have the desired contract provisions.
That solution will be incomplete, however, because not all derivatives traders are regulated financial institutions, and because many creditors would find ways to circumvent the contract and the requirement.
If the coverage is not complete, one can expect the regulated to complain that they have been placed at a competitive disadvantage.
Regulators may well need to turn to bankruptcy laws to fix the problem.
The regulators’ call to the ISDA for voluntary action will not amount to much if it is just a request to the derivatives industry to act against its own financial interests.
But it does start the regulators down the road to more serious reform.
Bonded Bankers
CAMBRIDGE – Since the global financial crisis, regulators have worked hard to make the world’s big banks safer.
The fundamental problem is well known: major banks have significant incentives to take on excessive risk.
If their risky bets pay off, their stockholders benefit considerably, as do the banks’ CEOs and senior managers, who are heavily compensated in bank stock.
If they do not pay off and the bank fails, the government will probably pick up the tab.
This confluence of economic incentives to take on risk makes bank managers poor guardians of financial safety.
They surely do not want their bank to fail; but, if the potential upside is large enough, it is a risk they may find worth taking.
Several solutions to this problem have been proposed, and some – such as increased capital requirements and restrictions on risky investments – are headed toward implementation.
More recently, two other important solutions have emerged.
Under the first, more developed proposal, banks would undertake large obligations via long-term bonds, which would be paid only if their operations are sound.
In effect, the long-term bondholders would guarantee the rest of a bank’s debts, including the riskiest ones.
If the bank faltered, the guaranteeing bondholders would stabilize the most troubled elements of the firm.
The bondholders – not the bank’s core operations – would take the hit.
Proponents hope that this would soften the systemic cost of bank failure.
They also hope that the guarantees would motivate the bondholders to monitor banks’ activities and pressure bank managers to limit their risky operations.
The second solution that is gaining ground is to revise bankers’ compensation.
Senior bank managers would be paid not in cash or equity, but in the bank’s long-term bonds, thereby giving them a larger financial stake in the bank’s long-term stability, instead of its long-term stock price.
If the bank failed, it would be unable to repay the bonds, and the managers owning bonds would be that much poorer.
Bank regulators in the US and elsewhere are now seriously considering such changes, but they have yet to determine how comprehensive the compensation makeover should be.
In general, though, a substantial share of senior bankers’ pay would be deferred for several years.
If the bank did not survive that long, the managers would lose that money.
This could be achieved by unfunded pension obligations, which do not require that banks set aside the money in advance.
Banks overseen by managers who had larger unfunded pensions weathered the financial crisis better than their counterparts, presumably because they had a stronger incentive to keep them safe.
A more aggressive approach would compensate bankers with the same bonds that guarantee their institutions’ short-term, volatile, and risky debts.
As a result, bank managers would have a personal financial stake in ensuring that the risky obligations do not blow up, as they did during the 2007-2008 financial crisis.
If the obligations deteriorated and the bank failed, the managers would be left unpaid.
Because the obligations would be guaranteeing the rest of the bank’s operations, the managers would, it is hoped, be especially vigilant in ensuring that basic operations were safe.
By tying senior managers’ pay to the bank’s stability, the financial sector, advocates argue, would be forced to police itself.
This incentive-based regulation could bolster economic stability more effectively than expecting regulators to keep pace with banks’ risky activities.
The proposal is not perfect – not least because bank managers’ compensation would still be tied to profits.