As Appiah says, duties beyond borders are a matter of degree; and there are also degrees of intervention that range from aid to refugees and arms to different degrees of the use of force.
But even when making these graduated choices, a leader also owes his followers a duty of prudence – of remembering the Hippocratic oath to first of all, do no harm.
Ignatieff says Obama already owns the consequences of his inaction; Friedman reminds him of the virtue of prudence.
Pity Obama.
Safeguarding Cyberspace
CAMBRIDGE – Brazil recently hosted NETmundial, the first global conference on Internet governance, attended by 800 representatives of governments, corporations, civil-society organizations, and technologists.
Based on the notion of “multi-stakeholderism,” the meeting produced a 12-page “outcomes” document.
Nonetheless, at the end of the conference, there was still no consensus on global cyber governance.
Many governments continued to advocate traditional United Nations voting procedures for making global decisions, and defend their right to control domestic cyber activities.
In a sense, this is not surprising.
After all, though the Internet is a complex, fast-evolving, and all-encompassing global resource, it has not been around for very long.
While the World Wide Web was conceived in 1989, it was only in the last 15 years that the number of Web sites burgeoned, and Internet technology began to transform global supply chains.
Since 1992, the number of Internet users has exploded from one million to nearly three billion. Just like that, the Internet became a substrate of economic, social, and political life.
In its early days, the Internet was often characterized as the ultimate egalitarian conduit of free-flowing information – a harbinger of the end of government controls.
But the reality is that governments and geographical jurisdictions have always played a central role in regulating the Internet – or at least have tried.
Ultimately, however, the Internet poses a major governance challenge, exemplified in ongoing efforts to understand the implications of ubiquitous mobility and the collection and storage of “big data.”
The governance challenge stems from the fact that cyberspace is a combination of virtual properties, which defy geographical boundaries, and physical infrastructure, which fall under sovereign jurisdictions.
Control of the physical layer can have both territorial and extraterritorial effects on the virtual layers.
At the same time, attacks can be launched from the low-cost virtual realm against the physical domain, where resources are scarce and expensive.
The Internet began as a small village of known users, where an authentication layer of code was unnecessary and the development of norms was simple.
But then it grew, and everything changed.
Though cyberspace offered the advantages of access to information and easy communication to a growing number of people, it became a breeding ground for crime, hacker attacks, and threats to governments.
Efforts to limit the risks incurred in this volatile environment have focused on creating private networks and “walled gardens” (closed platforms) – cyber equivalents to the seventeenth-century enclosures that were used to solve that era’s “tragedy of the commons.”
But this raises the risk of fragmentation, which, if allowed to go far enough, could curtail the Internet’s economic benefits.
Given that security is a traditional function of the state, some observers believe that growing insecurity will lead to a greater role for governments in cyberspace.
Indeed, accounts of cyber war may be exaggerated, but cyber espionage is rampant, and more than 30 governments are reputed to have developed offensive capabilities and doctrines for the use of cyber weapons.
Ever since the Stuxnet virus was used to disrupt Iran’s nuclear program in 2009-2010, governments have taken the threat posed by cyber weapons very seriously.
Governments also want to protect their societies from what comes through the Internet.
For example, China’s government has not only created a “Great Firewall” of software filters; it also requires that companies take responsibility for censoring their public content.
And, if China is attacked, it has the capacity to reduce its Internet connections.
But China’s government – and others that practice Internet censorship – still want to reap the economic benefits of connectivity.
That tension leads to imperfect compromises.
A similar tension exists in the effort to create international Internet-governance norms.
While authoritarian countries like China and Russia seek “information security,” including the kind of overt censorship that would be prohibited in countries like the United States, Western democracies pursue “cyber security.”
This divergence was starkly apparent in 2012, at a conference convened in Dubai by the UN’s International Telecommunications Union (ITU).
Though the meeting was ostensibly about updating telephony regulations, the underlying issue was the ITU’s role in Internet governance.
Authoritarian regimes and many developing countries believe that their approach to sovereignty, security, and development would benefit from the multilateral processes that the ITU employs.
But democratic governments fear that these processes are too cumbersome, and would undercut the flexibility of the “multi-stakeholder” approach, which stresses the involvement of the private and non-profit sectors, as well as governments.
The vote in Dubai was 89 to 55 against the “democratic” governments.
This outcome raised concerns about a crisis in Internet governance – concerns that the recent conference in Brazil alleviated, but only slightly.
Stayed tuned.
There are many more conferences scheduled on cyber governance – and a lot more work to be done.
Governance in the Information Age
ABU DHABI – As the year comes to an end, it is only natural to ask what might lie ahead.
But, instead of asking what may lie ahead in 2014, let us jump to mid-century.
What will governance look like in 2050?
That is what the World Economic Forum (WEF) asked at a recent meeting in Abu Dhabi that focused on the future of governance under three potential scenarios arising from the ongoing information revolution.
With that revolution already marginalizing some countries and communities – and creating new opportunities for others – the question could hardly be more timely.
The first scenario that participants considered is a world ruled by so-called “megacities,” where governance is administered largely by major urban agglomerations.
The second possibility is a world in which strong central governments use big data to fortify their control.
And, in the third scenario, central governments are fundamentally weak, with markets – and the enterprises that dominate them – providing almost all services.
Each of these scenarios is an extrapolation of a current trend.
While all of them could be beneficial in some respects, they also have features that, if left unchecked, could lead to dystopian outcomes.
Policymakers should already be implementing policies aimed at guiding trends like urbanization, the rise of big data, and the grouping of people into narrow communities, often based on their relationship to the market.
The goal should be to take advantage of these trends’ potential benefits, while ensuring that they do not undermine other critical aspects of governance.
For example, although megacities have the potential to create new opportunities for workers and businesses, they cannot solve universal problems like climate change or manage the production and protection of national and global public goods.
Likewise, while the use of big data has substantial problem-solving potential, important questions remain about who owns, who controls, and who regulates the use of the data.
The notion of a “datocracy” incites fear of an Orwellian “e-1984.”
Indeed, the recent revelations about National Security Agency surveillance programs barely scratch the surface of the issue.
After all, the use of big data is not confined to governments and corporations; anonymous criminal groups can easily abuse the information, too.
Finally, while individual choice within markets is often the most efficient way to allocate resources, markets do not produce a sufficient supply of public goods.
Indeed, there are some goods that the private sector is simply unable to provide.
This system may seem acceptable to those within the “gated communities” that benefit from it, but what about all those left outside?
The WEF’s Global Agenda Council on the Future of Government, of which I am a part, has considered ways in which information technology can improve governance and reduce feelings of alienation among the governed.
The most effective initiatives, the council observed, often arise from partnerships between government and the private sector.
For example, in Kenya, a private company developed a mobile-payments system that allows users to transfer money using cell phones, effectively creating a banking system much more quickly than the government could have done.
Once the system was privately created, the government was able to use it to provide additional services.
As a result, a Kenyan farmer in a remote district can now obtain information about crop prices or transfer funds, without having to travel long distances and wait in lines.
While such initiatives cannot solve the problem of inequality, they can help to relieve some of its most damaging effects.
At a time of rapid social change and relentless technological advancement, efforts to improve governance – at the local, national, or international level – will require careful thought and experimentation, in order to determine how to balance inclusive decision-making with the ever-evolving needs of markets.
As the American diplomat Harlan Cleveland once asked, “How will we get everybody in on the act, and still get some action?”
Consider international institutions.
Today, the world is organized into some 200 countries; in all likelihood, it will be in 2050 as well.
But only 16 governmental entities account for two-thirds of the world’s income and two-thirds of its population.
Many have advocated the use of “double majorities” – which require a majority of votes according to two separate criteria, population and economic output – to elicit action from a manageable number of states while enhancing weaker states’ influence in decision-making.
But, though the G-20 has moved in this direction, the approach to setting a global agenda remains flawed.
Indeed, it seems to be most effective in times of crisis; in more normal times, as we have seen, the G-20 struggles to get things done.
Moreover, even if the double-majority system helps to empower some weaker states, it does not account for the role of the world’s smallest countries in global decision-making processes.
Although these countries represent a small share of the global population, they comprise a significant majority of the total number of countries.
One potential solution would be for states to represent each other, as occurs in the International Monetary Fund.
But the IMF’s experience exposes significant challenges in implementation.
World leaders have not yet figured out how to reconcile the moral conviction that all people are equal with the simple fact that all countries are not.
In a global information age, governance systems capable of addressing fundamental issues like security, welfare, liberty, and identity will require coalitions that are small enough to function efficiently and a decision concerning what to do about those who are underrepresented.
Obviously, all of this calls for a lot more investigation.
Exploring potential future scenarios, as the WEF has done, is an important step in the right direction.
Japan’s Self-Defense Defense
CAMBRIDGE – Since the end of World War II, Japan has been ruled by an American-written “peace constitution,” Article 9 of which prohibits war and limits Japanese forces to self-defense.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is now seeking legislation to enable Japan to reinterpret the constitution to include “collective self-defense,” whereby the country would enhance its security cooperation with other countries, particularly its closest ally, the United States.
Critics view this as a radical departure from seven decades of pacifism.
But Abe’s central objectives – improving Japan’s ability to respond to threats that do not amount to armed attack; enabling Japan to participate more effectively in international peacekeeping activities; and redefining measures for self-defense permitted under Article 9 – are actually relatively modest.
Fears that the move would lead to Japanese involvement in distant US wars are similarly overblown.
Indeed, the rules have been carefully crafted to prohibit such adventures, while allowing Japan to work more closely with the US on direct threats to Japanese security.
It is not difficult to see why Abe is pursuing broader rights to self-defense.
Japan lies in a dangerous region, in which deep-rooted tensions threaten to erupt at any moment.
Given that East Asia, unlike Europe after 1945, never experienced full reconciliation among rivals, or established strong regional institutions, it has been forced to depend on the US-Japan Security Treaty to underpin regional stability.
When US President Barack Obama’s administration announced its “rebalancing” toward Asia in 2011, it reaffirmed the 1996 Clinton-Hashimoto Declaration, which cited the US-Japan security alliance as the foundation for stability – a prerequisite for continued economic progress – in Asia.
That declaration served the larger goal of establishing a stable, albeit uneven, triangular relationship among the US, Japan, and China.
Subsequent US administrations have upheld this approach, and opinion polls show that it retains broad acceptance in Japan – not least owing to close cooperation on disaster relief following the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami of 2011.
But Japan remains extremely vulnerable.
The most immediate regional threat is North Korea, whose unpredictable dictatorship has invested its meager economic resources in nuclear and missile technology.
A longer-term concern is the rise of China – an economic and demographic powerhouse whose expanding military capacity has enabled it to take an increasingly assertive stance in territorial disputes, including with Japan in the East China Sea.
China’s territorial ambitions are also fueling tensions in the South China Sea, where sea-lanes that are vital to Japanese trade are located.
Complicating matters further is the fact that China’s political evolution has failed to keep pace with its economic progress.
If the Chinese Communist Party feels threatened by a public frustrated with insufficient political participation and enduring social repression, it could slip into competitive nationalism, upending the already-delicate regional status quo.
Of course, if China becomes aggressive, Asian countries like India and Australia – which are already disturbed by China’s assertiveness in the South China Sea – will join Japan in the effort to offset China’s power.
But, as things stand, a strategy of containment would be a mistake.
After all, the best way to engender enmity is to treat China as an enemy.
A more effective approach, spearheaded by the US and Japan, would focus on integration, with a hedge against uncertainty.
American and Japanese leaders must shape the regional environment in such a way that China has incentives to act responsibly, including by maintaining strong defense capabilities.
Meanwhile, the US and Japan must rethink the structure of their alliance.
While the expected revisions to Japan’s defense framework are a positive development, many Japanese still resent the lack of symmetry in the alliance obligations.
Others chafe at the burden of US bases, particularly on the island of Okinawa.
A longer-term goal should thus be for the US gradually to transfer its bases to Japanese control, leaving American forces to rotate among them.
In fact, some bases – notably, Misawa Air Base north of Tokyo – already fly Japan’s flag, while hosting American units.
But the process must be handled carefully.
As China invests in advanced ballistic missiles, the fixed bases on Okinawa become increasingly vulnerable.
To avoid the perception that the US decided to turn the bases over to Japan just when their military benefits were diminishing, and to ensure that the move represented America’s recommitment to the alliance, a joint commission would have to be established to manage the transfer.
For Japan, becoming an equal partner in its alliance with the US is essential to securing its regional and global standing.
To this end, Abe’s modest step toward collective self-defense is a step in the right direction.
The Return of Japan
TOKYO – “Japan is back!” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared during a visit to Washington, DC, earlier this year.
But, while Japan may be on the right track after two decades of economic stagnation, there is still much to be done to secure the country’s long-term future.
In July, Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) won control of both houses of parliament – a resounding electoral victory that amounts to the strongest political mandate any Japanese leader has received in many years.
As a result, Abe seems likely to remain in power longer than his ineffectual predecessors, most of whom did not last more than a year.
Meanwhile, Japan’s economy seems to be recovering from a generation of malaise, with this year’s annualized growth rate exceeding 3%.
Moreover, following the triple shock of the earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear catastrophe in 2011, Japan has managed (at considerable cost) to replace the 25% of its energy supply that the disabled reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi plant provided.
The announcement that Tokyo will host the 2020 Olympic Games has also boosted public confidence.
Skeptics worry that the economic progress may not last, arguing that the high growth rate is simply a reflection of loose monetary policy and fiscal stimulus – a strategy that inflation will render unsustainable.
Abe’s supporters reply that the third “arrow” of “Abenomics” – productivity-enhancing structural reforms – has only now been removed from its quiver.
They point to Abe’s ability to overcome resistance from small rice farmers, part of the LDP’s electoral base, to Japan’s participation in negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would open Japan’s economy to increased global competition.
Nevertheless, Japan faces serious long-term challenges.
First, with its birth rate well below replacement level, Japan’s population is aging and shrinking.
Offsetting this trend will require increased immigration and greater female labor-force participation – neither of which will be easy to bring about.
Japan has not traditionally been a country of immigration, and the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report, which ranks 136 countries, has Japan in 105th place.
But, of course, this can change – and Japan does have a history of successfully reinventing itself.
Perhaps the most critical question about Japan’s future concerns its relationship with its neighbors – North Korea, South Korea, and China.
While recent polls suggest that Japan retains substantial soft power globally, this is not the case in its immediate neighborhood.
Unlike Europe, where Germany overcame World War II’s legacy through its integration into the European Union, Northeast Asia remains burdened by history.
According to its neighbors, Japan’s apologies for is past aggression are inadequate.
It does not help that some Korean and Chinese leaders have used anti-Japanese rhetoric to win domestic support.
In Japan, the relentless criticism has triggered a nationalist backlash, spurring politicians to respond in kind during last year’s election campaign.
For example, Abe threatened to rescind the official apologies issued by former leaders or officials for abuses and atrocities committed by Japan’s army during WWII, and stated his intention to visit the controversial Yasukuni Shrine, which honors not only Japan’s war dead, but also many of its war criminals.
While Abe has not acted on these campaign statements, some observers remain convinced that he will visit Yasukuni at some point, further straining Japan’s relations with South Korea and China.
Territorial disputes have exacerbated these tensions significantly.
China challenges Japanese control over more than seven square kilometers of islets – called the Senkaku Islands in Japan, and the Diaoyu Islands in China – in the East China Sea.
While the rival claims date back to the late nineteenth century, the latest flare-up – which has included widespread anti-Japanese demonstrations in China – was triggered in September 2012, when Japan’s government purchased three of the tiny islets from their private Japanese owner.
Then-Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda said that he decided to purchase the islands for the Japanese central government to prevent Tokyo Governor Shintaro Ishihara from purchasing them with municipal funds.
Noda feared that Ishihara, who was well known for nationalist grandstanding, would try to occupy the islands or find other ways to use them to provoke China.
But Chinese officials viewed the move as proof that Japan was trying to disrupt the status quo.
Some even claimed that Japan was trying to reverse the territorial outcome of WWII.
The May 1972 transfer back to Japan of Okinawa, which the United States had administered, included the Senkaku Islands.
A few months later, when China and Japan were working to normalize relations, Japanese Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka asked Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai about the islets; Zhou responded that the dispute should be left to later generations, in order to avoid any delay of normalization.
As a result, both countries maintained their sovereignty claims.
So, though Japan has administrative control, Chinese ships and planes frequently enter Japanese waters to assert China’s claim.
While Japan’s security treaty with the US serves as a deterrent, there is always a danger of miscalculation.
A quick resolution of the Senkaku Islands dispute (or of Japan’s lower-profile conflict with South Korea over the Korean-controlled Liancourt Rocks) is improbable, but Japan could be more proactive.
For example, by stating their willingness to take any territorial disputes to the International Court of Justice, Japanese authorities could help to dispel perceptions of militarism.
Furthermore, Japan should take the sovereign act of designating the Senkaku Islands as an international maritime preserve free of habitation or military use.
China might not agree, but such a move might at least return the issue to the back burner, while reinforcing Japan’s image as a peaceful power.
Japan and Northeast Asia need bold initiatives that focus on the future.
It is time to give history a rest.
The Myth of Isolationist America
CAMBRIDGE – Is the United States turning inward and becoming isolationist?
That question was posed to me by a number of financial and political leaders at the recent World Economic Forum at Davos, and was heard again a few days later at the annual Munich Security Conference.
In a strong speech at Davos, Secretary of State John Kerry gave an unambiguous answer: “Far from disengaging, America is proud to be more engaged than ever.”
Yet the question lingered.
Unlike the mood at Davos a few years ago, when many participants mistook an economic recession for long-term American decline, the prevailing view this year was that the US economy has regained much of its underlying strength.
Economic doomsayers focused instead on previously fashionable emerging markets like Brazil, Russia, India, and Turkey.
The anxiety about US isolationism is driven by recent events.
For starters, there is America’s refusal (thus far) to intervene militarily in Syria.
Then there is the coming withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan.
And President Barack Obama’s cancellation of his trip to Asia last autumn, owing to domestic political gridlock in the US Congress and the resulting government shutdown, made a poor impression on the region’s leaders.
Indeed, with Kerry’s time and travel focused on the Middle East, many Asian leaders believe that Obama’s signature foreign policy – strategic “rebalancing” toward Asia – has run out of steam, even as tension between China and Japan, evident in their leaders’ statements at Davos, continues to mount.
Particularly egregious from the point of view of “Davos” was the recent refusal by Congress to approve the reform and refunding of the International Monetary Fund, even though a plan that added no significant burden to the American taxpayer had been agreed years earlier by the G-20 under Obama’s leadership.
When I asked a prominent Republican senator why Congress had balked at keeping an American commitment, he attributed it to “sheer orneriness,” reflecting the mood of right-wing Tea Party Republicans and some left-wing Democrats.
Further evidence of American isolationism can be found in a recent opinion poll taken by the Pew Research Center and the Council on Foreign Relations.
According to the survey, fifty-two percent of Americans believe that the US “should mind its own business internationally and let other countries get along the best they can on their own.”
About the same number said that the US is “less important and powerful” than it was a decade ago.
The problem with these perceptions – both at home and abroad – is that the US remains the world’s most powerful country, and is likely to remain so for decades.
China’s size and rapid economic growth will almost certainly increase its relative strength vis-à-vis the US.
But even when China becomes the world’s largest economy in the coming years, it will still be decades behind the US in terms of per capita income.
Moreover, even if China suffers no major domestic political setback, projections based on GDP growth alone are one-dimensional and ignore US military and soft-power advantages. They also ignore China’s geopolitical disadvantages within Asia.
America’s culture of openness and innovation will ensure its role as a global hub in an age when networks supplement, if not fully replace, hierarchical power.
The US is well positioned to benefit from such networks and alliances, if American leaders follow smart strategies.
In structural terms, it matters greatly that the two entities in the world with economies and per capita income similar to the US – Europe and Japan – are both American allies.
In terms of balance-of-power resources, that boosts America’s net position, but only if US leaders maintain these alliances and ensure international cooperation.
Decline is a misleading metaphor for today’s America, and Obama fortunately has rejected the suggestion that he should pursue a strategy aimed at managing it.
As a leader in research and development, higher education, and entrepreneurial activity, the US, unlike ancient Rome, is not in absolute decline.
We do not live in a “post-American world,” but we also no longer live in the “American era” of the late twentieth century.
In the decades ahead, the US will be “first” but not “sole.”
That is because the power resources of many others – both states and non-state actors – are growing, and because, on an increasing number of issues, obtaining America’s preferred outcomes will require exercising power with others as much as over others.
The capacity of US leaders to maintain alliances and create networks will be an important dimension of America’s hard and soft power.
The problem for US power in the twenty-first century is not just China, but the “rise of the rest.”
The solution is not isolation, but a strategy of selectivity similar to what President Dwight Eisenhower advocated in the 1950’s.
A smart power strategy starts with a clear assessment of limits.
The preeminent power does not have to patrol every boundary and project its strength everywhere.
That is why Eisenhower prudently resisted direct intervention on the French side in Vietnam in 1954.
Eisenhower was right about something else, too: America’s military strength depends on preservation of its economic strength.
Nation-building at home is not the isolation that critics fear; on the contrary, it is central to a smart foreign policy.
A smart strategy would avoid involvement of ground forces in major wars on the Asian continent.
Yet such prudence is not the same as isolationism.
The US needs to combine its soft- and hard-power resources better.
As Obama said in his 2014 State of the Union address, “in a world of complex threats, our security depends on all elements of our power – including strong and principled diplomacy.”
Eisenhower could have said that, and no one would accuse him of being an isolationist.
Judgment Day for the Eurozone
MUNICH – Europe and the world are eagerly awaiting the decision of Germany’s Constitutional Court on September 12 regarding the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the proposed permanent successor to the eurozone’s current emergency lender, the European Financial Stability Mechanism.
The Court must rule on German plaintiffs’ claim that legislation to establish the ESM would violate Germany’s Grundgesetz (Basic Law).
If the Court rules in the plaintiffs’ favor, it will ask Germany’s president not to sign the ESM treaty, which has already been ratified by Germany’s Bundestag (parliament).
There are serious concerns on all sides about the pending decision.
Investors are worried that the Court could oppose the ESM such that they would have to bear the losses from their bad investments.
Taxpayers and pensioners in European countries that still have solid economies are worried that the Court could pave the way for socialization of eurozone debt, saddling them with the burden of these same investors’ losses.
The plaintiffs represent the entire political spectrum, including the Left Party, the Christian Social Union MP Peter Gauweiler, and the justice minister in former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democratic government, Herta Däubler-Gmelin, who has collected tens of thousands of signatures supporting her case.
There is also a group of retired professors of economics and law, and another of “ordinary” citizens, whose individual complaints have been selected as examples by the Court.
The plaintiffs have raised several objections to the ESM.
First, they claim that it breaches the Maastricht Treaty’s “no bail-out” clause (Article 125).
Germany agreed to relinquish the Deutsche Mark on the condition that the new currency area would not lead to direct or indirect socialization of its members’ debt, thus precluding any financial assistance from EU funds for states facing bankruptcy.
Indeed, the new currency was conceived as a unit of account for economic exchange that would not have any wealth implications at all.
The plaintiffs argue that, in the case of Greece, breaching Article 125 required proof that its insolvency would pose a greater danger than anticipated when the Maastricht Treaty was drafted.
However, no such proof was provided.
Second, Germany’s law on the introduction of the ESM obliges Germany’s representative on the ESM Council to vote only after having asked the Bundestag for a decision.
According to the plaintiffs, this is not permissible under international law.
If Germany had wished to constrain its governor’s authority in this way, it should have informed the other signatory states prior to doing so.
On the other hand, Germany’s representative on the Governing Council is sworn to secrecy, which, the plaintiffs argue, precludes any accountability to the Bundestag.
Moreover, the plaintiffs claim that, while the ESM treaty is restrictive in granting resources to individual states, requiring a qualified majority vote, it does not specify the conditions under which losses are acceptable.
Losses can result from excessive wages paid by the ESM Governing Council members to themselves, a dearth of energy in efforts to collect debts from countries that have received credit, or other forms of mismanagement.
And, because Governing Council and Executive Board members enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution, misbehavior cannot be punished.
If losses arise, they must be covered by the initial cash contribution of €80 billion ($100 billion), which then would be topped up automatically by all participating countries according to their capital shares.
If individual countries are no longer able to make the necessary contributions, others must do so on their behalf.
In principle, a single country might have to assume the entire burden of losses.
Such joint and several liability, the plaintiffs assert, contradicts the Court’s previous statements that Germany should not accept any financial commitments stemming from other states’ behavior.
Worse, according to the plaintiffs, although the liability of any country vis-à-vis external partners is limited to that country’s share of capital, this limitation does not apply to other signatory states.
It is theoretically possible that a single country could be held liable for the ESM’s total exposure of €700 billion.
Finally, the ESM cannot be considered on its own, but must be seen in the context of the total exposure amount, which includes the €1.4 trillion in bailout funds that have already been granted.
In particular, the Target2 credit drawn by the crisis-afflicted countries’ central banks, which already totals almost €1 trillion, should also be taken into consideration.
Nobody knows how the Constitutional Court will rule on these objections.
Most observers believe that the Court is unlikely to oppose the ESM treaty, though many expect the judges to demand certain amendments, or to ask Germany’s president to make his signature subject to certain qualifications.
It is good that the Court’s decisions cannot be forecast, and even better that the Court cannot be lobbied or petitioned.
The European Union can be based only on the rule of law.
If those in power can break its rules on a case-by-case basis, the EU will never develop into the stable construct that is a prerequisite for peace and prosperity.
The OPEC Oil Embargo at 40
DENVER – Forty years ago, the United States and much of Europe learned difficult lessons about their dangerous addiction to fossil fuels.
Following Israel’s victory in the Yom Kippur War, the Arab members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) announced an oil embargo on Israel’s supporters.
Developed countries, faced with the sudden cutoff of a key energy source and a major spike in world oil prices, felt powerless.
But, as it turned out, developed countries did have options for reducing their dependence on Arab oil.
They just had not recognized – or had not cared to recognize – the need for action until OPEC had them over a barrel.
While consumers waited in long lines – and even fought – to fill their gas tanks, governments attempted to encourage innovative solutions by, for example, raising efficiency requirements for automobiles and certain appliances, like refrigerators.
In 1977, the US created the Department of Energy (DOE); a year later, it enacted the National Energy Act, which employed tools like industrial regulation and tax incentives to promote fuel efficiency and renewable energy.
These efforts led to major improvements in energy efficiency.
From 1973 to 1985, US energy consumption per dollar of GDP declined by 28% – five times faster than during the previous quarter-century, according to the DOE.
But the corresponding decline in demand caused the price of oil to plummet in 1986, ushering in a new era of cheap energy.
This facilitated a two-decade-long economic boom, while reducing pressure on governments to sustain the momentum of progress toward greater energy efficiency.
But oil prices do not reflect the true costs of fossil-fuel consumption.
Beyond the economic and human costs of wars fought to maintain reliable oil supplies are the tremendous costs – which are set to rise substantially in the coming years – associated with human-induced climate change.
The recently released Fifth Assessment Report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provides further evidence that human-induced climate change is happening.
Continued greenhouse-gas emissions on the massive scale of today would have devastating consequences, including more frequent and more intense weather events.
Reversing this trend demands urgent action.
As was true in the 1970’s, innovation is the key to effective solutions.
But, unlike 40 years ago, governments cannot be expected to drive progress.
In recent years, governments have clearly demonstrated their lack of willingness to pursue the kind of bold policies and regulatory action that are needed to curb climate change.
Indeed, since world leaders failed to achieve a climate-change agreement at the COP15 conference in Copenhagen in 2009, the issue has remained on the back burner, with policymakers focusing instead on containing the fallout of the global economic crisis.
The recent budget gridlock in the US will only reinforce this approach.
While many would welcome top-down solutions like those that emerged in the 1970’s, such outcomes are unlikely in the foreseeable future.
Fortunately, there is another way.
Business-led innovation and market-based solutions can drive a decisive global shift from crippling fossil-fuel dependency to more efficient renewable-energy systems.
Rocky Mountain Institute’s Reinventing Fire analysis shows that such a future is possible, offering market-driven strategies for powering a US economy that is 158% larger in 2050 – without reliance on oil, coal, or nuclear energy.
Swift and determined action to make buildings more energy-efficient, design automobiles that require little or no fossil fuels, and increase the share of renewable energy in the electricity supply could ensure that the substantially hotter and less pleasant world of 2050 that the IPCC warns against does not materialize.
Our livelihoods, not to mention those of future generations, should not be held hostage by our ongoing addiction to fossil fuels.
Four decades ago, countries not only endured the immediate economic impact of the OPEC embargo; they leveraged the potential of the resulting oil shortages to spur innovation.
Today, the world needs the same kind of bold action – but this time, it is up to the market to provide it.
Mandela’s Children
NAIROBI – Before I knew that Nelson Mandela existed, I thought our then-leader, Kenyan President Daniel Toroitich arap Moi, was the world’s only statesman.
I was five years old, and no world existed for me outside Nairagie Enkare, my birthplace in rural Maasailand.
Moi was a mythical figure to me, because he didn’t live in Nairagie Enkare, yet he was always present through radio, a technology too complicated for a child like me to understand.
Every newscast from the government-controlled radio station began with what “His Excellency, Holy President Daniel Toroitich arap Moi” had said or done.
He visited a school. He planted a tree.
He helped a women’s group.
He attended church.
He said agriculture was the backbone of our nation.
He said we were fortunate to live in Kenya.
Throughout the day, the airwaves were filled with songs repeating the Father of the Nation’s message, and reminding Kenyans to follow in his footsteps.
Perhaps because what came over the radio was so predictable, people sought alternative news from the BBC Swahili Service.
On most evenings, at six o’clock, men gathered to listen at the homes of the few, like my father, who had radios.
The news lasted only 30 minutes, so everyone had to be absolutely quiet.
But, on February 11, 1990, the men began to say repeatedly, “He is free! He is free!
Nelson Mandela is free!”
I’m sure that my father and his friends had heard earlier from government radio that Mandela had been released, but they waited for verification from the BBC.
They left before the news was over to go to a bar to celebrate.
When my father came home that night, he was singing praises for Mandela.
I never asked my father who Mandela was.
The following year, I enrolled in school and began to learn that the world extended beyond Nairagie Enkare.
My teachers explained to me why Mandela’s freedom, after 27 years in prison, meant so much to Africans – from big cities to small villages.
Europeans, I learned, had colonized Africa and stripped Africans of the right to self-governance.
As African countries began to gain independence in the 1950’s, the white minority in South Africa was tightening its grip on power through a racial-segregation system known as apartheid. It was Mandela’s fight against apartheid that led to his imprisonment.
By 1980, black Africans had taken over governance in every country on the continent except South Africa.
Mandela’s release from prison ten years later moved Africa one step closer to absolute independence.
That mission was completed in 1994, when apartheid fell and South Africans chose Mandela as their first democratically elected president.
As I learned more about Mandela, I wondered how he had achieved the unimaginable, overcoming a 27-year ordeal to become the leader of Africa’s largest economy.
And, just when I thought that he had already made his mark on history, he shocked the world by announcing that he would not seek re-election after the end of his first term in 1999.
I was 14 then, old enough to understand how unusual it was for an incumbent African president to retire willingly.
In my own country, for example, people were beginning to wonder whether Moi would leave office in 2002, when his second term expired.
He had ruled Kenya for 13 years before a move in 1991 to reintroduce multi-party democracy paved the way for an election the following year.
Moi was allowed to run again, as long as he honored the constitutional two-term limit.
I feel extremely fortunate and honored that the start of my formal education coincided with Mandela’s re-emergence in African politics.
His patience, civility, and politics of reconciliation provided me a better example of democracy and good governance than any civics class could have done.
Mandela embodied the type of leader that Africans had in mind when they struggled for freedom from the European empires.
Africans wanted leaders who would reconcile and reunite them – leaders who would restore to them the dignity that colonialism had robbed.
Unfortunately for many African countries, freedom and independence ended up in the hands of a few who had tasted and become addicted to the repressive practices that Africans had spent decades fighting.
They amassed untold wealth as hunger and disease ripped their societies apart and pushed more Africans deeper into poverty.
Indeed, more than two decades after Mandela walked through the prison gates, supposedly completing Africa’s struggle for freedom, “Big Men” in countries like Congo and Zimbabwe continue to cling to power against the will of their people.
Nevertheless, I am encouraged by the fact that, since Mandela left office, many African presidents – including Moi and Thabo Mbeki, Mandela’s successor – have adhered to their countries’ constitutions and left office without a fight.
I am also hopeful that Mandela has inspired other young people like me to continue Africa’s liberation peacefully – the Mandela way.
Jumpstarting Europe’s Economy
PARIS – Not so long ago, the notion of the European Central Bank handing out money to governments or directly to citizens – so-called “helicopter money” drops – would have seemed outlandish.
But today a surprising number of mainstream economists and centrist politicians are endorsing the idea of monetary financing of stimulus measures in different forms.
This represents a much-needed change in the conversation – one that, at long last, finally puts the focus squarely on stimulating the demand side of the European economy.
After years of stagnant growth and debilitating unemployment, all options, no matter how unconventional, should be on the table.
The United Kingdom’s referendum decision to leave the European Union only strengthens the case for more stimulus and unconventional measures in Europe.
If a large majority of EU citizens is to support continued political integration, strong economic growth is critical.
As research by McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) shows, despite bold quantitative easing and record low interest rates – the ECB was the first major central bank to introduce negative interest rates in 2014 – anemic demand continues to hobble GDP growth throughout Europe.
In several EU countries, more than a quarter of the population has been unemployed for close to a decade, and political discontent is boiling over into extremism.
The uncertainty and volatility in financial markets in the aftermath of the Brexit vote will further cripple demand.
The wave of corporate investment that was supposed to be unleashed by a combination of fiscal restraint (to rein in government debt) and monetary easing (to generate ultra-low interest rates) has never materialized.
Instead, European companies slashed annual investment by more than €100 billion ($113 billion) a year from 2008 to 2015, and have stockpiled some €700 billion of cash on their balance sheets.
This is not surprising – businesses invest when they are confident about future demand and output growth.
Even before the Brexit vote, European and other global companies were not confident in Europe’s prospects.
Now they are confronting elevated risks of a European recession and the real possibility that both the UK and the EU could break up if populist contagion takes hold.
Business investors hate uncertainty and the Brexit vote has created a dramatically more uncertain world in Europe and beyond.
Fiscal austerity and ultra-low interest rates have also proven ineffective at stimulating household demand – and they may be backfiring.
When individuals cannot find decent yields, they may actually increase their savings to achieve their retirement goals.
And in the typical European city, where land and affordable housing are in short supply, lower interest rates have been driving property prices higher rather than stimulating construction.
It’s well past time to acknowledge the limits of current policy.
Under today’s precarious conditions, demand could certainly be better supported through strategies other than quantitative easing and ultra-low interest rates.
Moreover, alternative approaches to stimulate private demand might have fewer undesirable distributional consequences, as MGI has discussed.
Proponents of helicopter money – directly crediting citizens with central bank funds, or crediting national treasuries to finance infrastructure and other demand-generating activities – rightly argue that it has the advantage of putting money directly into the hands of those who will spend it.
An appropriately sized helicopter-money program might also raise inflation in a measured way, heading off the possibility of a Japanese-style deflationary trap.
Indeed, the boost to demand might give central banks the opening they need to move interest rates back toward historical norms.
This could take the air out of incipient assets bubbles that might be forming and ease pressures on institutional investors who are struggling to find the yield they need to meet their insurance and pension commitments.
But a helicopter-money program – a fanciful idea when Milton Friedman proposed it in 1969 – would also be a radical departure for policymakers, requiring an abundance of caution about citizen and investor perception, confidence, and solid governance structures.
And such an approach would cement the notion that central bank policy is “the only game in town,” relieving elected government leaders of their responsibility for pro-growth policies and the fiscal decisions they control.
A less risky and time-tested route for stimulating demand would be a significant increase in public infrastructure investment funded by government debt.
It is well documented that Europe and the United States have underinvested in infrastructure.
From a macroeconomic perspective, infrastructure investment is a “twofer”– it strengthens productivity and competitiveness in the long run and, where there is unused capacity, it boosts demand, output, and employment with significant multiplier effects in the short run.
Yet governments across Europe have clamped down on infrastructure spending for years, giving precedence to fiscal austerity and debt reduction in the misguided belief that government borrowing crowds out private investment and reduces growth.
But the crowding-out logic applies only to conditions of full employment, conditions that clearly do not exist in most of Europe today.
In addition, infrastructure investment cannot be deferred forever.
A new reckoning is warranted, one that accounts for the full costs of underinvestment in terms of foregone employment and growth.
One way to break the stalemate is a change in public accounting standards.
Specifically, if governments were able to treat infrastructure investment just as companies treat capital expenditure – as balance-sheet assets that are depreciated over their lifecycle, rather than as one-off expenses – such investment could then be exempted from Europe’s deficit rules without opening the door to profligate spending or easing the pressure for credible plans for long-term fiscal-consolidation.
Of course, it would be crucial to improve the planning and oversight of infrastructure projects simultaneously, as MGI has argued.
Fresh thinking about structural reform is needed, too.
For decades, reform discussions in the EU have focused on reducing labor-market regulation, cutting red tape in product markets, privatizing state-owned enterprises, and lowering tax rates.
But reform should now work with the grain of efforts to bolster demand – for example, unleashing the silver economy, fostering digital education and innovation, and unlocking urban land markets to pave the way for much-needed investment in housing.
Each of these options would require robust debate and deeper investigation.
But it’s clear that Europe needs a larger set of policy options.
Quantitative easing and ultra-low interest rates should no longer be the only arrows in the macroeconomic policy quiver.
These tools, along with excessive fiscal austerity, may have higher costs in terms of foregone employment and growth – and rising political discontent – than “risky” alternative options.
The Brexit vote is a canary in the coal mine for Europe’s economic policy makers.
Unconventional times require consideration of bold unconventional policy approaches.
China’s Untapped Growth Potential
SHANGHAI – China’s economic slowdown, from a nearly 10% annual output gain in 2007 to below 8% today, has fueled widespread speculation about the economy’s growth potential.
While it is impossible to predict China’s future growth trajectory, understanding the economy’s underlying trends is the best way to derive a meaningful estimate.
Whereas short-term demand largely dictates an economy’s real growth rate, its potential growth rate is determined on the supply side.
Some economists – citing indicators like investment ratios, industrial value-added, and employment – compare China to Japan in the early 1970’s.
After more than two decades of sustained rapid growth, Japan’s economy slackened considerably in 1971, leading to four decades of annual growth rates averaging less than 4%.
This correlation is reinforced by the convergence hypothesis – the benchmark theory for estimating an economy’s potential growth rate – which states that a rapidly growing developing economy’s real growth rate will slow when it reaches a certain share of the per capita capital stock and income of an advanced economy.
According to the economists Barry Eichengreen, Donghyun Park, and Kwanho Shin, that share is about 60% of America’s per capita income (at 2005 international prices).
At first glance, the experiences of Asia’s most advanced economies – Japan and the four “Asian Tigers” (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan) – seem to be consistent with this theory.
In 1971-1973, Japan’s per capita GDP fell to roughly 65% of that of the United States in purchasing-power-parity terms, while the Asian Tigers experienced economic downturns of varying degrees when they reached roughly the same income level relative to Japan.
But Eichengreen, Park, and Shin also found that once this income level is reached, annual growth rates tend to fall by no more than two percentage points.
This means that GDP growth should have slowed gradually in Japan after 1971, instead of plummeting by more than 50%.
Likewise, given the remaining income gap with the US, the Asian Tigers should have grown faster than they have in the last two decades.
But they each suffered a substantial slowdown (albeit less sharp than Japan’s).
These inconsistencies can be explained by external shocks – a point emphasized by Hideo Kobayashi in his book Post-War Japanese Economy and Southeast Asia.
During Japan’s economic boom, its total factor productivity (TFP, or the efficiency with which inputs are used) contributed about 40% to GDP growth.
When growth plummeted, TFP fell even faster – a dramatic change that was clearly linked to the 1971 yen appreciation and the 1973 oil crisis.
From a microeconomic perspective, a sudden exchange-rate shock and sharp increase in oil prices impedes firms’ ability to adjust their technology and production methods to meet new cost conditions, eventually undermining TFP growth.
Such a cost shock has a more prolonged effect than a negative demand shock.
Without negative external shocks, exorbitant TFP growth would have declined gradually, as the returns from institutional adjustment, reallocation of resources, and technological catch-up naturally diminished, in accordance with the convergence hypothesis.
External shocks also explain China’s GDP slowdown since 2007.
The renminbi’s gradual yet sustained appreciation against the US dollar is the cost shock’s main driver, but the demand shock that followed the 2008 global financial crisis aggravated the situation.
It is likely that TFP has declined substantially as China’s economy has slowed in response to these shocks.
Unlike Keynesians, who focus on demand shocks, followers of the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter view cost shocks as important potential catalysts for structural reform and industrial upgrading – both of which are needed to avoid falling into a low-growth rut in the long term.
In the short term, a cost shock devastates some economic activities, forcing companies either to shut down or move on to another line of business.
But what Schumpeter called “creative destruction” can facilitate the eventual emergence and expansion of new, more efficient firms.
The problem is that many country-specific factors, such as political concerns and pressure from vested interests, can impede this process.
In this sense, China’s government is facing an important test.
If it fails to take advantage of the opportunity provided by the cost shock and economic slowdown to implement the necessary structural reforms, China’s potential growth rate, as dictated by TFP, will never rebound fully.
Given that improving overall productivity is the best way to defend against cost shocks, the new round of structural reform should be aimed at creating conditions for economic transformation and upgrading.
The key is to establish a level playing field guided by market rules, reduce government intervention in the economy, and stop protecting inefficient businesses.
Such efforts would go a long way toward increasing China’s potential growth rate.
Indeed, considering that China’s per capita income amounts to only about 10-20% of that of the US, with massive regional differentials within China, its growth potential, as dictated by the convergence hypothesis, is far from tapped.
But the degree to which it can fulfill this potential in the coming decades will depend largely on its TFP prospects.
In 2007, the economists Dwight Perkins and Thomas Rawski estimated that, in order for China’s economy to maintain a 9% growth rate and a 25-35% investment ratio until 2025, it would need to maintain an annual TFP growth rate of 4.3-4.8%.
Either way, convergence will remain swift.
China’s High-Income Hopes
SHANGHAI – It is widely agreed that economic development means more than GDP growth.
As China is now learning, one does not guarantee the other.
Unless China’s leaders upgrade the country’s growth strategy to stimulate technological progress and structural transformation, high-income status will continue to elude the world’s second-largest economy and most populous country.
To be sure, China’s growth strategy – powered by investment in infrastructure, a massive increase in low-cost manufacturing exports, and technology transfers – has led to some structural change.
As labor and capital moved from low-productivity sectors and regions to high-productivity activities, resource allocation became more efficient, real wages rose, and the economic structure was upgraded.
But the growth strategies that lift a poor country to middle-income levels cannot be counted upon to propel it to high-income status.
Indeed, there is no shortage of countries whose leaders have failed to recognize their strategies’ constraints and provide enough incentives to encourage the emergence of a new one, causing their economies to stagnate and leaving them stuck in the so-called “middle-income trap.”
Perhaps the most notable exceptions to this rule have been in East Asia, where four economies – South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore – responded to external crises and challenges by shifting their growth strategies.
For China, whose growth model has so far resembled that used by these economies before they attained middle-income status, a similar shift is urgently needed.
As the late Yale economist Gustav Ranis observed nearly 20 years ago, the key to successful and sustainable development is “avoiding the encrustation of ideas.”
For Chinese policymakers, this means recognizing the need to abandon some of the fundamental ideas that underpinned the economy’s past growth, before they become so firmly encrusted that they jeopardize the country’s development prospects.
The first problem is China’s enduring dependence on exports.
In the early stages of economic development, almost all growth strategies boil down to trade strategies.
But China’s export-led growth model has limits – and the country is reaching them.
Unless change comes soon, the foreign-exchange regime and capital controls on which the model relies will become too deeply entrenched, and the window of opportunity for adjustment will be missed.
Another risk is that China’s leaders continue to delay efforts to expand the services sector – including finance, insurance, wholesale and retail trade, and logistics – in the hope that the economy can continue to depend on manufacturing.
Given how difficult it can be to gain support for such efforts, especially compared to policies aimed at boosting manufacturing, liberalization and expansion of the services sector will require a strong commitment from China’s government.
Here, Japan’s failure in opening up its services sector – which impeded its ability to adapt its economic structure to its declining demographic dividend – can provide much-needed motivation.
The final idea at risk of blocking further progress is that political transformation would undermine social order.
One of the East Asian economies’ major lessons for developing countries is that economic development leads to institutional transformation, not the other way around.
In Taiwan and South Korea, for example, authoritarian governments after World War II compensated for the weakness of the rule of law by creating transitional institutional arrangements to facilitate GDP growth.
In this sense, China has a significant advantage.
Countries with weak government capacity have rarely managed to achieve high-income status.
But, as the description of these arrangements as “transitional” suggests, they cannot last indefinitely.
After 35 years of dependence on such arrangements, China must embrace the rule of law and establish a reliable, independent judicial system capable of facilitating the liberalization of the services sector, protecting intellectual-property rights, and underpinning a competitive market-based system.
In short, the biggest risk to China’s continued development is not a crisis, but the failure of its political leaders and intellectual elites to recognize the need to transform a growth strategy that has proved successful so far.
In fact, to the extent that a crisis could do more good than harm, warnings that the rapid credit expansion of recent years could trigger a debt crisis, or that the real-estate sector is on the verge of collapse, may not be as worrying as many believe.
Ideally, no such crisis would be needed.
In this scenario, China’s economic slowdown since 2008, which could be viewed as China’s first modern growth crisis, would be sufficient to force China’s leaders to shift their focus from supporting double-digit annual GDP increases to restructuring the economy.
In fact, a consensus already appears to be emerging concerning the need to reduce China’s dependence on exports, expand trade in services, attract more foreign investment to its services sector, and accelerate the liberalization of exchange rates, interest rates, and cross-border capital flows – exemplified in the establishment of the Shanghai Pilot Free-Trade Zone last year.
And, following the Third Plenum of the Chinese Communist Party’s 18th Central Committee last November, China’s leaders declared their commitment to allowing the market to play a greater role in shaping economic outcomes.
These are undoubtedly steps in the right direction.
The question is whether China’s leaders will follow through on their declarations before it is too late.
The ECB’s Leap into the Unknown
FRANKFURT – The European Central Bank is in the middle of a big, risky experiment.
Key interest rates have remained close to zero for six years now.
Financial markets are flooded with liquidity.
Crisis management has resulted in major market distortions, with some segments’ performance no longer explainable by fundamental economic data.
The unintended consequences of this policy are increasingly visible – and will become increasingly tangible with the US Federal Reserve’s exit from post-2008 ultra-loose monetary policy.
And yet Europe’s crisis is far from over, as the decisions by the European Central Bank’s Governing Council in June and September demonstrate.
This reflects two factors: too little ambition in carrying out essential balance-sheet corrections, and slow progress – negligible in France and Italy – in restructuring Europe’s national economies.
The ECB’s decision to double down on monetary stimulus should thus be regarded as an act of desperation.
Its key rate has been cut to 0.05%, the deposit rate is negative, and targeted longer-term refinancing operations are supposed to support bank lending.
Moreover, the asset-backed securities market is to be revived by the purchase of ABSs.
All of this is intended to flood the markets, expand the euro system’s balance sheet by €700 billion ($890 billion), and return to the balance-sheet volume recorded at the start of 2012.
The expansion of the ECB’s balance sheet and the targeted depreciation of the euro should help to bring the eurozone’s short-term inflation rate close to 2% and thus reduce deflationary risks.
For the first time in its history, the ECB appears to be pursuing an exchange-rate target.
As was the case for the Bank of Japan, the external value of the currency will become an important instrument in the framework of a new strategic approach.
Financial markets have applauded the ECB’s recent decisions.
Moreover, having “effectively thrown off all of the Maastricht Treaty restrictions that bound the bank to the model of the Deutsche Bundesbank,” as former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan put it, the ECB is prepared to break further taboos.
But for what purpose?
Particularly by guaranteeing highly indebted countries’ sovereign bonds, the ECB has actually weakened the willingness to reform, particularly in the larger European Union countries, whose decrepit economic structures are an obstacle to potential growth, and where more room must be given to private initiative.
The ECB’s willingness to buy ABSs is especially risky and creates a new element of joint liability in the eurozone, with European taxpayers on the hook in the event of a loss.
The ECB lacks the democratic legitimacy to take such far-reaching decisions, with potentially substantial redistributive effects, which implies an even greater risk to monetary-policy independence.
Indeed, the ECB already has been driven onto the defensive by the International Monetary Fund, the OECD, financial-market analysts, and Anglo-Saxon economists in the wake of feverish discussion of the risk of deflation in the eurozone.
But what is the appropriate eurozone inflation rate, given de facto economic stagnation?
Should higher nominal (that is, inflation-driven) growth replace debt-driven growth?
Europe must aim for sustainable, non-inflationary growth and the creation of competitive jobs.
The current inflation rate of 0.3% is due to the significant decline in commodity prices and the painful but unavoidable adjustment of costs and prices in the peripheral countries.
Only Greece currently has a slightly negative inflation rate.
In other words, price stability reigns in the eurozone.
This strengthens purchasing power and ultimately private consumption.
The ECB has fulfilled its mandate for the present and the foreseeable future.
There is no need for policy action in the short term.
It is, instead, the eurozone governments that must act.
But any clear division of tasks and responsibilities between governments and central banks has, it seems, been jettisoned.
Government action in many problem countries ultimately ends in finger pointing: “Europe,” the ECB, and Germany, with its (relatively) responsible policy, have all been scapegoats.
Against this background, the ECB has yielded to immense political pressure, particularly from France and Italy, to loosen monetary policy further and weaken the exchange rate.
But indulging the old political reflex of manipulating the exchange rate to create a competitive advantage will yield a short-term fix at best.
It will not eliminate the structural weaknesses of the countries in question.
The ECB is moving ever farther into uncharted territory.
In view of the insufficient balance-sheet corrections in the private sector and inadequate structural reforms, macroeconomic demand-management tools will not work.
Despite the ECB’s aggressive approach, monetary policy in the absence of structural economic reform risks being ineffective.
Simply put, more liquidity will not lead to more active bank lending until there is more transparency regarding the extent of non-performing loans and the relevant economies have become more flexible.
The ECB’s asset quality review and bank stress tests are expected to bring some clarity to the first question.
Then, more lending will occur on acceptable terms – assuming that there is corresponding demand.
But the uncertainty regarding the extent and pace of economic reforms remains.
The ECB’s recent decisions, with their focus on short-term effects, indicate that monetary policy is no longer targeted at the eurozone as a whole, but at its problem members.
Ad hoc decisions have replaced a feasible and principled medium-term strategy.
The problems created by this approach will be compounded by the unavoidable conflicts of interest with monetary policy implied by the ECB’s assumption of its new financial-stability and banking-supervision roles.
The first casualty will most likely be price stability.
Justice for Srebrenica’s Dead
THE HAGUE – In 1993, atrocities committed against Slavic Muslims near the Bosnian silver-mining town of Srebrenica catalyzed demands to establish a tribunal to try political and military leaders accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
The new United Nations tribunal that was formed – nearly five decades after the final judgments were rendered at Nuremberg and Tokyo – became the forerunner of ad hoc courts to prosecute perpetrators of Rwanda’s genocide, Charles Taylor and his blood-diamond butchers in Sierra Leone, and the Khmer Rouge killers in Cambodia.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) also gave rise to the permanent International Criminal Court to try war criminals worldwide.
Undeterred by the still-untested ICTY’s reach, Serb soldiers finally overran Srebrenica itself – despite its status as a “safe area” under UN protection – 15 years ago, on July 11, 1995, and proceeded to expel the town’s people and execute 7,600 captives.
Out of this massacre, however, the tribunal and foreign-backed war-crimes courts in Bosnia and Serbia have delivered the international justice effort’s most significant achievement to date.
With no media fanfare and limited arrest and investigative powers, and despite the foreign-policy and military “realists” who dismiss international justice as a pipedream, these judicial institutions have brought justice to Srebrenica’s dead and their survivors, and have demonstrated that justice can be delivered to victims in other conflict areas.
It is an imperfect, unsatisfying justice, to be sure, but no more imperfect or unsatisfying than that dispensed by national courts.
The ICTY ruled the Srebrenica massacre to be an act of genocide.
The tribunal and the local courts imprisoned 13 of those who gave the orders, as well as 17 execution-squad members; 11 more men, four of them leaders, are facing their reckoning.
On trial now are Radovan Karadžić, the Bosnian Serb political leader, and Jovica Stanišić, the police minister in Slobodan Milošević’s Serbia.
Of course, the Bosnian Serb commander, Ratko Mladić remains a fugitive.
But Serbia’s authorities, facing economic turmoil, cannot harbor him much longer if the United States and the European Union exert adequate pressure.
Serbia recently surrendered Mladić’s war-time diaries.
The Srebrenica trials also yielded a soul-testing record of a crime whose gravity Serb political leaders, former UN officials, and others once shamefully denied.
Thanks to the ICTY, anyone can read the transcripts of intercepted calls to deliver more “packages” to the killing fields.
A Serb district president, Miroslav Deronjić, testified that Karadžić told him: “Miroslav, those people there must be killed.”
We know when, where, and to whom Mladić issued the kill order.
The tribunal’s Web site has video of an execution.
We know that a Serb truck driver rescued a boy who survived a firing squad and, crying for his father, crawled from a twisted scrum of bodies.
We know that a Serb officer defied Mladić and refused to order his men to partake in mass murder.
The ICTY is flawed, of course.
Judges and attorneys have treated too many witnesses with condescension, as if the tribunal were doing them a favor.
Judges have sentenced too many killers to absurdly lenient prison terms, diminishing any deterrent effect that the tribunal might generate.