Voters, clearly tired of the status quo, want change at the top, leaving even major parties’ establishments struggling to install leaders of their choosing.
In the United Kingdom, Labour Party MPs have been stymied in their efforts to unseat Jeremy Corbyn as leader.
In Japan, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party’s preferred candidate for Governor of Tokyo, Hiroya Masuda, lost in a landslide to Yuriko Koike.
As for the United States, the Republican Party wanted virtually anybody except Donald Trump to win the nomination for the presidency; yet Trump it is.
And while the Democratic Party is being represented by the establishment choice, Hillary Clinton, her competitor, Bernie Sanders, put up a much stronger fight than virtually anyone anticipated.
The message to the establishment is clear: we don’t trust you anymore.
But some of the leaders voters do trust could pose a very real danger – to their supporters, their countries, and the world.
Trump – with his admiration of dictators, unabashed racism and sexism, ignorance regarding the issues, and mercurial temperament – stands at the top of this list.
Those who led the British campaign to leave the European Union – such as Conservatives like Boris Johnson (now the country’s foreign secretary) and Nigel Farage, the right-wing populist leader of the UK Independence Party – are similarly disparaged for recklessly jeopardizing the future of the UK and the EU alike.
If mainstream leaders want to change voters’ minds, they should look carefully at what leadership really means.
Here, it is worth recalling the insights of US General George C. Marshall, who contemplated the topic as he worked to rebuild the US military in the 1940s.
Marshall argued that leadership is a matter not of rhetoric, but of character.
In particular, leaders must display three key qualities to win the trust needed to lead effectively: purpose, impartiality, and competence.
Purpose, in his view, meant putting the greater good ahead of one’s own interests.
This kind of leadership still exists.
A shining example is Jo Cox, the young British MP who was murdered during the Brexit campaign, whose leadership in advocating for the rights of refugees was recognized across party lines.
But, in many cases, politics has become a matter of self-promotion – and a race for ratings.
In today’s celebrity culture, politicians must be “personalities.”
They campaign like contestants on a reality TV show.
Trump, with his clownish looks and showbiz resume, is probably the ultimate example of this shift.
(The Huffington Post even decided last summer to publish coverage of Trump’s campaign in its entertainment section.)
The problem is not only that this can lead to the election of utterly unqualified leaders.
It is also that, once elected, even qualified leaders can struggle to shed the personal elements of their decision-making, and serve the country impartially instead.
The slippery slope is exposed in a memo – recently disclosed as part of the UK’s Chilcot Inquiry – written by former British Prime Minister Tony Blair to former US President George W. Bush in the run-up to the Iraq war.
The note begins, “I will be with you, whatever.”
He was talking about leading his country into war.
Yet his language suggests that his personal bond with Bush somehow took precedence over his duty as Prime Minister.
Leading with purpose, rather than personality, is closely related to the impartiality that Marshall thought essential.
Once in office, leaders must act with fairness and candor.
They must resist the temptation to use official power to benefit themselves, their families, or their cultural identity group, and refuse enticements, however powerful they may be, to offer special access or protection to friends, funders, and lobbyists.
Maintaining a high standard of impartiality is not easy, but it is far from impossible.
President Pedro Pires of Cape Verde was awarded the 2011 Ibrahim Prize for Achievement in African Leadership, for transforming his country into “a model of democracy, stability, and increased prosperity.”
Pires retired from office without even a house to his name; he worked for the people, not to amass personal wealth.
The third criterion for good leadership – competence – is not just a matter of how much knowledge a leader already possesses.
As Marshall noted, it also consists in leaders’ capacity to learn from their mistakes and to prepare themselves and those around them for important decisions.
Chilcot’s verdict on Britain’s lack of preparation for the Iraq War and its aftermath is damning in this regard.
So is the Brexiteers’ lack of any plan whatsoever for how to proceed after the referendum.
It is time to revitalize good leadership.
Voters need to see candidates who show purpose, impartiality, and competence.
If they don’t, they will continue to vote against the establishment that they believe has failed them – even if it means voting for turmoil in Europe or a reckless narcissist in the US.
The Battle for Water
NEW YORK – The sharpening international geopolitical competition over natural resources has turned some strategic resources into engines of power struggle.
Transnational water resources have become an especially active source of competition and conflict, triggering a dam-building race and prompting growing calls for the United Nations to recognize water as a key security concern.
Water is different from other natural resources.
After all, there are substitutes for many resources, including oil, but none for water.
Similarly, countries can import fossil fuels, mineral ores, and resources from the biosphere like fish and timber; but they cannot import water, which is essentially local, on a large scale and on a prolonged – much less permanent – basis.
Water is heavier than oil, making it very expensive to ship or transport across long distances even by pipeline (which would require large, energy-intensive pumps).
The paradox of water is that it sustains life but can also cause death when it becomes a carrier of deadly microbes or takes the form of a tsunami, flash flood, storm, or hurricane.
Many of the greatest natural disasters of our time – including, for example, the Fukushima catastrophe in 2011 – have been water-related.
Global warming is set to put potable-water supplies under increasing strain – even as oceans rise and the intensity and frequency of storms and other extreme weather events increase.
Rapid economic and demographic expansion has already turned adequate access to potable water into a major issue across large parts of the world.
Lifestyle changes, for example, have spurred increasing per capita water consumption, with rising incomes promoting dietary change, for example, especially higher consumption of meat, production of which is ten times more water-intensive, on average, than plant-based calories and proteins.
Today, the earth’s human population totals slightly more than seven billion, but the livestock population at any given time numbers more than 150 billion.
The direct ecological footprint of the livestock population is larger than that of the human population, with rapidly rising global meat consumption becoming a key driver of water stress by itself.
Political and economic water wars are already being waged in several regions, reflected in dam construction on international rivers and coercive diplomacy or other means to prevent such works.
Consider, for example, the silent water war triggered by Ethiopia’s dam building on the Blue Nile, which has elicited Egyptian threats of covert or overt military reprisals.
A report reflecting the joint judgment of US intelligence agencies warned last year that the use of water as a weapon of war or a tool of terrorism would become more likely in the next decade in some regions.
The InterAction Council, comprising more than 30 former heads of state or government, has called for urgent action to prevent some countries battling severe water shortages from becoming failed states.
The US State Department, for its part, has upgraded water to “a central US foreign policy concern.”
In many countries, inadequate local water availability is increasingly constraining decisions about where to set up new manufacturing facilities and energy plants.
The World Bank estimates that such constraints are costing China 2.3% of GDP.
China, however, is not yet in the category of water-stressed states.
Those that are, stretching from South Korea and India to Egypt and Israel, are paying an even higher price for their water problems.
These countries already understand that water is a renewable but finite resource.
Nature’s water-replenishment capacity is fixed, limiting the world’s usable freshwater resources to about 200,000 cubic kilometers.
But the human population has almost doubled since 1970, while the global economy has grown even faster.
Major increases in water demand, however, are being driven not merely by economic and demographic growth, or by the additional energy, manufacturing, and food production to meet rising consumption levels, but also by the fact that the global population is getting fatter.
The average body mass index (BMI) of humans has been increasing in the post-World War II period, but especially since the 1980’s, with the prevalence of obesity doubling in the past three decades.
Heavier citizens make heavier demands on natural resources, especially water and energy.
The issue thus is not just about how many mouths there are to feed, but also how much excess body fat there is on the planet.
For example, a study published in the British journal BMC Public Health has found that if the rest of the world had the same average body mass index as the US, this would be the equivalent of adding almost one billion people to the global population, greatly exacerbating water stress.
With the era of cheap, bountiful water having been replaced by increasing supply and quality constraints, many investors are beginning to view water as the new oil.
The dramatic rise of the bottled-water industry since the 1990’s attests to the increasing commodification of the world’s most critical resource.
Not only are water shortages likely to intensify and spread, but consumers also will increasingly have to pay more for their water supply.
This double whammy can be mitigated only by innovative water management and conservation, and by developing nontraditional supply sources.
As in the oil and gas sector – where tapping unconventional sources, such as shale and tar sands, has proved a game changer – the water sector must adopt all unconventional options, including recycling wastewater and desalinating ocean and brackish waters.
In short, we must focus on addressing our water-supply problems as if our lives depended on it. In fact, they do.
The Biology of Luxury
PARIS – Despite the global economic crisis, sales of luxury goods are surging worldwide.
Why?
While marketing has contributed to the rise, the luxury market’s robust growth is actually rooted in biology.
Discussions about the structure of human thought have long been dominated by the Enlightenment view that reality is composed of four elements: space, time, matter, and energy.
But recently, a fifth element, information, has entered the debate.
And information, it turns out, is crucial to understanding the fundamental drivers of luxury-goods consumption, and thus to predicting the luxury market’s future.
Living organisms communicate, and the information that they exchange shapes their reality.
While animals use colorful displays and complicated behaviors to signal fitness and strength, humans use luxury goods to demonstrate economic health.
But, more than a symbol, buying luxury goods could indicate future success, owing to the selective advantage that showing off provides.
In nature, competitors perform, and the most compelling, beautiful spectacle wins.
For most animals, males are the performers.
Male birds, for example, often have brightly colored plumage or intricate appendages, such as the Australian lyrebird’s long tail.
As a result, competitive displays have been interpreted as a way to demonstrate fitness to a potential mate.
A bird that survives, despite inconvenient plumage that slows it down or makes it visible to predators, must be fit, and will likely sire a healthy progeny.
Given that females bear the physical burden of offspring, an unobtrusive appearance is more advantageous – and thus more common – in nature.
But humans are social creatures with no natural predators, so female competition is more widespread – and demonstrative performance and display are more likely.
Indeed, while visual manifestations of wealth are prevalent for both genders, women’s appearance is frequently more vivid (and more closely scrutinized).
But effective display is costly.
Developing complex, vibrant plumage demands significant energy and genetic resources.
Genes are difficult to maintain, requiring subtle and energy-intensive correcting processes.
Just as writing too fast can cause typographical errors that garble a text, rapid changes to the genome can undermine a species’ integrity.
Likewise, purchasing luxury goods requires substantial financial resources.
This cost dictates the display’s competitive impact.
In today’s information-based world, selection is effective only if a striking appearance is obtained at a very high price – and that price is known.
For example, those who use cosmetics known to be expensive often seem healthier, more vibrant, and more attractive than those who do not.
This is not the result of efficiency (the most effective cosmetics frequently become pharmaceutical drugs).
Rather, it signals a lifestyle that values the preservation of beauty and youth.
Cosmetics, like all luxury products, gain influence not from their production, or even their purchase, but from their visibility.
Indeed, an expensive item with no label or identifying characteristics has less competitive impact than a recognized item or brand.
For luxury goods to have any function, society needs information about their cost.
This has been true to varying degrees throughout history – sometimes resulting in price bubbles.
False information, such as counterfeit goods, jeopardizes the competition-based selection process.
Animals commonly use mimicry to capitalize on knowledge – or fear – of another’s strength.
By imitating an animal with a well-known protective profile, a weaker one may enjoy selective benefits without the costs.
But mimicry’s success in nature depends on the ratio of the original to the ersatz.
If there are too few of the original, the profile loses its significance, and its protective value vanishes.
Similarly, nobody would display a symbol of wealth if it were too common.
Therefore, assessing whether luxury goods will maintain their impact, and thus their appeal, requires monitoring the extent of counterfeiting.
Given that luxury goods provide individuals with a competitive advantage, higher luxury-goods sales could indicate a brighter economic future for a country.
In a time of crisis, countries in which luxury goods play their selective role effectively are the safest bets for productive investment.
Why Wolfensohn Mattered
At the end of this month, James Wolfensohn’s ten-year tenure as President of the World Bank comes to an end.
Though much remains to be accomplished and consolidated, his achievements as leader of the international development community are noteworthy and provide a strong foundation upon which to build.
Perhaps Wolfensohn’s most important contribution was to clarify the Bank’s mission – to promote growth and eradicate poverty in the developing world – while recognizing the massive scale of that task and the inadequacy of previous approaches.
At one time, it was thought that since developing countries had less capital than more developed countries, merely supplying more capital would solve their problems.
Indeed, this view provided part of the rationale for the World Bank: if a shortage of funds was the problem, clearly a Bank would have to be a key part of the solution.
In the 1980’s, there was a switch from projects to policies – structural adjustments, involving trade liberalization, privatization, and macroeconomic stabilization (typically focusing on prices rather than employment or output.)
But these policies proved neither necessary nor sufficient for growth; the countries of East Asia, which followed different policies, achieved faster growth and were far more successful in poverty reduction.
Under Wolfensohn’s leadership, the Bank began to look for multifaceted strategies, framed by what he called a Comprehensive Development Framework.
Many of the links were obvious, but had been given insufficient attention.
Improved rural productivity or better market access would do little good if roads and harbors were lacking.
In a malaria-infested country, mosquito eradication programs can boost production and even increase effective land usage, as acres that were almost uninhabitable become livable.
The returns from education, too, can be increased, if more individuals live longer because of better health care.
The Bank began to recognize that developing countries differed from more developed countries not just in their lack of resources; there was also a knowledge gap.
This was particularly important as the world moved into what we call the “knowledge economy.”
Among the success stories were India and East Asia, which invested heavily not just in primary education, but also in secondary and tertiary education, and especially in technology and science.
This represented a major change in the Bank’s approach to education, which previously focused on primary schooling .
Wolfensohn’s campaign against corruption also represented a major change in thinking, a shift from downsizing the state to improving the State.
Failed states, it was now acknowledged, were no less an impediment to development than were overbearing states.
The Bank’s 1997 World Development Report reflected this new attempt at finding a balanced role for the state, and showed an understanding of the limitations both of markets and government.
Under Wolfensohn, the Bank repeatedly stood up to the United States, where both the Clinton and Bush administrations might have preferred a more pliant President.
When then US Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Lawrence Summers tried to change the Bank’s Decennial report on poverty – to downgrade concerns about insecurity and empowerment and to focus more narrowly on income – the Bank prevailed.
When the US tried to suppress the Bank’s call for a more balanced intellectual property regime – one more consonant with the interests of developing countries – the Bank prevailed yet again.
Both the Bush administration and the EU would undoubtedly have preferred less criticism of their trade regimes, which have such adverse effects on developing countries.
It would have been helpful for Bush if the World Bank quietly accepted proposals to finance debt relief for the poorest countries by depleting its reserves, thereby making poor countries pay for the poorest by reducing the Bank’s lending capacity.
But it would have been wrong, and the Bank again stood up for the interests of the developing world.
Changing the relationship between the Bank and the countries seeking its help was no less of an achievement.
In the past, the Bank was seen as a purveyor of neoliberal orthodoxy – an approach to development whose credibility had weakened by the time Wolfensohn arrived, and whose standing has eroded further since.
That orthodoxy often went hand in hand with the national, corporate, and financial interests of the advanced industrial countries, or so it was perceived.
Worse, the Bank typically demanded myriad conditions in return for assistance, an approach that undermined democratic processes and domestic ownership of policies, thereby enervating their effectiveness.
When Bank research showed that conditionality did not work, the Bank under Wolfensohn moved away from it.
The Bank began to realize that on many key issues there were legitimate disagreements among economists about the right course of action.
Democracy requires active debate about economic policies, not the suppression of discussion or the delegation of decision-making to experts, whether domestic or foreign.
The Bank’s attempt to open the debate was not well received, by either the US Treasury or the IMF, but its influence was undeniable.
The Fund, too, began to reduce conditionality, and eventually it began to question the desirability of capital market liberalization, which previously had been central to its agenda.
Gradually the Bank came to be perceived, at least in many quarters, as a partner in the joint quest for growth and poverty reduction, not an adversary attempting to promote a Western economic agenda or ideology.
Wolfensohn meant it when he said that he wanted to put the country in the driver’s seat, though not everyone within the Bank was as enthusiastic about this (or some of his other) initiatives.
James Wolfensohn presided over the World Bank at a time of enormous change, tumult, and opportunity, an era marked by the end of the Cold War, the postcommunist transition to market economies, and the East Asian – and then global – financial crises.
His commitment to those in the developing world has been contagious. He has left an impressive legacy for his successor to take up.
Lingkaran Kebajikan dalam Urusan Konservasi
NEW YORK – Penduduk miskin dan pedesaan di dunia mengandalkan tumbuhan dan hewan untuk mendirikan tempat bernaung, sebagai sumber pangan, pendapatan, dan obat-obatan.
Sesungguhnya, salah satu rumusan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan yang dikeluarkan PBB, dikenal sebagai SDG, yakni Tujuan ke-15 mengenai ekosistem berkelanjutan, mengakui eratnya hubungan penduduk di negara-negara berkembang dengan alam, terutama ketika SDG menyerukan peningkatan “kapasitas masyarakat lokal untuk memperoleh hak dan mata pencaharian yang berkelanjutan.”
Namun bagaimana realisasinya?
Konvensi tentang Perdagangan Internasional Tumbuhan dan Satwa Liar tahun 1975 atau CITES membangun sebuah kerangka kerja untuk pengentasan kemiskinan sekaligus konservasi alam.
Konvensi tersebut mengatur pengambilan atau penangkapan dan pertukaran lebih dari 35.000 spesies tumbuhan dan satwa liar di berbagai lokasi.
Alam seringkali disebut sebagai “PDB-nya penduduk miskin”.
Kerangka CITES, dikawinkan dengan kebijakan konservasi nasional yang kuat, bisa melindungi spesies liar sembari menguntungkan masyarakat adat, miskin, dan hidup di pedesaan, melalui dorongan pada negara dan komunitas untuk melaksanakan rencana pengelolaan lingkungan hidup yang solid dan menyeluruh.
Contohnya, berdasarkan CITES, komunitas Andes mencukur bulu hewan vicuña yang kaya serat wool, kemudian dijual ke industri fesyen mewah di luar negeri.
Penduduk Kamerun mengumpulkan ek cherrybark asal Afrika untuk diekspor ke perusahaan-perusahaan farmasi di Eropa.
Komunitas di daratan tinggi Tibet di Bhutan memperoleh penghasilan dari menjual jamur ulat kepada industri pengobatan tradisional.
Akan tetapi, di luar CITES, tidak banyak pedoman yang tersedia memastikan bahwa perdagangan yang sah akan bermanfaat bagi warga miskin, juga berkelanjutan.
Perdagangan berkelanjutan umumnya menuntut masyarakat pedesaan dan miskin untuk melestarikan sumber daya mereka sendiri di tingkat lokal.
Guna memahami praktik saat ini, International Trade Center (ITC) mengkaji pengelolaan perdagangan python secara berkelanjutan oleh penduduk di kawasan Asia Tenggara, salah satu spesies yang terdaftar dalam CITES.
Kulit ular piton biasanya digunakan sebagai bahan baku di industri fesyen mewah dan survei-survei yang dilakukan ITC atas pengumpul, peternak, pelaku pemrosesan, dan eksportir kulit ular piton di Vietnam dan Malaysia menemukan bahwa perdagangan tersebut menegaskan ketahanan penghidupan sebagai sumber pendapatan tambahan.
Di Vietnam, sekitar 1.000 keluarga yang membudidayakan dan memperdagangkan piton, serta pengumpulan piton di Malaysia menjadi pendapatan bagi pekerja dengan keterampilan dan upah rendah ketika tidak ada kesempatan kerja atau menjadi terbatas karena faktor-faktor ekonomi yang lebih luas.
Peneliti menyimpulkan bahwa mayoritas pengumpul piton memiliki rencana pengelolaan berkelanjutan yang sederhana dan efektif, sehingga mengurangi tekanan pada populasi liar.
Akan tetapi, kulit ular piton, seperti produk dari satwa liar lainnya, merupakan komoditas, jadi komunitas yang mengumpulkan atau membudidayakan piton menghadapi keterbatasan dalam hal kemampuan mereka memperoleh nilai tambah untuk meningkatkan hasil (returns).
Kaum perempuan Andes di Peru membersihkan serat wool dari vicuña menggunakan tangan agar menaikkan harga jualnya sejumlah 50 dolar AS per kilogram, sementara harga jual selendang bahan wool sebanyak 150-200 dolar AS; di Malaysia, kulit ular piton dijual dengan harga 200 dolar AS, sementara tas berbahan kulit piton bisa mencapai harga 2.000 dolar AS.
Sejumlah emerging countries memperbaiki value chain dan mempertahankan return lebih besar, seperti merk lokal seperti Kuna, menjual wool yang berasal dari alpaca dan vicuña di Peru, dan Natura, merk kosmetik berbahan alami asal Brasil.
Ancaman terbesar terhadap perdagangan tumbuhan dan satwa liar yang sah adalah perburuan liar (poaching), penyelundupan (smuggling), perizinan dagang yang tidak layak, dan penyiksaan terhadap hewan, yang mana harus dikendalikan oleh regulator dan pemangku kepentingan di tingkat lokal.
Untungnya, masyarakat pedesaan memiliki posisi paling tepat untuk melindungi tumbuhan dan satwa liar, tentunya selama masyarakat termotivasi.
Pada kondisi yang ideal, sebuah lingkaran kebajikan (virtuous cycle), berisikan produsen-produsen lokal yang memiliki kepentingan langsung dalam pelestarian dan pelindungan tumbuhan dan satwa liar (karena mereka memperoleh manfaat dari perdagangan yang sah) adalah solusi jangka panjang terbaik – malah mungkin satu-satunya – menjawab persoalan keberlanjutan.
Untuk mengatasinya, pemerintah perlu meningkatkan sumber daya dan hak pemanfaatan tumbuhan dan satwa liar bagi masyarakat pedesaan agar mampu mengelola dan melindungi sumber daya alam yang ada secara berkelanjutan.
Contohnya, pada tahun 1970an ketika Peru menyerahkan hak guna kepada komunitas Andes atas wool vicuña, akibatnya adalah vicuña terlepas dari kepunahan dan terbentuknya jalur pemasukan baru bagi komunitas yang berjangka panjang.
Mengingat situasi hukum dan alami beragam di masing-masing negara dan komunitas, perlu adanya inovasi kebijakan serupa untuk diterapkan di berbagai sektor.
Salah satu sektor yang menjanjikan adalah pariwisata, ini juga sejalan dengan kerangka CITES.
Contohnya, semenjak Rwanda memulai pembagian pemasukan pariwisata alam dengan masyarakat lokal, populasi gorila pegunungan mulai bertambah.
Seiring berjalannya waktu, bisa disimpulkan bahwa ketika masyarakat lokal dilibatkan, kapasitas mereka meningkat dan berfungsi sebagai wali atau pembela tumbuhan dan satwa liar yang sangat berdedikasi.
Selain itu, ilmuwan yang mengembangkan metode pengelolaan adaptif baru patut diberi dukungan, dan sektor swasta juga perlu diberi insentif untuk berinvestasi pada penguatan sumber daya yang berkelanjutan dan peningkatan transparansi pada rantai suplai dan produksi.
Sebagaimana digambarkan pada contoh di atas, konservasi dan peningkatan penghidupan bagi warga miskin sangat mungkin dilakukan dan bahkan keduanya saling mendukung.
Ditambah dengan kemauan politik dan investasi cerdas, tidak ada alasan mengapa kita tidak bisa mencapai target SDG untuk mengentaskan kemiskinan sekaligus melestarikan tumbuhan dan satwa liar untuk generasi ke depan.
Tahun lalu, PBB mengeluarkan sebuah resolusi yang bersejarah yang bertujuan memberantas perdagangan tidak sah terhadap tumbuhan dan satwa liar, juga mengakui efektivitas kerangka hukum CITES.
Resolusi ini menyerukan agar 182 negara peserta konvensi CITES untuk melindungi kepentingan spesies liar, sekaligus memberi manfaat nyata kepada masyarakat miskin dan mereka yang hidup di pedesaan.
Kita harap delegasi dari negara-negara anggota yang bertemu pada World Wildlife Conference di Afrika Selatan akan menyambut baik seruan tersebut.
Will Banks and Financial Markets Recover in 2009?
NEW YORK – Global financial markets in 2008 experienced their worst crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
Major financial institutions went bust; others were bought up on the cheap or survived only after major bailouts.
Global stock markets fell by more than 50%; interest-rate spreads skyrocketed; a severe liquidity and credit crunch appeared; and many emerging-market economies staggered to the International Monetary Fund for help.
So what lies ahead in 2009?
Is the worst behind us or ahead of us?
To answer these questions, we must understand that a vicious circle of economic contraction and worsening financial conditions is underway.
The United States will certainly experience its worst recession in decades, a deep and protracted contraction lasting about 24 months through the end of 2009.
Moreover, the entire global economy will contract. There will be recession in the euro zone, the United Kingdom, Continental Europe, Canada, Japan, and the other advanced economies.
There is also a risk of a hard landing for emerging-market economies, as trade, financial, and currency links transmit real and financial shocks to them.
In the advanced economies, recession had brought back earlier in 2008 fears of 1970’s-style stagflation (a combination of economic stagnation and inflation).
But, with aggregate demand falling below growing aggregate supply, slack goods markets will lead to lower inflation as firms’ pricing power is restrained.
Likewise, rising unemployment will control labor costs and wage growth.
These factors, combined with sharply falling commodity prices, will cause inflation in advanced economies to ease toward the 1% level, raising concerns about deflation, not stagflation.
Deflation is dangerous as it leads to a liquidity trap: nominal policy rates cannot fall below zero, so monetary policy becomes ineffective.
Falling prices mean that the real cost of capital is high and the real value of nominal debts rise, leading to further declines in consumption and investment – and thus setting in motion a vicious circle in which incomes and jobs are squeezed further, aggravating the fall in demand and prices.
As traditional monetary policy becomes ineffective, other unorthodox policies will continue to be used: policies to bail out investors, financial institutions, and borrowers; massive provision of liquidity to banks in order to ease the credit crunch; and even more radical actions to reduce long-term interest rates on government bonds and narrow the spread between market rates and government bonds.
Today’s global crisis was triggered by the collapse of the US housing bubble, but it was not caused by it.
America’s credit excesses were in residential mortgages, commercial mortgages, credit cards, auto loans, and student loans.
There was also excess in the securitized products that converted these debts into toxic financial derivatives; in borrowing by local governments; in financing for leveraged buyouts that should never have occurred; in corporate bonds that will now suffer massive losses in a surge of defaults; in the dangerous and unregulated credit default swap market.
Moreover, these pathologies were not confined to the US.
There were housing bubbles in many other countries, fueled by excessive cheap lending that did not reflect underlying risks.
Equity prices and other risky assets have fallen sharply from their peaks of late 2007, but there are still significant downside risks.
An emerging consensus suggests that the prices of many risky assets – including equities – have fallen so much that we are at the bottom and a rapid recovery will occur.
But the worst is still ahead of us.
In the next few months, the macroeconomic news and earnings/profits reports from around the world will be much worse than expected, putting further downward pressure on prices of risky assets, because equity analysts are still deluding themselves that the economic contraction will be mild and short.
While the risk of a total systemic financial meltdown has been reduced by the actions of the G-7 and other economies to backstop their financial systems, severe vulnerabilities remain.
The credit crunch will get worse; deleveraging will continue, as hedge funds and other leveraged players are forced to sell assets into illiquid and distressed markets, thus causing more price falls and driving more insolvent financial institutions out of business.
A few emerging-market economies will certainly enter a full-blown financial crisis.
So 2009 will be a painful year of global recession and further financial stresses, losses, and bankruptcies.
Only aggressive, coordinated, and effective policy actions by advanced and emerging-market countries can ensure that the global economy recovers in 2010, rather than entering a more protracted period of economic stagnation.
Europe’s Unending Berlusconi Problem
LONDON – Silvio Berlusconi, Italy’s three-time prime minister and the country’s dominant politician for two decades, has now been convicted and sentenced to four years in prison – a sentence since reduced to one year.&#160; But few people in Italy – or in Europe – believe that Berlusconi will fade from Italian, or European, politics anytime soon.
Just a few days ago, he declared his intention to remain involved in politics, though not to run for prime minister a fourth time.
Whatever role Berlusconi chooses to play, it is unlikely to be a marginal one.
He may not wish to be king again, but he certainly can be a kingmaker, owing to his control of Mediaset, Italy’s largest media group.
And, given his abysmal popularity ratings, he may decide to play the wild card, embrace a euro-skeptic and anti-government stance, and try to bring down Prime Minister Mario Monti’s technocratic administration.
Monti’s government took over from Berlusconi in November 2011, arriving with a clear mandate, and full parliamentary support, to implement the measures needed to restore market confidence and reassure Italy’s eurozone partners and the International Monetary Fund that the country was not going down the path taken by Greece.
At the time of the G-20 summit in Cannes that month, Italy – and Europe – was dangerously close to collapse, with Berlusconi’s government deeply divided about the fiscal measures needed to bring down the country’s debt-service costs.
Domestic political deadlock, and Berlusconi’s inability to engage with Germany and France resulted in spiraling refinancing costs, with the spread relative to German bunds consistently over 500 basis points between July and November 2011.
The Monti government has restored market confidence and Italy’s international credibility.
But the overall picture remains fragile.
The interest-rate spread has stabilized around a more manageable 300 basis points, but is still higher than it was three years ago.
In addition, Italy’s economic outlook remains highly uncertain.
More needs to be done in order to support economic growth in the short term, improve the country’s fiscal position in the medium term, and implement the structural reforms needed to make the Italian economy more robust and internationally competitive in the long term.
Italy is ranked 43rd in the World Economic Forum’s global competitiveness index, well below the main eurozone countries, owing to lack of investment – especially in human capital – and structural rigidities that have constrained growth for many years.
The answer to Italy’s economic problems is not, as Berlusconi advocates, an exit from the eurozone and a return to the flexibility of its own currency, which in the past allowed policymakers to boost competitiveness through irresponsible devaluations.
Italy needs to learn how to live with the euro and within the eurozone, which means adopting policies that ensure that productivity growth and innovation, not currency devaluation, are the main drivers of competitiveness.
A stable, competent, and responsible government with a comfortable parliamentary majority is essential to continue what Monti’s government has initiated.
While the odds still favor a relatively smooth transition, many uncertainties could derail the reform process.
In particular, whether Italy will be able to move beyond technocratic politics to a “normal” government remains the outstanding question both at home and for the other eurozone member states.
From this perspective, what Berlusconi advocates for Italy, and the consequences of his agenda for the eurozone, is not good news.
Any hint that the country may be locked again in parliamentary inertia, as in the final months of Berlusconi’s last government, would push the markets to question the credibility of Italy’s fiscal-consolidation plan, jeopardizing the country’s ability to refinance its debt.
That debt is the largest in the eurozone – at roughly €2 trillion ($2.6 trillion), or 120% of the country’s GDP – which means that Italy can be helped, but not rescued.
With potential instability looming, Monti should ensure that Italy is not defenseless in the event of another round of market instability.
Unlike some months ago, now the European Central Bank can intervene and buy troubled countries’ debt.
But this mechanism can be activated only by formal request.
Italy should follow this route without delay.
It is better to have a powerful weapon that may gather dust than to be unarmed in a time of need.
Will Britain Choose Irrelevance?
LONDON – When voters in the United Kingdom go to the polls on June 23 to decide whether their country should leave the European Union, the issues they will have to reckon with will include the impact of their decision on unemployment, trade flows, and the stability of financial markets.
But there are other less quantifiable considerations that must also be weighed in the balance.
The economic arguments against a British exit from the EU – or Brexit – have been well rehearsed.
Many have suggested that if the UK were to leave, manufacturers would secure continued access to the European market by fleeing across the English Channel, costing the country millions of jobs.
Similarly, withdrawal from the EU risks undermining London’s position as a global financial center, which depends on the city’s integration into European markets.
Trade agreements, too, would have to be renegotiated in the wake of a Brexit.
Another area of concern for many voters regards the UK’s sovereignty – the idea that independent countries should have ultimate decision-making authority over what happens within their borders.
Membership in the EU sometimes requires ceding control to a complex web of often-inefficient Brussels-based supranational institutions.
I hold a doctorate in economics and work with businesses whose employees and operations benefit from the UK’s membership in the EU.
I also have a pronounced disdain for red tape and inefficiency.
And yet I do not believe that economic considerations or concerns about sovereignty offer compelling arguments for Brexit.
Much more important is the potential impact of such a decision on the UK’s global standing.
Membership in a European community of 500 million people provides the UK with considerable influence over geopolitics and the global economy.
As the world becomes ever more daunting and complex, maintaining that influence is clearly in the country’s interest.
The referendum campaign is playing out against a global economic and political backdrop that is nothing if not foreboding.
The International Monetary Fund has warned that global growth is unlikely to return to the levels that it attained before the 2008 financial crisis.
Indeed, the global consulting firm McKinsey predicts that global growth rates during the next 50 years will be half of what they were over the previous five decades.
Meanwhile, Martin Dempsey, a retired army general and former Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, has said that the world has entered the most dangerous period he has ever witnessed.
Developing countries are home to roughly 90% of the world’s population, and some two-thirds of their residents are younger than 25.
Stagnant growth or shrinking output in many emerging economies has serious consequences.
The UK’s Overseas Development Institute predicts that by 2025, roughly 80% of the world’s poor will live in fragile states.
Job-eroding technological advances, worsening income inequality, demographic shifts, dwindling natural resources, and environmental depletion are adding even more straws to the camel’s back.
The world is already undergoing the worst refugee crisis since the end of World War II, with some 60 million people having been driven from their homes.
The mounting instability will only exacerbate the problem.
Leaving the EU will not shield the UK from the vagaries of the global economy.
It will only deprive the country of a leading voice in shaping the response to new and existing challenges.
The UK is far better placed to influence the global policy agenda from inside the EU than from outside it.
To be sure, leaving the EU would not strip the UK of its historical prominence in international organizations – most notably its permanent membership of the United Nations’ Security Council.
But a non-European Britain would be less likely to secure the same standing and influence in whatever institutions emerge in the years ahead.
Within the EU, the UK is a critical part of an influential economic and political bloc with undeniable heft.
Amplified by the EU, its voice can influence world events, providing the country with what the British like to describe as an ability to punch above its weight.
Should the UK leave, however, its influence would be limited to its true size on the global stage: a relatively small country with limited economic and political power.
As British voters prepare to cast their ballots, they should weigh carefully the consequences of international irrelevance.
Will Cap-and-Trade Incite Protectionism?
CAMBRIDGE ­– There is a serious danger that the international adoption of cap-and-trade legislation to limit carbon-dioxide emissions will trigger a new round of protectionist measures.
While aimed at reducing long-term environmental damage, cap-and-trade policies could produce significant harmful economic effects in the near term that would continue into the future.
Scientific evidence appears to indicate that the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels (primarily coal, oil, and natural gas) – mainly in electricity production, transportation, and various industrial processes – contributes to gradual global warming, with long-term adverse effects on living conditions around the world.
It is with this in mind that representatives of more than 150 countries are scheduled to meet in Copenhagen in December to discuss ways to reduce CO2 emissions.
A common suggestion is to impose a tax on all CO2 emissions, which would be levied on companies that emit CO2 in production, or that sell products like gasoline that cause CO2 emissions when used.
Such a tax would cause electricity companies and industrial firms to adopt techniques that reduce their CO2 emissions, as long as the cost of doing so is less than the tax that they would otherwise have to pay.
The higher cost of production incurred to reduce emissions – and of any emissions tax still due – would, of course, be included in the price charged to consumers.
Consumers would respond to the tax-induced increase in the cost of the emissions-intensive products by reducing their consumption of those goods and services in favor of goods and services that create smaller amounts of CO2 emissions.
A carbon tax causes each firm and household to respond to the same cost of adding CO2 to the atmosphere.
That uniform individual cost incentive allows total CO2 to be reduced at a lower total cost than would be achieved by a variety of administrative requirements, such as automobile mileage standards, production technology standards (e.g., minimum renewable fuel inputs in electricity generation), etc.
Yet we do not see carbon taxes being adopted.
Although governments levy taxes on gasoline, they are reluctant to impose a general carbon tax because of public opposition to any form of taxation.
Governments have therefore focused on a cap-and-trade system as a way of increasing the cost of CO2-intensive products without explicitly imposing a tax.
In a cap-and-trade system, the government sets total allowable national emissions of CO2 per year and requires any firm that causes CO2 emissions to have a permit per ton of CO2 emitted.
If the government sells these permits in an auction, the price of the permit would be a cost to the firm in the same way as a carbon tax – and with the same resulting increases in consumer prices.
The cap-and-trade system thus imposes a carbon tax without having to admit that it is really a tax.
A cap-and-trade system can cause serious risks to international trade.
Even if every country has a cap-and-trade system and all aim at the same relative reduction in national CO2 emissions, the resulting permit prices will differ because of national differences in initial CO2 levels and in domestic production characteristics.
Because the price of the CO2 permits in a country is reflected in the prices of its products, the cap-and-trade system affects its international competitiveness.
When the permit prices become large enough to have a significant effect on CO2 emissions, there will be political pressure to introduce tariffs on imports that offset the advantage of countries with low permit prices.
Such offsetting tariffs would have to differ among products (being higher on more CO2-intensive products) and among countries (being higher for countries with low permit prices).
Such a system of complex differential tariffs is just the kind of protectionism that governments have been working to eliminate since the start of the GATT process more than 50 years ago.
Worse still, cap-and-trade systems in practice do not rely solely on auctions to distribute the emissions permits.
The plan working its way through the United States Congress (the Waxman-Markey bill) would initially give away 85% of the permits, impose a complex set of regulatory policies, and allow companies to buy CO2 offsets (e.g., by paying for the planting of trees) instead of reducing their emissions or buying permits.
Such complexities make it impossible to compare the impact of CO2 policies among countries, which in turn would invite those who want to protect domestic jobs to argue for higher tariff levels.
There is no easy answer to this problem.
But before rushing to impose tariffs, it is important to remember that cap-and-trade policies would not be the only government source of differences in competitiveness.
Better roads, ports, and even schools all contribute to a country’s competitiveness.
No one attempts to use tariffs to balance those government-created differences in competitiveness, and there should be no such attempts if a cap-and-trade system is introduced.
If an international agreement to impose a cap-and-trade scheme is adopted in Copenhagen, the countries there should agree as well that there will be no attempt to introduce offsetting tariffs that would ultimately threaten our global system of free trade.
Will China “Lose” the 2008 Olympics?
When the International Olympic Committee awarded Beijing the 2008 Summer Games in July 2001, the announcement ignited wild celebrations across the country.
The Chinese Communist Party hoped to use the Games to showcase the country’s emergence as a dynamic, modern nation.
But as China’s leaders begin final preparations for the Games next August, they may be wondering if hosting the event was such a good idea after all.
They have significant reasons for doubt.
China’s senior leaders always closely monitor spontaneous public expressions of nationalist fervor, fearful that shifting winds might blow an unwelcome storm in their direction.
Of course what they hope is that the Games will channel these energies toward national solidarity, which will allow the leadership to deliver its people a moment of achievement and patriotic glory.
But the Olympics will also bring intense international scrutiny of China’s weaknesses at a delicate moment in the country’s development.
The world already knows of China’s success and its attractiveness as a destination for foreign investment, but few outsiders have seen firsthand the steep price the country is paying for its new prosperity.
The most obvious signs of that cost flow through the country’s waterways and contaminate its air.
Runaway growth and development have left about 70% of China’s lakes and rivers severely polluted, many unfit for human use of any kind.
Indeed, nearly a half-billion Chinese lack access to clean drinking water, and the number of terminally polluted rivers and lakes grows daily.
But air quality will prove the more embarrassing problem next August.
Television coverage of athletes gasping for breath will hardly provide Beijing with the signature Olympic image it had in mind, and growing international anxiety over climate change and other environmental hazards will ensure that such issues receive considerable media coverage.
There is also the risk that the Games will become a political circus, as the international spotlight generates irresistible opportunities for public protest.
The Chinese leadership has demonstrated many times that it can quell domestic dissent, but the unique scale of the Olympics will require round-the-clock vigilance.
Activists with grievances over Tibet, Taiwan, Burma, Darfur, and dozens of other political, environmental, and human-rights issues are already making plans.
Is China ready for Greenpeace, Human Rights in China, Amnesty International, and Falun Gong supporters to take to the streets, with thousands of foreign journalists hungry for stories and asking questions that the authorities are unaccustomed to answering?
Even if police are able to maintain order in Beijing, can they extend that control across the country?
Can they manage the flow of information and ideas through the blogosphere as online activists open yet another front in their battle for free information?
What we do know that Chinese officials have never faced a challenge of this scale with such a potential to both win and lose face.
The Games will generate significant foreign-policy risks as well.
In Taiwan, outgoing President Chen Shui-bian is stirring the independence pot, knowing that the Olympic spotlight will limit Beijing’s ability to respond forcefully.
He has already proposed a popular referendum on Taiwanese membership in the United Nations.
China’s influence within the UN would prevent such a move even if Taiwan voted yes, but an international confrontation is the last thing China wants coinciding with the Olympics.
Then there is the matter of how the Games will be received in the West.
Since 2001, China has increasingly become the focal point of much anxiety in the developed world.
Huge bilateral trade deficits, accusations that China keeps its currency undervalued, and a rash of defective and dangerous Chinese-made exports have fueled a protectionist backlash in the United States and Europe.
Amid bitter election-year debates over Iraq and Iran, and a souring economic outlook, Americans may be in no mood for the triumphalist pageantry of a new rising power on display in Beijing.
Will China’s uneasy Asian neighbors be any more receptive?
International criticism is sure to follow if something, anything, goes wrong during the Games, especially if it involves the suppression of dissent and is vectored around the world via 24-hour cable television and the Internet.
China has changed since it “won” the 2008 games seven years ago.
The Party leadership has grown more self-assured in its growing international role, but its ability to manage the pace of change at home has become more uncertain.
In 2001, then President Jiang Zemin hoped the Games would herald China’s arrival as an industrialized power.
But his successor, Hu Jintao, has focused on the damage that has come from unrestrained growth.
He and Premier Wen Jiabao have also championed a more “harmonious” society, because they understand that the growing wealth gap, social tensions, environmental and public health problems, and the Party’s tenuous relationship with China’s less advantaged people can no longer be neglected.
As China’s leaders scramble to address these challenges, will they still relish the idea of providing an international audience with front-row seats?
How they look back on the Games once the confetti is swept from the streets is far from certain.
Will China’s Capitalist Revolution Turn Democratic
Communist China has experienced a monumental capitalist revolution in the last two decades, with an economy that is now six times bigger than it was 20 years ago.
A minor player in the global economy in the 1980’s, China today is the world’s third largest trading power.
But if these stunning economic statistics make you think that so much capitalist development must also have brought more democracy to China, think again.
Most Westerners believe in a theory of liberal evolution, according to which sustained economic growth, by increasing wealth and the size of the middle class, gradually makes a country more democratic.
While the long-run record of this theory is irrefutable, China’s authoritarian ruling elite is not only determined to hold on to power, but it also has been smart enough to take adaptive measures aimed at countering the liberalizing effects of economic development.
Thus, for all its awe-inspiring economic achievement, China has made remarkably little progress in political liberalization.
Indeed, judging by several key indicators, progress toward democracy in China has stalled, despite unprecedented economic prosperity and personal freedom.
For instance, in the mid-1980’s, Chinese leaders seriously discussed and later drew up a blueprint for modest democratic reforms.
Today, the topic of political reform is taboo.
Nearly all the major institutional reforms, such as strengthening the legislature, holding village elections, and building a modern legal system, were launched in the 1980’s.
Since the Tiananmen Square massacre of June 1989, however, not a single major democratic reform initiative has been implemented.
Instead of democratic transition, China has witnessed a consolidation of authoritarian rule – the strengthening of a one-party regime through organizational learning and adaptation.
Since 1989, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has been pursuing a two-pronged strategy: selective repression that targets organized political opposition and co-optation of new social elites (the intelligentsia, professionals, and private entrepreneurs).
This strategy emphasizes the maintenance of an extensive law enforcement apparatus designed to eliminate any incipient organized opposition.
Huge investments have strengthened the People’s Armed Police (PAP), a large anti-riot paramilitary force whose specialty is the quick suppression of anti-government protests by disgruntled industrial workers, peasants, and urban residents.
Frequent deployment of the PAP is a major reason why the tens of thousands of collective protests that occur each year (74,000 in 2004 and 86,000 in 2005) have had a negligible impact on China’s overall stability.
To deal with new emerging political threats, such as the information revolution, the Chinese government has spent mightily on manpower and technology.
A special 30,000-strong police unit monitors and screens Internet traffic, advanced technology is deployed to block access to overseas Web sites considered “hostile or harmful,” and Internet service and content providers, both domestic and Western, must comply with onerous restrictions designed to suppress political dissent and track down offenders.
The regime has even conducted multi-agency exercises to test whether different government bodies could cooperate closely to keep “harmful information” off the Net during an emergency.
Having learned from the collapse of the Soviet Union that a bureaucratic ruling party must co-opt new social elites to deprive potential opposition groups of leaders, the Communist Party has conducted an effective campaign of expanding its social base.
The urban intelligentsia and professionals have been pampered with material perks and political recognition, while new private entrepreneurs have been allowed to join the Party.
This strategy of pre-emptive political decapitation has produced enormous dividends for the Party.
In the 1980’s, its principal adversaries were the urban intelligentsia, who constituted the backbone of the pro-democracy movement that culminated in Tiananmen Square.
Today, the mainstream of the Chinese intelligentsia is an integral part of the ruling elite.
Many have joined the Party and become government officials, and a large percentage enjoy various professional and financial privileges.
Predictably, the intelligentsia, usually the most liberal social group, is no longer a lethal threat to party rule.
Worse, without support from this strategic group, other social groups, such as workers and peasants, have become politically marginalized and rudderless.
Although the Party’s carrot-and-stick approach has worked since 1989, it is doubtful that it will retain its efficacy for another 17 years.
To the extent that China’s authoritarian regime is by nature exclusionary (it can only incorporate a limited number of elites), the co-optation strategy will soon run up against its limits, and the Party will no longer have the resources to buy off the intelligentsia or keep private entrepreneurs happy.
At the same time, selective repression can contain social frustrations and discontent only temporarily.
As long as much of Chinese society views the current political system as unjust, unresponsive, and corrupt, there will always be a large reservoir of ill will toward the ruling elites.
When things go wrong – as is likely, given mounting social strains caused by rising inequality, environmental degradation, and deteriorating public services – China’s alienated masses could become politically radicalized.
And, unlike past protests, which have usually been allied with students or members of the intelligentsia, popular disaffection might not have the virtue of rational leaders with whom the government could talk and negotiate.
So it may be premature for the Party to celebrate the success of its adaptive strategy.
China’s rulers may have stalled democratic trends for now, but the current strategy has, perhaps, merely delayed the inevitable.
The Mirage of the Financial Singularity
NEW HAVEN – In their new book The Incredible Shrinking Alpha, Larry E. Swedroe and Andrew L. Berkin describe an investment environment populated by increasingly sophisticated analysts who rely on big data, powerful computers, and scholarly research.
With all this competition, “the hurdles to achieving alpha [returns above a risk-adjusted benchmark – and thus a measure of success in picking individual investments] are getting higher and higher.”
That conclusion raises a key question: Will alpha eventually go to zero for every imaginable investment strategy?
More fundamentally, is the day approaching when, thanks to so many smart people and smarter computers, financial markets really do become perfect, and we can just sit back, relax, and assume that all assets are priced correctly?
This imagined state of affairs might be called the financial singularity, analogous to the hypothetical future technological singularity, when computers replace human intelligence.
The financial singularity implies that all investment decisions would be better left to a computer program, because the experts with their algorithms have figured out what drives market outcomes and reduced it to a seamless system.
Many believe that we are almost there.
Even legendary investors like Warren Buffett, it is argued, are not really outperforming the market.
In a recent paper, “Buffett’s Alpha,” Andrea Frazzini and David Kabiller of AQR Capital Management and Lasse Pedersen of Copenhagen Business School, conclude that Buffett is not generating significantly positive alpha if one takes account of certain lesser-known risk factors that have weighed heavily in his portfolio. The implication is that Buffet’s genius could be replicated by a computer program that incorporates these factors.
If that were true, investors would abandon, en masse, their efforts to ferret out mispricing in the market, because there wouldn’t be any.
Market participants would rationally assume that every stock price is the true expected present value of future cash flows, with the appropriate rate of discount, and that those cash flows reflect fundamentals that everyone understands the same way.
Investors’ decisions would diverge only because of differences in their personal situation.
For example, an automotive engineer might not buy automotive stocks – and might even short them – as a way to hedge the risk to his or her own particular type of human capital.
Indeed, according to a computer crunching big data, this would be an optimal decision.
There is a long-recognized problem with such perfect markets: No one would want to expend any effort to figure out what oscillations in prices mean for the future.
Thirty-five years ago, in their classic paper, “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,” Sanford Grossman and Joseph Stiglitz presented this problem as a paradox: Perfectly efficient markets require the effort of smart money to make them so; but if markets were perfect, smart money would give up trying.
The Grossman-Stiglitz conundrum seems less compelling in the financial singularity if we can imagine that computers direct all the investment decisions.
Although alpha may be vanishingly small, it still represents enough profit to keep the computers running.
But the real problem with this vision of financial singularity is not the Grossman-Stiglitz conundrum; it is that real-world markets are nowhere close to it.
Computer enthusiasts are excited by things like the blockchain used by Bitcoin (covered on an education website called Singularity University, in a section dramatically titled Exponential Finance).
But the futurists’ financial world bears no resemblance to today’s financial world.
After all, the financial singularity implies that all prices would be based on such things as optimally projected future corporate profits and the correlation of profits with expected technological innovations and long-term demographic changes.
But the smart money hardly ever talks in such ethereal terms.
In this context, it is difficult not to think of China’s recent stock-market plunge.
News accounts depict hordes of emotional people trading on hunch and superstition.
Sometimes they go viral.
When one has a heart-to-heart talk with many seemingly rational people, they turn out to have crazy theories.
These people influence markets, because all other investors must reckon with them; and their craziness is not going away anytime soon.
Maybe Buffett’s past investing style can be captured in a trading algorithm today.
But that does not necessarily detract from his genius.
Indeed, the true source of his success may consist in his understanding of when to abandon one method and devise another.
The idea of financial singularity may seem inspiring; but it is no less illusory than the rational Utopia that inspired generations of central planners.
Human judgment, good and bad, will drive investment decisions and financial-market outcomes for the rest of our lives and beyond.
Will Europe Be Willing but Disabled?
NEWPORT BEACH – When it comes to describing Europe’s ever-worsening crisis, metaphors abound.
For some, it is five minutes to midnight; for others, Europe is a car accelerating towards the edge of a cliff.
For all, a perilous existential moment is increasingly close at hand.
Optimists – fortunately, there remain a few, especially in Europe itself – believe that when the situation becomes really critical, political leaders will turn things around and put Europe back on the path of economic growth, job creation, and financial stability.
But pessimists have been growing in number and influence.
They see political dysfunction adding to financial turmoil, thereby amplifying the eurozone’s initial design flaws.
Of course, who is ultimately proven correct is a function of eurozone governments’ willingness to make the difficult decisions that are required, and in a coordinated and timely fashion.
But that is not the only determinant: governments must also be able to turn things around once the willingness to do so materializes.
And here, the endless delays are making the challenges more daunting and the outcome more uncertain.
Experienced observers remind us that crises, rather than vision, have tended to drive progress at critical stages of Europe’s historic integration – a multi-decade journey driven by the desire to ensure long-term peace and prosperity in what previously had been one of the world’s most violent regions and the site of appalling human suffering.
After all, the European Union (including the eurozone’s 17 members) remains a collective of nation-states with notable divergences in economic, financial, and social conditions.
Cultural differences persist.
Political cycles are far from synchronized.
And too many regional governance mechanisms, with the important exception of the European Central Bank, lack sufficient influence, credibility, and, therefore, effectiveness.
Left to its own devices, such a grouping is vulnerable to recurrent bickering, disruptive posturing, and disagreement over visions of the future.
As a result, progress towards meaningful economic and political integration can be painfully slow during the good times.
But all of this can change rapidly when a crisis looms, especially if it threatens the integrity of the European project.
That is where the eurozone is today.
A debt crisis that erupted in Greece, the eurozone’s outer periphery, has migrated with a vengeance towards the core, so much so that the survival of the eurozone itself is at stake.
The more the policy response has lagged, the broader the set of questions about Europe’s future has become.
Maintaining a 17-member monetary union is no longer a given.
Talk of countries exiting, starting with Greece (the “Grexit”), is now rampant.
And only hard-core idealists dismiss altogether the mounting risk of the eurozone’s total disintegration.
Nonetheless, many veterans of the European integration project see a silver lining in the dark clouds massing over their creation.
For them, only a crisis can stop politicians from just kicking various cans farther down the road and, instead, catalyze the policy initiatives – greater fiscal, banking, and political union – that, together with monetary union, would ensure that the eurozone rests on a stable and sustainable four-legged platform.
But this view is not without its own risks.
It assumes that, when push comes to shove, political leaders will indeed do what is necessary – the willingness question.
It also presumes that they will have the capacity to do so – the ability question.
And, over time, uncertainty concerning the latter question has risen to an uncomfortable level.
Today’s eurozone is beset by an unprecedented degree of rejection – on economic, financial, political, and social grounds –&nbsp;by citizens in a growing number of countries.
The longer this persists, the harder it will be for politicians to maintain control of their countries’ destinies and that of Europe’s collective enterprise.
Private-sector activity is slowing, and it is nearing a standstill in the eurozone’s most vulnerable economy (Greece), where a bank run is in full swing.
Elsewhere, too, depositors are beginning to transfer their savings to the strongest economy (Germany) and to safe havens beyond (Switzerland and the United States).
Weaker companies are shedding labor, while stronger firms are delaying investments in plant and equipment.
And global investors continue to exit the eurozone in droves, shifting countries’ liabilities to taxpayers and the ECB’s balance sheet.
No wonder that social unrest is evident in a growing number of countries.
No wonder that fringe political movements are gaining traction throughout the eurozone.
And no wonder that voters in almost two-thirds of eurozone countries have turned out the incumbents in their most recent elections.
All of this serves to undermine the effectiveness of government policies – by reducing their credibility, clogging their channels of transmission to the economy, and making it difficult to offset the withdrawal of private-sector capital and spending.
As a result, the market-based economic and financial systems that prevail in Europe, and that, not so long ago, were a source of significant strength, are losing their vibrancy.
I, too, am fond of metaphors.
During a trip to the continent last week, I heard one that captures very well the key dynamic in Europe today.
The eurozone’s leaders are on a raft heading towards a life-threatening waterfall.
The longer they wait, the more the raft gains speed.
So the outcome no longer depends only on their willingness to cooperate in order to navigate the raft to safety. It also hinges on their ability to do so in the midst of natural forces that are increasingly difficult to control and overcome.
The message is clear.
The current crisis might indeed eventually break eurozone leaders’ inherent resistance to compromise, collaboration, and common action.
But the longer they bicker and dither, the greater the risk that what they gain in willingness will be lost to incapacity.
Will Europe Learn to Love Bush?
President George W. Bush will soon travel to Europe, and President Jacques Chirac will visit Washington.
EU “Foreign Minister” Javier Solana has already been there, and returned bullish on future transatlantic cooperation.
Atmospherically, at least, relations have, indeed, improved since the US presidential election, and both sides have expressed good will.
Yet there is little ground for genuine optimism.
Bush’s declared intention to “better explain the reasons for his decisions” to America’s Allies simply will not do.
Europeans don’t want explanations; they want to be consulted – to have input into American decision-making and see their concerns reflected in US foreign policy.
None of this is likely to happen.
On the contrary, the US is continuing to thwart European efforts gradually to establish a rule-based international order.
There are no signs that the Bush administration is relenting on, for example, the UN, the Kyoto Protocol, the International Criminal Court, the ban on land mines, or the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
In Iraq, Europeans fully share the American objectives of preserving the country’s unity and achieving at least some modicum of democracy.
At the same time, they believe that it is up to the US to remove the chaos it created, so they are reluctant to contribute to the task in a substantive way.
European attitudes may seem shortsighted to Americans, but it would need a lot of cajoling to change them.
There is general agreement on the aims to be achieved in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: the end of violence and a peaceful solution based on the concept of two sovereign states.
However, Europeans consider the opinion recently expressed by Bush – that Palestinian democracy and not Israeli occupation of the West Bank is at the core of the problem – to be ill conceived.
The same is true with respect to the President’s assertion that Israel’s permanent presence in Palestinian territories and the non-return of Palestinian refugees to their homes in Israel must be accepted as realities on the ground.
It may well be that such painful deviations from agreed principles will be reflected in an eventual comprehensive settlement, but prejudging these issues before the beginning of negotiations denies the Palestinians some of their most important bargaining chips.
On the question of Iran’s nuclear weapons capability, Americans and Europeans also fundamentally agree: it should be prevented.
While the US tries to achieve this through hard power, regime change, sanctions, and threats of pre-emptive military intervention, Europe uses soft power, diplomacy, inclusion, and partnership.
Unfortunately, this “good cop, bad cop” game doesn’t work in international politics.
European efforts to induce Teheran to renounce its nuclear designs by addressing Iran’s legitimate security concerns and offering important opportunities for economic and social betterment cannot be successful without active US support.
In other words, Europe’s carrots are not enough; a successful outcome requires American carrots, too.
By standing aside and discounting the European approach from the outset, America is merely helping to bring about a self-fulfilling prophecy.
It would be more productive for the US to join in, at the same time agreeing with Europeans on measures to be taken should their combined efforts fail.
Relations with China have improved over the years on both sides of the Atlantic.
China has become Europe’s biggest trading partner, and its huge reserves of US dollars has made it America’s most important creditor.
Despite this rosy picture, China could be the cause of a major transatlantic row if Europeans make good on their intention to lift the arms export embargo in place since the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989.