And, if the Greek and Italian economies face difficult recoveries inside the eurozone, consider how hard it would be to repay euro-denominated debts with devalued drachmas or liras.
Quite apart from the financial aspects, there would be a real danger of throwing away the benefits that the EU has brought, particularly in terms of Europe’s standing in the world.
In isolation, European countries would have limited global significance.
As a union, Europe still matters a great deal.
The alternative to dismantling the EU is to strengthen it – to pool the debt and create a European treasury.
If European citizens are to accept this, however, the EU needs more democracy.
But that depends upon a vital sense of European solidarity, which will not come from anthems, flags, or other gimmicks devised by bureaucrats in Brussels.
For starters, affluent northern Europeans have to be convinced that it is in their interest to strengthen the EU, as it certainly is.
After all, they have benefited most from the euro, which has enabled them to export cheaply to southern Europeans.
While it is up to national politicians to make this case, the EU’s governing institutions in Brussels, Luxembourg, and Strasbourg also have to be brought closer to European citizens.
Perhaps Europeans could vote for members of the European Commission, with candidates campaigning in other countries, rather than just in their own.
Perhaps Europeans could elect a president.
Democracy may seem like a mad dream in a community of 27 nation-states, and perhaps it is.
But unless one is prepared to give up on building a more united Europe, it is surely worth considering.
And who can say what is possible?
Consider football clubs, the modern world’s most insular, even tribal institutions.
Thirty years ago, who would have imagined that two of London’s most popular clubs – Arsenal and Chelsea – would have a French and a Portuguese coach, respectively, and players from Spain, France, Portugal, Brazil, Russia, Serbia, the Czech Republic, Poland, Mexico, Ghana, South Korea, Holland, Belgium, Nigeria, and the Ivory Coast?
Oh, yes, they have one or two from Britain, too.
Is the European Union imploding?
The prospect of being accepted into the EU provided the nations of Eastern and Central Europe with a strong incentive to achieve fiscal balance - a process somewhat similar to what happened in Western Europe at the time the euro was launched.
In both cases, however, after initial progress, countries have shown clear signs of political "fatigue": in the euro area, the Stability Pact has imploded; throughout Eastern Europe, budget deficits have started to rise.
In the Czech Republic last year, the budget deficit jumped to 13% of GDP, a threefold increase since 1999.
Although this included a one-time charge for bank restructuring costs, this year the deficit will close above 6% of GDP.
In Poland, the deficit is also moving close to 6% of GDP, up from 2.9% in 2001.
In Hungary the budget deficit is widening again, after narrowing to 4% of GDP in 2001.
Malta, too, has a deficit close to 10% of GDP, up four percentage points since 2001.
Only the Baltic countries seem able to maintain sound fiscal policies.
In many ways, this is not surprising: once politicians no longer face annual EU progress reports - and the threat of exclusion - fiscal relaxation becomes much less costly.
At the same time, the big euro area members (France and Germany) do not have a leg to stand on to criticize other countries' fiscal policies, so there are virtually no international constraints on EU countries' budget deficits.
Indeed, these constraints have proven to be utterly useless after a country's EU entry, and it will be hard to impose them as an admission criterion for other potential entrants.
Perhaps more surprising is the apparent political backlash against the governments that have led countries into the EU.
Once again the similarity with what happened in Western Europe at the time of the euro's implementation is striking.
The government of Romano Prodi, having managed against all the odds to get Italy into Europe's monetary union, fell three months later.
The Czech Republic, Poland, and Hungary have each endured a government crisis since EU accession.
Throughout Central and Eastern Europe, the EU is not as popular as it used to be.
Voter turnout in the European Parliament elections in June was embarrassingly low in the new accession countries, ranging from just 17% in Slovakia to 38.5% in Hungary.
Participating in their first-ever EU election, citizens in these countries turned out at a rate not only well below the European average (about 45%), but even below the UK average.
The reasons are twofold.
Accession countries felt that they were asked to make major fiscal adjustments in order to be accepted into the EU.
Regardless of whether such policies were in the long-term interest of these countries, in the short run they were politically costly.
This "adjustment fatigue," a term coined to describe the experience of Latin American countries to economic liberalization in the 1990's, is now coupled with the feeling that the EU is not such a great bargain after all.
Perhaps most visible has been Western European countries' eagerness to protect their labor markets against migration from Central and Eastern Europe - a sticking point that always comes up in every meeting between politicians from the West and the East.
Little wonder, then, that voters in Central and Eastern Europe now feel that they got a poor bargain from the governments that brought them in: belt tightening, labor market restrictions, and the notorious barrage of EU regulation.
LAGUNA BEACH – Earlier this year, financial markets around the world were forced to navigate a perfect storm – a violent disruption fueled by an unusual amalgamation of smaller disturbances.
Financial volatility rose, unsettling investors; stocks went on a rollercoaster ride, ending substantially lower; government bond yields plummeted, and lenders found themselves in the unusual position of having to pay for the privilege of holding an even bigger amount of government debt (almost one-third of the total).
The longer these disturbances persisted, the greater the threat to a global economy already challenged by structural weaknesses, income and wealth inequalities, pockets of excessive indebtedness, deficient aggregate demand, and insufficient policy coordination.
And while relative calm has returned to financial markets, the three causes of volatility are yet to dissipate in any meaningful sense.
First, mounting signs of economic weakness in China and a series of uncharacteristic policy stumbles there still raise concerns about the overall health of the global economy.
Given that China is the second largest economy in the world, it didn’t take long for European officials to reduce their own growth projections, and for the International Monetary Fund to revise downward its expectations for global growth.
Second, there are still legitimate doubts about the effectiveness of central banks, the one group of policymaking institutions that has been actively engaged in supporting sustainable economic growth.
In the United States, doubts focus on the willingness of the Federal Reserve to remain “unconventional”; elsewhere, however, doubts about effectiveness concern central banks’ ability to formulate, communicate, and implement policy decisions.
For example, rather than viewing monetary authorities’ activism as an encouraging sign of policy effectiveness, markets have been alarmed by the Bank of Japan’s decision to follow the European Central Bank in taking policy rates even deeper into negative territory.
Third, the system has lost some important safety belts, which have yet to be restored.
There are fewer pockets of “patient capital” stepping in to buy when flightier investors are rushing to the exit.
In the oil market, the once-powerful OPEC cartel has stepped back from the role of swing producer on the downside – that is, cutting output in order to stop a disorderly price collapse.
Each of these three factors alone would have attracted the attention of traders and investors around the world.
Occurring simultaneously, they unsettled markets.
Intra-day volatility rose in virtually every segment of global financial markets; adverse price contagion became more common as more vulnerable entities contaminated the stronger ones; and asset-market correlations were rendered less stable.
All this came in the context of a US economy that continues to be a powerful engine of job creation.
But markets were not voting on the most recent economic developments in the US.
Instead, they were being forced to judge the sustainability of financial asset prices that, boosted by liquidity, had notably decoupled from underlying economic fundamentals.
In the wake of this volatility, markets have recently regained a more stable footing.
Yet the fundamental longer-term challenge of allowing markets to re-price assets to fundamentals in a relatively orderly fashion – and, critically, without causing economic damage that would then blow back into even more unsettled finance – remains.
Indeed, the more frequent the bouts of financial volatility in the months to come, the greater the risk that it will lead consumers to become more cautious about spending, and prompt companies to postpone even more of their investment in new plant and equipment.
And, if this were to persist and spread, even the US – a relatively healthy economy – could be forced to revise downward its expectations for economic growth and corporate earnings.
Durably stabilizing today’s markets is important, especially for a system that has already assumed too much financial risk.
It requires a policy handoff instigated by more responsible behavior on the part of politicians on both sides of the Atlantic – one that undertakes the much-needed transition from over-reliance on central banks to a more comprehensive policy approach that deals with the economy’s trifecta of structural, demand, and debt impediments (and does so in the context of greater global policy coordination).
Should this handoff occur, its beneficial impact in terms of delivering inclusive growth and genuine global stability would be turbocharged by the productive deployment of cash sitting on companies’ balance sheets, and by exciting technological innovations that began as firm/sector specific but are now having economy-wide effects.
If the handoff fails, the financial volatility experienced earlier this year will not only return; it could also turn out to have been a prologue for a notable risk of recession, greater inequality, and enduring financial instability.
Is There a New Washington Consensus?
CAMBRIDGE – Two and a half years ago, senior staff members of the World Bank approached the Nobel laureate Michael Spence to ask him to lead a high-powered commission on economic growth. The question at hand could not have been more important.
The “Washington consensus” – the infamous list of do’s and don’ts for policymakers in developing countries – had largely dissipated. But what would replace it?  
Spence was not sure he was the man for the job.
After all, his research had focused on theoretical issues in advanced economies; he had been dean of a business school; and he did not have much experience in economic development.
But he was intrigued by the task.
And he was encouraged by the enthusiastic and positive response he received from the commission’s prospective members.
Thus was born the Spence Commission on Growth and Development, a star-studded group of policymakers – including another Nobelist – whose final report was issued at the end of May.    
The Spence report represents a watershed for development policy – as much for what it says as for what it leaves out.
Gone are confident assertions about the virtues of liberalization, deregulation, privatization, and free markets.
Also gone are the cookie cutter policy recommendations unaffected by contextual differences.
Instead, the Spence report adopts an approach that recognizes the limits of what we know, emphasizes pragmatism and gradualism, and encourages governments to be experimental.
Yes, successful economies have many things in common: they all engage in the global economy, maintain macroeconomic stability, stimulate saving and investment, provide market-oriented incentives, and are reasonably well governed.
It is useful to keep an eye on these commonalities, because they frame the conduct of appropriate economic policies.
Saying that context matters does not mean that anything goes.
But there is no universal rulebook; different countries achieve these ends differently.
The Spence report reflects a broader intellectual shift within the development profession, a shift that encompasses not just growth strategies but also health, education, and other social policies.  The traditional policy framework, which the new thinking is gradually replacing, is presumptive rather than diagnostic .
It starts with strong preconceptions about the nature of the problem: too much (or too little) government regulation, too poor governance, too little public spending on health and education, and so on.
Moreover, its recommendations take the form of the proverbial “laundry list” of reforms, and emphasize their complementary nature – the imperative to undertake them all simultaneously – rather than their sequencing and prioritization.
And it is biased toward universal recipes – “model” institutional arrangements, “best practices,” rules of thumb, and so forth.
By contrast, the new policy mindset starts with relative agnosticism about what works.
Its hypothesis is that there is a great deal of “slack” in poor countries, so simple changes can make a big difference.
As a result, it is explicitly diagnostic and focuses on the most significant economic bottlenecks and constraints.
Rather than comprehensive reform, it emphasizes policy experimentation and relatively narrowly targeted initiatives in order to discover local solutions, and it calls for monitoring and evaluation in order to learn which experiments work.
The new approach is suspicious of universal remedies.
Instead, it searches for policy innovations that provide a shortcut around local economic or political complications.
This approach is greatly influenced by China’s experimental gradualism since 1978 – the most spectacular episode of economic growth and poverty reduction the world has ever seen.
The Spence report is a consensus document, and therefore an easy target for cheap shots.
It has no “big ideas” of its own, and at times it tries too hard to please everyone and cover all possible angles.
But, as Spence puts it with regard to economic reform itself, you need to take small steps in order to make a big difference in the long run.
It is quite a feat to have achieved the degree of consensus he has around a set of ideas that departs in places so markedly from the traditional approach.
It is to Spence’s credit that the report manages to avoid both market fundamentalism and institutional fundamentalism.
Rather than offering facile answers such as “just let markets work” or “just get governance right,” it rightly emphasizes that each country must devise its own mix of remedies.
Foreign economists and aid agencies can supply some of the ingredients, but only the country itself can provide the recipe.
If there is a new Washington consensus, it is that the rulebook must be written at home, not in Washington.
And that is real progress.
Is the TPP Good for America?
WASHINGTON, DC – The Trans-Pacific Partnership, the far-reaching trade and investment agreement that the United States has negotiated with 11 other countries, including Canada, Mexico, Japan, Malaysia, Australia, and Vietnam, is now up for debate.
In order to enter into effect, the US Congress must approve the TPP, which is not likely until enough members make up their minds about the merits of the case.
So, what does the TPP mean for US voters now and in the future?
For starters, while the TPP would most likely generate some overall gain for the US economy, measured in terms of GDP and people’s incomes, that gain is very small and comes mostly from providing greater opportunities for US exports – by reducing tariff and non-tariff barriers in other countries.
Some imports would become cheaper as well, benefiting American consumers.
In analytical work favored by President Barack Obama’s administration, the projections suggest that approval of the TPP could cause the total size of the US economy to be 0.5% higher in 2030 than it would be otherwise.
Note that this estimate is of the TPP’s effect on the level of aggregate income after 15 years, not of its impact on the annual growth rate.
Given that this assessment is advanced by TPP supporters, it seems reasonable to suppose that it represents the higher end of what they regard as plausible.
(I am a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, under whose auspices the study was published, but I had no part in its preparation.)
Unfortunately, the models used in this field do not generate error bands or confidence intervals.
In fact, given the complexity of the trade agreement – including the emphasis on hard-to-quantify non-tariff barriers – these estimates are likely to be highly imprecise.
Second, such models ignore key issues that belong in any quantitative analysis.
For example, when imports surge, there are significant negative effects on employment.
Compelling evidence on this point comes from outstanding research by Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Brendan Price, who found that “total job losses from rising Chinese import competition over 1999-2011” were in the range of 2-2.4 million.
People who lose high-paying jobs in manufacturing can find alternative work – but typically at a much lower wage in a low-productivity part of the service sector.
In principle, they could be compensated for this loss of lifetime income; but such compensation is very limited in the US.
In reality, there are long-lasting or even permanent effects on some communities – and particularly on people with less education in places where prosperity was based on manufacturing that is now exposed to more competition from imports.
In addition, the pro-TPP model assumes that wages rise with productivity.
This used to be the case in the US; but the relationship has been greatly weakened in recent decades – precisely as globalization has deepened.
As a result, the model’s estimates regarding how unskilled workers will benefit from the TPP thus seem like a stretch.
Third, basing any policy decision on models alone is fraught with danger.
The TPP will change many other dimensions of public policy, including the protections afforded to foreign investors (making it easier for them to sue governments) and access to affordable medicines (for low-income countries but also potentially for Americans).
And it is striking that the TPP currently does essentially nothing to discourage currency manipulation – sustained one-way intervention in the foreign-exchange market, aimed at devaluing a currency and gaining a competitive advantage.
In the 1980s, imports of goods and services into the US were about 10% of GDP; now that figure is about 17%, and the TPP would presumably push it higher (so the models say).
One hopes that the ITC will provide a more complete and granular analysis – including of potential downsides for various sectors – than is currently available.
An objective assessment will find that the TPP is no “slam dunk” that should be approved automatically.
Much greater scrutiny and discussion of the agreement’s details is warranted.
The good news is that this process of careful assessment is now underway.
Is Ukraine Next?
LONDON – The war in Georgia has clearly exposed the security vacuum in the surrounding region, as well as a lot of raw nerves.
Russia’s hasty decision to recognize the “independence” of South Ossetia and Abkhazia was a shot across the bow for every former Soviet country, and has intensified speculation about who might be “next” – and how to prevent Russia from multiplying the supposed Kosovo “precedent” in other ex-Soviet countries.
Having established itself as the main broker in the conflict, the European Union has many urgent priorities in Georgia itself.
But it should also be thinking ahead about how it can demonstrate a stronger commitment to security, democracy, and prosperity in the European “neighborhood.”
The most effective way of dealing with a newly assertive Russia will be for Europe to issue a collective refusal to accept a bipolar Europe of distinct Russian and EU spheres of influence.
The place to start is Ukraine.
Fortunately, the EU-Ukraine summit on September 9 in Evian, France, provides the perfect opportunity.
Many Ukrainians now hear domestic echoes of the lead-up to war in Georgia.
Ukraine has its own potentially separatist region in Crimea, and the country’s Russian minority numbers some 8.3 million (the largest minority in Europe).
Half of Ukraine’s population is Russian-speaking in various degrees.
Although the Ukrainian constitution bans dual citizenship, the government has had to launch an inquiry into alleged covert Russian passport-holding in the Crimean city of Sevastopol.
Ukrainians note that Russia justified its invasion of Georgia, as the Nazis justified their dismemberment of Czechoslovakia, as being necessary to “protect” a minority to whom they had just given citizenship.
Russia has begun a war of words over Ukraine’s supply of arms to Georgia.
And the conflict itself has shown that the Russian Black Sea Fleet, based in Sevastopol, can operate with impunity, whether Ukraine likes it or not.
Based on its analysis of Ukraine’s “Orange Revolution” as a foreign-backed “NGO revolution,” Russia has also been quietly building its own network of Russia-friendly NGOs in Ukraine since 2004.
Ukrainians also talk of an otkat ekonomiya (“kickback economy”), in which Russian money percolates throughout the Ukrainian elite.
The European Neighborhood Policy is worthy enough, but it does not address the pressing concerns about maintaining and securing Ukraine’s independence.
Many member states will worry about leaping straight to the contentious issue of ultimate membership for Ukraine, but the EU already recognizes Ukraine’s theoretical right to join once it has met the Copenhagen criteria; and it cannot be beyond EU leaders’ verbal dexterity to play up the prospect.
What Ukraine would value most is a real sense that it is being treated distinctly in its own right.
The key words are “association” and “partnership,” in whatever order or combination.
The EU has more scope for short-term measures, and should develop a multi-dimensional solidarity strategy as a signal to both Ukraine and Russia.
For example, the EU’s foreign ministers should invite their Ukrainian counterpart to give a briefing on Ukraine-Russia relations at their next meeting.
Ukraine should be offered a road map for visa-free travel.
The new EU-Ukraine agreement should include a beefed-up solidarity clause, building on the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, whereby the EU would consult and assist Ukraine in case of challenges to its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
And the EU should back Ukraine if it insists that the Russian Black Sea Fleet leaves on schedule in 2017.
The EU should also launch a comprehensive study of all aspects of Europe’s reliance on Russian energy supplies, including transit, energy security and conservation, supply diversification, and the impact of “bypass” pipelines like Nord Stream and South Stream.
It should consider linking the opening of the Nord Stream pipeline, which would allow Russia to cut off gas to Poland and Ukraine while maintaining deliveries to Germany, to the opening of the proposed “White Stream” pipeline to bring gas from Azerbaijan directly to Ukraine via Georgia, bypassing Russia.
The EU could even play a part in keeping the 2012 European Championship football finals on track.
The decision to appoint Ukraine and Poland as co-hosts was a powerful symbol of European unity across the current EU border (Poland is a member, Ukraine is not).
UEFA is unhappy with Ukraine’s progress in building the necessary infrastructure, but Ukraine should be given time to get its act together.
Where appropriate, the EU should extend these measures to Moldova, which is now calling Ukraine a “strategic shelter.”
Ukraine faces a crucial presidential election in 2009 or 2010 (and Moldova will hold elections in March 2009).
After getting its fingers badly burned at the last election in 2004, Russia is clearly tempted to intervene again.
The “Russian factor” will strongly influence the campaign.
Greater Western engagement is needed to ensure that the “Europe factor” is equally prominent.
Roman Europe?
BERLIN/VENICE – As the European Union begins to disintegrate, who can provide the leadership to save it?
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is widely credited with finally answering Henry Kissinger’s famous question about the Western alliance: “What is the phone number for Europe?”
But if Europe’s phone number has a German dialing code, it goes through to an automated answer: “Nein zu Allem.”
This phrase – “No to everything” – is how Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank president, recently described the standard German response to all economic initiatives aimed at strengthening Europe.
A classic case was Merkel’s veto of a proposal by Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi to fund refugee programs in Europe, North Africa, and Turkey through an issue of EU bonds, an efficient and low-cost idea also advanced by leading financiers such as George Soros.
Merkel’s high-handed refusal even to consider broader European interests if these threaten her domestic popularity has become a recurring nightmare for other EU leaders.
This refusal underpins not only her economic and immigration policies, but also her bullying of Greece, her support for coal subsidies, her backing of German carmakers over diesel emissions, her kowtowing to Turkey on press freedom, and her mismanagement of the Minsk agreement in Ukraine.
In short, Merkel has done more to damage the EU than any living politician, while constantly proclaiming her passion for “the European project.”
But where can a Europe disillusioned with German leadership now turn?
The obvious candidates will not or cannot take on the role: Britain has excluded itself; France is paralyzed until next year’s presidential election and possibly beyond; and Spain cannot even form a government.
That leaves Italy, a country that, having dominated Europe’s politics and culture for most of its history, is now treated as “peripheral.”
But Italy is resuming its historic role as a source of Europe’s best ideas and leadership in politics, and also, most surprisingly, in economics.
Draghi’s transformation of the ECB into the world’s most creative and proactive central bank is the clearest example of this.
The enormous program of quantitative easing that Draghi pushed through, against German opposition, has saved the euro by circumventing the Maastricht Treaty’s rules against monetizing or mutualizing government debts.
Last month, Draghi became the first central banker to take seriously the idea of helicopter money – the direct distribution of newly created money from the central bank to eurozone residents.
Germany’s leaders have reacted furiously and are now subjecting Draghi to nationalistic personal attacks.
Less visibly, Italy has also led a quiet rebellion against the pre-Keynesian economics of the German government and the European Commission.
In EU councils and again at this month’s International Monetary Fund meeting in Washington, DC, Pier Carlo Padoan, Italy’s finance minister, presented the case for fiscal stimulus more strongly and coherently than any other EU leader.
More important, Padoan has started to implement fiscal stimulus by cutting taxes and maintaining public spending plans, in defiance of German and EU Commission demands to tighten his budget.
As a result, consumer and business confidence in Italy have rebounded to the highest level in 15 years, credit conditions have improved, and Italy is the only G-7 country expected by the IMF to grow faster in 2016 than 2015 (albeit still at an inadequate 1% rate).
Padoan has more recently created an imaginative public-private partnership to finance a desperately needed recapitalization of Italy’s banks.
And he has launched his initiative without waiting for approval from ECB and EU officials, who blocked an earlier “bad bank” plan under German pressure.
Financial markets immediately rewarded Italy for its defiance, with the share price of the country’s biggest bank, Unicredit, jumping by 25% in three days.
Italy’s increasingly assertive resistance to German economic dogmas may not be surprising: The country has suffered from almost continuous recession since joining the euro.
Moreover, Padoan, who was formerly the OECD’s chief economist, is the only G-7 finance minister with professional economics training.
He understands better than anyone that misguided fiscal and monetary policies have been the underlying cause of Europe’s economic underperformance, and are largely responsible for the political tensions threatening to destroy the EU.
The renaissance of Italian self-confidence and leadership can also be observed in domestic and international politics.
Renzi was the only European leader to increase his party’s vote share in the 2014 European Parliament election, and his dominance of Italian politics has since grown.
While populist politics now threatens Germany, France, Spain, and Britain, Italy has turned its back on Silvio Berlusconi, and Renzi has squeezed support for the Northern League and the Five Star Movement.
As a result, Italy has started implementing labor, pension, and administrative reforms that were unthinkable in the past.
In foreign affairs, too, Italy has become more assertive.
The Italian foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, is collaborating with his predecessor, Federica Mogherini, now the EU’s High Representative for foreign affairs, to create more pragmatic and effective European policies on Libya and the refugee crisis.
Most significantly, Italy is leading an effort to repair relations with Russia after the Ukraine confrontation and to strengthen cooperation over Syria.
This campaign appears to be bearing fruit with a gradual lifting of EU sanctions against Russia, starting this summer.
Given the failures of German leadership in Europe and the political vacuum elsewhere in the EU, Italy’s decision to raise its profile is surely right.
As Renzi put it in a recent interview, “After two years listening, now I speak.”
It remains to be seen whether Italy can assemble a coalition of economically progressive and politically pragmatic countries to overcome German conservatism and dogmatism.
But one way or another, Europe’s political economy will have to adapt to the new type of global capitalism evolving out of the 2008 crisis.
With luck, a new breed of wily and agile Italian leaders will out-maneuver the blundering German dinosaurs, whose outdated rules and doctrines are leading the EU toward extinction.
Europe’s December Day of Reckoning
VIENNA – While most of the European Union seems panic-stricken by the prospect of a victory for French far-right leader Marine Le Pen in France’s presidential election in May, the EU’s next test will come much sooner.
On Sunday, Italians will vote in a referendum on constitutional reforms, and Austrians will choose their next president.
Both countries’ votes could have major ramifications beyond their borders.
In Italy, the upcoming plebiscite has become a popular confidence vote in Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, who has said he will resign if the reforms are rejected.
According to the latest polls, Renzi could be forced to make good on his pledge, which might spell the end of reformist social democracy in Italy – and beyond.
In Austria, voters will choose between a pro- and an anti-EU candidate in the nationalist mold of Le Pen, Norbert Hofer of the Austrian Freedom Party (FPÖ).
A victory for Hofer could add wind to Le Pen’s sails.
The constitutional changes that Renzi’s Yes campaign is asking voters to approve would undo some of his predecessor Silvio Berlusconi’s legacy – a legacy that serves as a prime example of the damage right-wing populism can do to a country.
Among other things, Berlusconi altered Italy’s political system in such a way as to prevent the left from ever gaining full power again, and to block any criminal charges that could be leveled against him.
Renzi’s proposed reforms would, among other things, modernize the political system by disempowering the Senate (the upper house of Parliament).
Such an amendment is sorely needed to eliminate political gridlock, and Renzi has already succeeded in getting it through both chambers of Parliament.
Indeed, the plebiscite was only supposed to provide final confirmation.
But Renzi failed to improve Italy’s dismal economic performance.
Eight years after the 2008 financial crisis, industrial production is still down by 25% from pre-crisis levels, and youth unemployment is hovering at more than 40%.
According to these economic indicators, “la crisi,” as the Italians call it, is as bad as that experienced a quarter-century ago in Poland and other Eastern European countries, in the aftermath of communism’s collapse.
But those countries endured their post-communist hardships, because their leaders and enough of their people believed in the promise of free-market capitalism.
By contrast, since the 2008 global financial crisis, that belief has been badly shaken in Italy and other EU-countries.
The boyish Renzi did try to improve the existing system and close some of Italy’s generational gaps, by implementing labor-market reforms.
But, unlike former British Prime Minister Tony Blair in the 1990s or former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in the early 2000s, Renzi is operating under far worse global economic conditions.
Italy cannot build on an export-driven growth model, and it is staggering under the massive debt burden inherited from Berlusconi.
Renzi’s foes include left-wing populists such as the Five Star Movement (Movimiento Cinque Stelle) and right-wing populists such as the Northern League, or Lega Nord, which fiercely attack him while blaming the EU for many of Italy’s economic and political problems.
The EU, meanwhile, has left Italy to manage on its own the 160,000 North African refugees who have arrived so far just in the course of this year.
If Renzi’s referendum fails, Five Star Movement leader Beppe Grillo has indicated that he will demand another plebiscite on Italy’s eurozone membership, which might just succeed.
While Italy was once a staunchly pro-EU country, many Italians may now support less integration, especially after the high-profile example set by the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum in June.
On the other hand, a eurozone-membership referendum may not even be necessary.
If Renzi steps down, Italy could become almost ungovernable, which will frighten financial markets.
This, in turn, will make it difficult for Italy to remain in the eurozone, given the already high interest rates on its public debt, which amounts to 132% of its GDP.
Meanwhile, in Austria, the upcoming presidential election – pitting Hofer against independent left-wing candidate Alexander Van der Bellen – will be more about the country’s politics than about its economy.
For the past 10 years, Austria has been governed by a grand coalition of Social Democrats and Conservatives; but these two mainstream parties constantly block each other, and are united only in their opposition to right-wing populists such as Hofer.
This sclerotic arrangement, however, has enabled those same right-wing populists to present themselves as the only alternative to “the system.”
Austria is one of the EU’s richest countries, and it is doing well compared to Italy.
But Austrians are afraid of losing their current wealth, and they do still have economic grievances that politicians can tap.
For example, low- and middle-class Austrians’ incomes have been slowly shrinking for ten years; overall economic growth is lower than the EU average; and unemployment is rising.
As in Italy, Austria’s right-wing populists have railed against the EU, and have mused about taking the country out of the Eurozone.
But such a move would be even more suicidal than in Italy’s case, and the FPÖ has actually moderated its anti-European stance since the Brexit vote.
Instead, the FPÖ has announced its intention to turn Austria’s political system into a more presidential-plebiscitary democracy.
This, too, would be a blow against Europe, because it would mean that any EU legislation – such as policies to disperse refugees now in Italy to other member countries – could be blocked by a plebiscite.
When the Berlin Wall came down – and state socialism along with it – the European Economic Community’s founding member states responded by establishing the European Union, and committing to deeper European integration.
That project worked well until the 2008 crisis, suggesting that the EU might be best suited for good times, not for hard times.
Its double test in Italy and Austria on December 4 will provide powerful evidence one way or the other.
Италия референдумында ұтыс тігу
МИЛАН –  соңғы 68 жылда Италия 17 жалпы сайлауды және бірнеше референдумдарды өткізді.
Бірақ тек үш рет итальяндық дауыс беру халықаралық назарды аударды : таңдау Батыс пен коммунизм арасында болған 1948 жылы; 1976 жылы сайлаушылар Христиан демократтар және Энри́ко Берлингуэ́рдың «Еврокоммунизмы» арасында тап осындай таңдауда болды; және қазір, конституциялық реформалар туралы алдағы референдумы.
Алдағы дауыс беру салдары зор болып табылады.
Премьер-Министр Маттео Ренци дауыс беруге өзінің саяси болашағымен тәуекелге бел байлады, егер реформалар қабылданбаса, ол (әрине, бірден емес) қызмет орнын босатуға уәде берді.
Мұндай нәтиже солшыл үкіметтік коалицияны әлсіретер еді: Ренцинің демократиялық партиясының (PD) өзінде реформаларға байланысты дау-күрестер жүріп жатыр.
Шын мәнінде, PD дауыстың көбшілігі премьер-министрге берілсе де, бөлінуден аман қалмайды.
Ренци жеңілісі Италияның екі ірі популистік партиялар үшін жеңіс болады: Lega Nord және актер Беппе Грилло басқаратын үлкенірек Five Star қозғалысы.
Екі партия одақтас болмаса да, екеуі де үкіметті қолдамай, Италияның проблемаларына қарсы  «ұлттық шешімдерді», - мысалы, итальяндық лираға қайта оралуды - жақтайды.
Егер Ренци жеңілсе, Lega Nord және Five Star қозғалысы жаңа үкіметті қолдау үшін өз күштерін біріктіріп, осы жолы евро тақырыбында жаңа референдум жасай алады.
Егер Италия - әлемдегі ең ірі борышкерлердің бірі - жалғыз кетуге шешім қабылдаса, бүкіл Еуропалық жоба өлім пышақпен соққы алғандай болуы мүмкін.
Дональд Трамп және Brexit заманында, бұл нәтиже мүмкіндей көрінеді.
Референдум басында тұрған сұрақ маңызды, бірақ ол Еуропаның тағдырын шешпеуі қажет.
Итальяндықтар сенаттың (парламенттің жоғарғы палатасы) мүшелерін үштен екісін босатып, оның заңнамалық күшін азайту, сонда ол Германиядағы Бундесраттің екінші палатасы сияқты жай ғана “әңгіме дүкеніне” айналдыру, және облыстардың кейбір өкілеттігін  орталық үкіметке қайтару -осындай мәселелер бойынша дауыс береді.
Осы сияқты өзгерістер 30 жыл бойы талқыланып келе жатыр.  Егер сайлаушылар олар склеротикалық жүйесін реформалауға осындай сирек мүмкіндікті қолдану керек деген қорытынды жасаса, қозғалыстың болмауы Ренци үшін тиімді болар еді.
Президент Серджо Маттарелла бейтарап, бірақ ол реформалардың алға басуын қалайды.
Оның ізашары, Джорджо Наполитано да реформаларды қатты қолдайды, және оның айтуы бойынша олар «Италия үшін үлкен жаңалық» болады.
Бірақ реформалар, сондай-ақ қатты қарсылыққа тап болды.
Кейбір мемлекеттік мекемелер атқарушы билікке көп өкілеттікті беру идеясын ұнатпайды; магистраттар, мысалы, судьялардың ауқымды және тексерілмеген өкілеттігінен айрылуларынан шын қорқады. Содан кейін жаңа популисттер, бірнеше ескі ПД мүшелері  және өзге де мекеме қайраткерлері, оның ішінде әдетте, өзгерістен қауіптенетін конституциялық соттың бірнеше бұрынғы мүшелері де бар.
Бұрынғы премьер-министр Сильвио Берлускони, бұрын-соңды оппортунист, реформаларға қарсы болуда.
Оппозиция, әдеттегідей, өзінің қарапайым хабарламасын айтарлықтай пайдалы қолданып жатыр.
«Жоқ»  деп дауыс беру ол «жүйе» және оның сыбайлас жемқорлығының барлығына қарсы дауыс беру болып табылады.
Сыбайлас жемқорлыққа қарсы емес кісі бар ма?
Бұған өскелең Евроскептизмді қосыңыз, және нәтижесі  бас айналдыратын саяси қоспа болып шығады.
Сауалнамалар сайлаушылардың 20% әлі де шешім қабылдамағанын ал 5-6-балдық көпшілік Жоқ деп таңдайтынын көрсетеді.
Жалпы сайлау референдумдай болса, Грилло Ренци ПД-мен тепе-тең келуі анық.
Италияның жаңа сайлау заңы бойынша жеңімпазға үлкен сыйлықақысы (Ренци оның пайдасын  өзім көрем деп сенімді болды) ескере отырсақ, осындай болжам шын мәнінде қорқынышты болып табылады.
Грилло - Lega Nord-тың Маттео Сальвинисі сияқты - аз саяси тәжірибесі бар, Еуропа тарихы бойынша аз білімі бар, бірнеше әдемі дәлелдері  ғана бар, және болашаққа ешқандай сенімді көзқарасы жоқ.
Ол Италияның қателіктері үшін Еуропаны кінәлайды, мысалы қазір ЖІӨ-нің 132% -ын құрайтын жаппай мемлекеттік борыш үшін.
Және ол жағдайы жоқ барлық азаматтарға кепілді табыс  беру тәрізді қисынсыз уәделерді берді.
Хуан Перон, нағыз популист, ол Аргентинада осыған ұқсас бағдар алған кезде осындай уәделердің қаншалықты сәтсіз болатынын дәлелдеді.
Бұл Грилло жасай алатын жалғыз аргентиналық қате емес.
Ол сондай-ақ өз шарттарын орындамай, төлемеу арқылы қарыздармен айналысудың Аргентиналық үлгісін қолдайды.
Ол мұндай абсурд ұсыныс, себебі, Италия, ешқашан дефолтқа бармады, әрине, Муссолини басқаруы кезінде, ол «өз жолымен» баруға тырысты, бірақ апатты нәтижелерге тап болды, осыған орай Грилло саясат және комедияны ажырата ала ма деген сұрақ туындайды.
Ұлыбритания мен АҚШ-тағыдай өзгеріс бүгін Италияда да сиқырлы сөз.
Ешкім өзгеріске қарсы болғысы келмейді.
Оның орнына, реформаға қарсы оппозиция керісінше жақсы реформаларды қолдау ретінде көрсетілген.
Тек қана Конституцияны өзгерту емес, “Жоқ” науқаны сайлаушылардан “бәрін өзгерт!” деп өтінеді.
Джузеппе Томази ди Лампедузаның Il Gattopardo (Қабылан) ұлы романындағыдай, барлығын өзгерту тек бәрін сол қалпында ұстап қалу жолы ғана болуы мүмкін.
Бұл Италияға қажет ең соңғы нәрсе болып табылады.
Can Trump Save the Euro?
BRUSSELS – Europe has just endured two more difficult tests.
While Austrian voters rejected the possibility of the European Union getting its first far-right head of state, Italians delivered a stinging rebuke to their government – and opened the way for populist forces to come to power.
Add to that a Brexit that has yet to unfold and the eurozone’s still-lackluster economic performance, and the survival of the common currency is far from guaranteed.
With the euro taking the blame in recent years for Europe’s many economic travails (from a double-dip recession to a slow and uneven recovery), nationalist, Euroskeptic, and populist political movements have gained ground.
Austria has sidestepped their advance, but Italy may not.
Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s decision to make good on his promise to resign if voters rejected his government’s proposed constitutional reforms has thrown Italian politics into disarray, and an early general election is likely.
At a time of substantial economic challenges – Italy’s output has been stagnant for a decade, and its public finances remain precarious – the populist Five Star Movement, which has pledged to hold a referendum on continued euro membership, may well tempt voters.
If the eurozone’s breakdown is to be avoided, Italy – indeed, the entire currency area – urgently needs an economic boost.
US President-elect Donald Trump may be just the person to deliver it.
Even weeks before Trump takes office, he is beginning to have an impact.
Long-term interest rates have risen in the United States, and are expected to climb higher. That has contributed to a (much smaller) rate increase in Europe.
Yields on German ten-year bunds are in positive territory, having risen by around 50 basis points since the US election.
Populists can no longer complain that the European Central Bank is taxing German savers.
In the eurozone’s periphery, the increase has been more marked; in Italy, for example, ten-year bond yields are up almost a full percentage point.
While this might seem problematic, the reality is that the negative impact of higher rates in the periphery is likely to be limited.
After all, a large share of the borrowing by households and businesses in the periphery is indexed to short-term rates, which are set by the ECB, not the markets, and therefore have remained low.
Moreover, periphery governments are largely shielded from the increase in the risk premium on long-term bonds, because their central banks continue to purchase their outstanding debts.
And the US dollar’s substantial appreciation in the wake of Trump’s election is likely to make European exports more competitive.
So the immediate impact of Trump’s victory has been a net positive for the eurozone – and the benefits seem set to continue.
Trump has pledged to implement sweeping tax cuts, including a reduction of the corporate tax rate from 35% to 15%.
Add to that plans to subsidize infrastructure investment and increase military spending, and it seems likely that the US will face rapidly rising fiscal deficits and a huge short-term increase in demand.
With the US economy already operating at close to full capacity (unemployment is below 5%), higher imports – and a stronger US dollar – will be needed to meet that demand.
All of this will be good for the eurozone, for which the US remains a leading export market.
But it is the peripheral countries that are likely to benefit the most.
For example, the impact of a euro depreciation is about three times larger in Italy than it is in Germany, because demand for Germany’s exports of specialized capital goods is not very price elastic.
As a result, rapid demand-fueled growth in the US, together with the strong dollar, could contribute to a much-needed rebalancing of the eurozone.
Europe may also benefit from Trump’s energy policy.
During the campaign, Trump pledged to ensure energy self-sufficiency – an effort that would probably entail new subsidies for domestic oil, gas, and possibly coal production.
That would help to suppress oil prices – a boon for the eurozone’s energy-importing countries.
There is a precedent for Trumponomics’ potential benefits for Europe.
After the collapse of the dollar-based Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates in the 1970s, Europe created the European Monetary System to serve as an island of stability in an ocean of widely fluctuating exchange rates.
While maintaining stable exchange rates within the EMS initially proved difficult, owing to large differences in national inflation rates and economic-policy priorities, the situation quickly improved, thanks to US President Ronald Reagan.
“Reaganomics” produced large fiscal deficits and an ultra-strong dollar. Together with low oil prices, this put Europe in a strong position to overcome challenging disparities and achieve growth.
In fact, it was the last time Italy’s GDP grew faster than the EMS average.
Trumponomics aims to create precisely the same conditions.
Whatever the potential downsides to Trump’s policies, there is one clear upside: they will boost growth and employment in a eurozone where economic dissatisfaction is generating political turmoil – and the gains will be most pronounced in the countries that most need them.
As Italians face the prospect of a referendum on eurozone membership, and the French prepare for next year’s presidential election, the value of this cannot be overestimated.
Indeed, Trump could well end up saving the euro.
Saving Italy From Itself
SIENA – Now that Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s credibility is weakening at home, he will need all the friends he can get to clear the hurdle of a constitutional referendum in December – and thereby avoid likely political disruption.
Renzi will need the support not just of his own party, which is deeply divided over the referendum, but also of an Italian electorate that has grown disillusioned with politics in general.
The referendum has become a litmus test for Renzi and his government partly because of his ill-considered warning earlier this year that he would resign if the proposed reform of the Senate (the parliament’s upper house) were voted down.
But Renzi’s bigger problem is that he is a mid-term, unelected prime minister who promised, in 2014, to bring change to a country that has heard it all before.
Two years later, far less change than expected has materialized, and Renzi has come to resemble a guarantor of political stability more than a rottamatore – a “scraper of the old,” as he had been nicknamed.
Renzi has vigorously backpedaled from his conditional vow to step down; but if voters reject the Senate reform, he will become a lame duck, and political stability will most likely suffer unless he keeps his promise.
Renzi is an astute politician who understands and speaks to many voters’ gut feelings about the two main issues on their minds: the state of the economy and immigration.
So he knows that his government’s survival – and his own political future – depends on their trust in his ability to address both.
There is no guarantee that he will succeed.
Italy’s economy started the year with strong exports and positive growth, but it has since lost momentum: for the first time since 2014, the economy recorded zero growth in the second quarter, and full-year GDP growth is now expected to be a modest 0.8%.
That is far below what Italy needs to make up for the economy’s 5% contraction between 2005 and 2015.
Simply put, Italy’s economic malaise stems from the country’s inability to live with the euro.
The economy has always needed radical supply-side and public-administration reforms to cope with eurozone-membership constraints – both fiscal and monetary.
And yet no government, not even those of Silvio Berlusconi, which held comfortable parliamentary majorities, could accomplish more than piecemeal reforms in specific areas, such as pensions.
Lacking a framework to adjust to new economic realities, Italian real (inflation-adjusted) GDP growth has suffered, averaging just 0.3% per year from 1999 to 2015.
During this period, real wages and employment were hit hard – almost 37% of young people and 19% of people in southern Italy are unemployed – and as many as 1.5 million young Italians have left the country, with 90,000 departing in 2014 alone.
Meanwhile, five million foreign immigrants have arrived, constituting 8.3% of all residents (and not including undocumented immigrants).
Many Italians blame German-inspired fiscal austerity for their country’s economic malaise; and opposition parties such as the right-wing Northern League and the anti-establishment Five Star Movement want Italy to leave the euro, redenominate, and devalue to regain competitiveness.
Just 20 years ago, Italians willingly agreed to pay a one-off tax to bring the fiscal deficit into compliance with eurozone rules.
Today, an estimated 35-40% of Italians want out.
But Italians are torn between antipathy toward the European Union, which disciplines the Italian government, and discontent and frustration with that government itself, owing to its failure to present a credible reform plan.
Because there is no clear villain, an Italian version of the United Kingdom’s “Brexit” referendum is implausible.
In an August opinion poll, only 28% of respondents supported leaving the EU; in a May survey, as many Italians wanted “more Europe” as wanted “less Europe.”
Italy’s upcoming constitutional referendum cannot plausibly be compared to June’s Brexit vote.
In Italy, the referendum is required by the constitution – it did not come about through political machinations – and it is not a vote on EU membership, even if the EU or the eurozone will be on voters’ minds.
Still, the referendum could have far-reaching implications that would spill over into Europe.
The political uncertainty likely to result if voters reject the Senate reform would adversely affect Italy’s struggling economy.
International investors have come around to Renzi, believing that he strikes the right balance between dynamism and stability needed to bring Italy out of its torpor.
They have tolerated his exuberance and even his mistakes (for example, in his management of the country’s banking crisis).
They are underwriting the narrative that Renzi is the only person who can save Italy from itself; that may be the right bet – at least for the time being.
Italy’s Capital Flight
MUNICH – In August, the European balance-of-payments crisis moved beyond the Eurozone’s periphery and began buffeting Italy.
Interest spreads for Italian government bonds began to rise, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s administration was alarmed enough to implement an austerity program, and the European Central Bank helped with extra liquidity.
The ECB directed the central banks of all Eurozone members to buy huge quantities of Italian government bonds during the crisis.
While the national central banks have not revealed how much they bought, the aggregate stock of all government bonds purchased rose from €74 billion ($102 billion) on August 4, to €165 billion this month.
Most of this increase was probably used to purchase Italian government bonds.
The German Bundesbank, which was forced to buy most of the bonds, strongly opposed the program, but was unable to stop it.
In response, ECB Chief Economist Jürgen Stark resigned.
He followed Bundesbank President Axel Weber, who had resigned in February because of the earlier bond repurchases.
Meanwhile, the new Bundesbank president, Jens Weidmann, openly objects to the program, while German President Christian Wulff has publicly accused the ECB of circumventing the Maastricht Treaty.
But the bond purchases are just the tip of the iceberg.
Equally important, but largely unknown, is the fact that the Banca d’Italia has resorted to the printing press to cover Italy’s gigantic balance of payments deficit.
The extra money printing and lending, as measured by the so-called Target deficit, effectively means drawing a credit from the ECB.
This credit replaces the private capital imports that had hitherto financed the country’s net purchases of foreign goods, but which dried up because of the crisis, and it finances a capital flight, i.e. the purchase of foreign assets.
The ECB in turn draws the Target credit from the respective national central bank to which the money is flowing and which therefore has to accept a reduction in its scope for issuing refinancing credit.
Until July, only Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain had drawn Target credit, for a combined total of €330 billion.
Italy was stable and did not seem to need the printing press to solve its financial problems.
No longer.
In August alone, Italy’s central bank drew €40 billion in Target credit, and it probably drew roughly another €50 billion in September, when the Bundesbank’s Target loans to the ECB system increased by €59 billion (after a €47-billion hike in August).
This is the highest Target loan ever drawn from the Bundesbank in a single month, and in all likelihood it went primarily to Italy.
This is an explosion in slow motion.
The stock of overall Target credit that the ECB system has drawn from the Bundesbank was around zero until mid-2007.
By the end of September, it had climbed to €450 billion – in addition to the purchases of government bonds that the Bundesbank has been forced to make.
As Italy’s monthly current-account deficit approximates only €3-4 billion, the Target credit must have compensated primarily for capital flight.
Italian investors sold their assets to the banking system, which paid with newly printed money.
The investors then invested the proceeds in Germany, buying shares, bonds, and other assets.
In essence, Germany and Italy traded Target claims against marketable assets.
Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain’s collective draw on Target credits forced the Bundesbank to reduce the refinancing credit that it issued by about €30 billion per year from 2008 to the end of 2010, when it stood at barely €90 billion.
At that rate, it was predicted that the level could fall to zero within the next three years.
The Italian Target credit, however, has now exceeded that estimate.
In September 2011, the Bundesbank’s stock of refinancing loans, net of its deposit facilities vis-à-vis German banks, turned negative for the first time in history.
The ECB’s shifting of refinancing credit via the Target system has therefore already hit the limit, three years earlier than the trend of the past three years would have suggested.
This is not the end of the world, not even for the ECB.
However, the Bundesbank has entered a new regime in which it will have to borrow extensively from the private banking sector to absorb the flight money from the crisis countries.
They, in turn, will continue to compensate for capital flight by cranking up the money-printing press.
With this, the Eurozone has entered dangerous territory.
Deposit facilities count as central bank money and have inflationary potential, given that the German banks could withdraw those funds at any time.
If they do, more than the Target balances could be exploding in Europe.
Europe, Italian-Style
MILAN – Last summer, after two years of growing uncertainty, systemic risk in the eurozone finally began to wane, as conditional commitments came together.
Italy and Spain offered credible fiscal and growth-oriented reforms, and the European Central Bank, with Germany’s backing, promised intervention as needed to stabilize the banking sector and sovereign-debt markets.
Unfortunately, that trend may be reversing.
Growth in the eurozone has turned negative overall, significantly so in the south.
Unemployment stands at about 12% in Italy, and 38% for the young.
Likewise, Spain’s unemployment rate is above 25% (and 55% for young people).
And French economic indicators are slipping quickly.
Meanwhile, the outcome of Italy’s election will most likely leave the country – the eurozone’s third-largest economy and the world’s third-largest sovereign-debt market – without a stable government.
As a result, it will be difficult to sustain a reform program that is vigorous enough to satisfy the ECB and the eurozone core.
Surprisingly (to me, at least), markets have reacted stoically.
Interest-rate spreads on Italian sovereign debt have widened, but not sharply.
External investors may not be rushing for the exits, but they are not piling in, either.
It feels like wait and see at this point.
Italy is the only debt-distressed eurozone country in which the negative competitiveness trends (productivity relative to income) have not reversed direction in the post-crisis period.
With a debt/GDP ratio of more than 120%, Italy lacks the flexibility to implement fiscal stimulus to bridge the transition to higher growth.
Outgoing Prime Minister Mario Monti’s government accomplished a major pension reform, cut public spending, and raised taxes.
But Italian voters overwhelmingly rejected his approach, in part because austerity did not appear to extend to elected officials or to major parts of the large ecosystem of departments, enterprises, and unions that surround government.
Systemic reform of Italy’s government may be a prerequisite to achieving consensus on a path to fiscal health and growth.
But this is not the ideal moment for a timeout to do that.
The real issues, in any case, are distributional and reflect a shortage of policy instruments.
For example, tax evasion is pervasive, so increases disproportionately hit those who already pay, fueling a widespread perception of unfairness.
Monti attempted to address this, but moving from the current equilibrium to a better one, in which tax evasion is the exception rather than the norm, is a long-term project.
As a result, the burden of the crisis is being borne mainly by the unemployed and the young.
Given Italy’s adverse competitiveness position, devaluation of the currency, were it possible, would not be a long-term substitute for productivity-boosting reforms, but it certainly would help in at least three ways.
First, devaluation would distribute the costs of rebalancing more evenly, making it easier to clear the burden-sharing hurdle to deeper reforms.
Second, floating exchange rates imply that devaluation is an automatic adjustment mechanism, so it occurs without the appearance of an explicit burden-sharing choice and the accompanying potential for political gridlock.
Finally, as is true in many of the advanced countries, weak demand constrains Italy’s short- and medium-term growth.
This means that, unless government spending provides the demand bridge, the large non-tradable part of the economy cannot drive growth and job creation.
But Italy’s government, like that of the United States and other fiscally constrained countries, is subtracting effective demand.
Some parts of the global economy are growing.
So a negative domestic demand shock need not completely constrain the roughly one-third of the Italian economy that is tradable – and thus could grow and generate employment if the competiveness parameters were reset quickly.
Obviously, in the context of the eurozone, this is not an option.
The alternative is muted wage and income growth shared across the income spectrum, combined with productivity-enhancing measures.
This was a component of Germany’s successful reform program of a decade ago, which included labor-market and social-security reforms, the combined effect of which was to restore competitiveness and growth potential in the tradable sector, while improving productivity on the non-tradable side.
This process does work in the long run.
But Germany’s reforms took place in a much healthier global economy, and, when the initial divergences are large, it may take too long to restore growth.
Some observers have argued for a higher stable inflation target in the eurozone to facilitate the “relative deflation” process in countries that need it, and to put the “zero bound” on interest rates further away, thereby enhancing the potential impact of monetary policy.
But inflation has its own adverse distributional and efficiency implications, and would be fiercely resisted.
It is hard to see how this ends well.
The alternatives seem to be a lengthy and difficult return to growth and employment, or declining enthusiasm for the common currency.
Beyond that, the main lessons concern design flaws.
In the eurozone, for the most part, national governments separately choose investment levels in infrastructure, education, research, and technology.
Their labor-market, social-welfare, and competition policies vary.
All affect the trajectories of growth, income, and employment.
So, even if the eurozone’s structure is modified to achieve the desired level of fiscal discipline and balance, in its current highly decentralized structure, countries will continue to diverge in other important respects.
Divergence in policies and convergence in outcomes is not a realistic expectation.
Adjustment mechanisms are needed, but external devaluation and inflation are not available, while labor mobility is partial at best.
Perhaps one could interpret the common currency as “forcing” eventual convergence in policies.
But, realistically, loss of support for the euro might come first, precisely because the adjustment mechanisms are so limited.
No one doubts the depth of Europe’s official long-run commitment to integration.
The huge design challenge is to find the right level of mandatory policy convergence – one that works economically and is acceptable politically.
Italy’s Return to Political Paralysis
For more than a decade, Italy has been ruled through a bipolar political system.
Voters could choose between a left-wing coalition and a right-wing coalition.
Those disappointed by the incumbent government could vote for the opposition.
And the existence of a viable alternative has had a disciplining effect on politicians: not by chance, Silvio Berlusconi’s government served its entire electoral term.
This is in stark contrast to the Italian political tradition.
Throughout the post-war era, until the early 1990’s, Italian governments survived less than a year on average.
Voters were unable to choose between the incumbent and the opposition, because the same centrist parties were in office all the time.
Government crises were merely an opportunity to reshuffle key cabinet positions or change the party faction of the prime minister.
However, there is now a high risk that Italian politicians will return to their old habits.
This may seem strange, given the antagonism between Romano Prodi and Silvio Berlusconi during the electoral campaign.
But that antagonism reflected the personalization of politics achieved by Berlusconi, as well as an institutional feature that he abolished.
One of the last acts of his government was to replace the majoritarian electoral system, introduced in 1993, with proportional rule.
The new electoral system changes the politicians’ incentives, and could induce a return to shifting coalitions and unstable governments.
This outcome would be accelerated if, as is likely, Berlusconi himself were to distance himself from politics in the coming electoral term.
Under the new electoral rules, seats are allotted to parties in proportion to votes, but a special provision induces parties to forge pre-electoral agreements: the pre-electoral coalition that wins the most votes receives a seat premium that ensures a comfortable majority in the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house).
Unfortunately, the new law – hastily enacted at the last minute of the previous legislature – has a silly formulation that does not guarantee an equally safe majority in the Senate.
As a result, Prodi has won a large margin in the lower house, but he has only a handful of extra votes in the Senate.
Given Italy’s almost perfect bicameralism, this means that the new government will find it very difficult to function even under ideal circumstances.
But Italy’s circumstances are far from ideal.
The new government will face formidable challenges.
The budget deficit is again out of control, and well over the 3%-of-GDP Maastricht ceiling.
The aging population is straining the public pension and healthcare systems beyond sustainability.
The manufacturing sector, squeezed by stagnating productivity and competition from China and other low-cost producers, is no longer competitive.
Many services remain inefficient, because they are either in the domain of an archaic public administration or enjoy monopoly rents created by regulatory barriers.
Inaction is simply not an option for the new government. And yet agreement on virtually everything of significance will be very difficult to reach.
Prodi’s left-wing l’Unione coalition comprises a hodge-podge of parties spread all over the political spectrum, ranging from staunch communists to former liberals (with communists stronger than in the previous election).
Under the new electoral system, all of these parties will be competing with each other for the same votes, and each one will seek to protect its own constituency or claim credit for whatever is accomplished.
Given l’Unione’s razor-thin majority in the upper house, the most likely outcome is paralysis.
As if this was not enough, Prodi will face another problem.
Just before stepping down, Berlusconi’s government also approved a constitutional reform that, among other things, provides a logical complement to the new electoral system.
In particular, the new constitution strengthens the powers of the prime minister and enables him to call early elections in the event of a government crisis.
This provision would be an important weapon in Prodi’s hands.
But the left-wing parties that support him have already announced that they will block the constitutional reform, which they opposed for other reasons.
Hence, Prodi will almost certainly be deprived of his best tool for imposing discipline on his unruly coalition.
What is likely to happen when a large and heterogeneous coalition with barely a parliamentary majority must govern in an increasingly dire economic situation?
The answer is almost obvious: either the government will collapse, or it will seek to poach supporters from opposition parties.
Which of these two outcomes will materialize also depends on what happens inside Berlusconi’s camp, and that is less easy to predict.
But, either way, the bipolar political system to which Italians were getting accustomed is unlikely to survive unscathed.
The left-right divide will become easier for opportunistic politicians to cross, and perhaps a new centrist party will emerge.
As a result, Italy will soon return to its older tradition of short-lived governments and unstable coalitions.
Of course, Prodi could preserve a bipolar political system – and thus increase the longevity of his government – by either restoring a majoritarian electoral system or pressing ahead with other constitutional amendments designed to preserve government and coalition stability.
But forcing such changes on his coalition partners could be as difficult for Prodi as tackling Italy’s daunting economic problems.
No Country for Young Men (and Women)
MILAN – Over the last 20 years, roughly a half-million Italians aged 18 to 39 have moved abroad, especially to more economically dynamic European Union countries such as Germany, France, and the United Kingdom.
And those are just the official figures; the actual numbers are probably much higher, possibly more than double.
Why are young Italians so eager to leave?
It is not for lack of political representation.
Since 2013, the share of Italy’s parliament that is under 40 has increased from 7% to 13%.