Complete eradication is in reach, but is still proving elusive, as small outbreaks have plagued one country or another in recent years.
In some cases, such as Northern Nigeria, social resistance to the vaccine has blocked adequate coverage of the population.
Pockets of polio transmission also persist in India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan.
In a few other countries, the disease has been sporadically reintroduced by travelers from regions where polio has not yet been eliminated.
And, in rare cases, the vaccine itself has failed and led to infection.
Still, despite the difficulties of rooting out the very last cases, the progress made against polio has been historic.
More importantly, Rotary’s leadership on polio offers a more general lesson in the fight against extreme poverty, hunger, and disease.
Even when politicians don’t lead, it is still possible for committed individuals and voluntary organizations to change the world.
The key is to link a bold idea with a practical and powerful technology, and then to push the idea and technology forward through mass citizen action.
These same lessons can be applied to the Millennium Development Goals (MDG’s), the targets for fighting poverty, disease, and hunger that the world’s governments adopted in 2000.
The MDG’s are bold but achievable.
For example, they call for reducing by 2015 the proportion of the world’s population that was chronically under-nourished in 1990, and for cutting the child mortality rate by three quarters.
The MDG’s also address the scourges of maternal death in childbirth, lack of access to safe drinking water, and killer diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis, and AIDS.
Just as with polio, the fight against hunger, disease, and lack of access to safe water and sanitation can be carried forward with practical and powerful technologies.
Indeed, these technologies are so powerful that they can enable families currently trapped in poverty to escape it once and for all.
Consider hunger in Africa.
Most of Africa’s farmers, working tiny plots, do not produce enough food to feed their families, much less to earn an income.
The root of the problem is that Africa’s farmers are too poor to obtain the basic modern inputs—including high-yield seed varieties, fertilizers, and small-scale water management systems—that could enable them to double or triple their output of food and cash crops.
The solution is therefore not much more complicated than a polio vaccine.
If organizations like Rotary International can help African farmers to get a 50 kilogram bag of appropriate fertilizer and a 10 kilogram tin of improved seeds, the rise in farm output could be enough to relieve extreme hunger and help farm households begin to earn some income.
Such practical approaches can solve many of the key problems of extreme poverty.
Consider, similarly, the death and illness caused by malaria, which can be reduced very sharply through the use of mosquito nets for beds and anti-malaria medicines.
An anti-malaria bed net costs just $5, lasts five years, and can accommodate two children.
Thus, for just $0.50 per year, each child can be protected by a bed net.
And a $1 medical treatment can cure malaria if the child gets infected despite the bed net.
Yet bed nets and anti-malaria medicines do not reach the people who need them, because the people who need them are too poor.
Fortunately, the American Red Cross and other organizations have been following the Rotary model, using private donations and private volunteers to fill the gap left by our political leaders.
Red Cross chapters across Africa, in partnership with other organizations, are now distributing bed nets free of charge to impoverished families, in the same way that Rotary has been distributing polio vaccines.
The time has arrived for a massive effort by voluntary organizations to take up the MDG’s through private action.
We need not wait for the politicians.
In a short period of time, the world’s citizens can make deep inroads in the fight against disease, hunger, and poverty.
Then the politicians will follow.
The key is practicality, boldness, and, most importantly, a commitment by those who are better off to volunteer their time and money to bring practical help–in the form of high-yield seeds, fertilizers, medicines, bed nets, drinking wells, and materials to build school rooms and clinics—to the world’s poorest people.
Kembalinya Penindasan
BERLIN – Pemerintah di banyak negara melakukan aksi-aksi kejam untuk menekan organisasi masyarakat sipil, mulai dari undang-undang yang bersifat membatasi dan hambatan-hambatan birokratis hingga fitnah, sensor, dan penindasan terbuka yang dilakukan badan intelijen atau kepolisian.
Apapun tujuannya, pemerintah berusaha keras untuk mengintervensi pekerjaan aktivis politik, sosial, dan lingkungan hidup, bahkan sebegitu gigihnya derajat intervensi ini sebanding dengan masa sebelum komunisme runtuh di Eropa 250 tahun yang lalu.
Tentu saja pemerintah menggunakan berbagai alasan, isu keamanan misalnya terkait dengan terorisme sekarang menjadi alasan utama untuk membenarkan pengekangan terhadap LSM dan organisasi kemasyarakatan lainnya.
Namun pada kenyataannya, risiko-risiko keamanan – walaupun mungkin benar – tidak dapat dijadikan alasan atas kecurigaan absolut yang dimiliki pemerintah dan digunakan sebagai dalih untuk membungkam atau melarang organisasi independen.
Tren yang mengkhawatirkan ini nampaknya bukan fenomena sesaat saja tapi sebuah tanda terjadinya perubahan fundamental dalam geopolitik internasional.
Di antara perubahan-perubahan ini yang terpenting adalah semakin besarnya penekanan pada “kedaulatan” di kalangan negara-negara emerging economy, seperti Mesir dan Thailand.
Benar bahwa sebagai bagian dari hasrat melindungi kedaulatan negara, pemerintah di negara-negara berkembang dan emerging kini memperlakukan pemberian dana dari negara-negara kaya, misalnya untuk proses demokratisasi, dengan kecurigaan lebih besar dibandingkan pada tahun 1990-an.
Anggapan bahwa bantuan kepada LSM lokal adalah campur tangan asing terhadap urusan dalam negeri, banyak pemerintah di negara-negara selatan (global south) yang ingin mempertahankan atau mengembalikan kendali penuh atas aliran dana asing – terutama jika dana atau bantuan tersebut diperuntukkan bagi aktor masyarakat sipil yang dinilai loyalitasnya terbagi, oleh karena koneksi-koneksi internasional di antara mereka.
Sebagai akibatnya, aliran dana dan berjejaring antara LSM dan yayasan lokal dan asing serta donor eksternal lainnya semakin diawasi secara ketat oleh pemerintah.
Undang-undang yang membatasi atau melarang penyaluran dana kepada LSM oleh sumber-sumber eksternal adalah salah satu instrumen utama yang digunakan pemerintah untuk memonitor atau menghambat aktivitas kelompok-kelompok tersebut.
Undang-undang semacam itu kini diterapkan atau tengah dirumuskan di 50 negara di seluruh dunia.
Di Rusia, contohnya, 12 LSM asing dimasukkan ke dalam daftar hitam (blacklist) bulan Juli lalu dan diancam akan dibubarkan.
Karena kerja sama dengan lembaga asing berpotensi melarang hukum, organisasi massa di Rusia kehilangan akses yang merupakan jantung bagi keuangan mereka.
Di Israel, setelah perdebatan sengit, Knesset (parlemen Israel) mengundangkan sebuah peraturan di awal Februari yang memuat ketentuan bagi LSM untuk mengungkapkan sumber dana apabila menerima lebih dari setengah anggaran dari lembaga publik asing.
Pemerintah juga memperketat gerakan-gerakan sosial populer.
Selama beberapa tahun terakhir, unjuk rasa di tingkat lokal – aksi penolakan terhadap kondisi kerja yang buruk hingga pembalakan liar, perambahan lahan, dan proyek-proyek infrastruktur yang merusak lingkungan hidup atau situasi sosial – semakin meluas.
Dengan adanya teknologi digital yang memberikan akses bagi aktivis setempat kepada jejaring politik dan pengamat internasional yang luas, pemerintah semakin merasa tertekan untuk memenuhi tuntutan para demonstran.
Akan tetapi, alih-alih mengangguk pada tekanan populer, kaum elite politik dan ekonomi justru umumnya memilih untuk melarang aksi tersebut.
Selain itu, mereka menerapkan undang-undang tentang media yang represif yang setara dengan pengendalian negara atas internet, sebuah tindakan yang mereka klaim sebagai keharusan untuk menjaga stabilitas, memberantas terorisme, atau membela kedaulatan negara dari campur tangan Barat.
Kritik keras terhadap aksi protes yang populer ini bukan hanya ranah di rezim-rezim otokratik.
Bahkan pemerintah di negara-negara demokratis – seperti Australia, Kanada, dan India – beralih pada klaim bahwa unjuk rasa dikontrol secara eksternal untuk mendiskreditkan perlawanan lokal terhadap misalnya pipa penyalur dalam industri minyak atau tambang batubara yang seharusnya menghasilkan profit.
Pada contoh-contoh ini, semua tujuannya sama yaitu mempertahankan kekuasaan politik dan/atau menjaga kepentingan ekonomi dari elite teratas.
Sebetulnya penindasan atau pengekangan yang dilakukan pihak penguasa terhadap orang-orang yang memperjuangkan hak asasi manusia, kesetaraan gender, supremasi hukum, hak-hak LGBTI, dan kebijakan-kebijakan ekonomi yang lebih berorientasi sosial dan ekologis bukan hal baru.
Aktor masyarakat sipil bisa dan harus membuat pemerintah di negaranya merasa tidak nyaman.
Mereka berperan sebagai anjing penjaga (watchdog) kebijakan publik, menarik perhatian pada pembangunan yang tidak layak, memelopori dan memfokuskan debat publik, dan menawarkan opsi-opsi politik dan sosial.
LSM terus dilibatkan dalam proses-proses kebijakan multilateral seperti membantu pelaksanaan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan PBB (SDGs) atau menjamin keluaran perjanjian Paris tentang perubahan iklim.
Isu mengenai pembatasan dan penutupan ruang bagi organisasi massa harus dimasukkan ke dalam agenda parlemen nasional, lembaga multilateral, dan proses perundingan internasional.
Kebebasan berpendapat, berserikat, dan berkumpul adalah inti dari demokrasi.
Segala bentuk tindakan untuk mengurangi kebebasan tersebut harus dianggap tantangan bagi seluruh pemerintahan yang demokratis dan kendala bagi kerja sama internasional, sehingga harus dihentikan.
Civil Society Unbound
MOSCOW – The challenges facing civil-society organizations are greater in Russia than in many parts of the world, but the challenges facing civil society itself are similar everywhere.
Indeed, around the world there is a gap between civil-society organizations and the societies they profess to serve.
Civil-society organizations do not gain power through elections (legitimate or otherwise), but through reaching the broader world.
In short, their goal is to build civil society itself. 
They are most successful when people behave as part of civil society without necessarily being “civil-society” professionals.
That is, they will do such things as take care of their own health, engage in public discussions or blog about safety conditions in their community, rate school performance, organize weekly runs for dog owners, care for their local forests or rivers- as part of their lives, not as part of their jobs.
One area of concern for civil society nowadays is the press and new media.
In many places today information is flowing more than ever, but mass media are under both political and financial pressure. 
Most people think of a free press as a way to keep track of what governments are doing – and so it is.
That is why the press as a whole, and journalists in particular, are so frequently targeted by the authorities.
When media outlets aren’t owned – and tamed – by the authorities or people close to them, they still face censorship, intimidation, tax audits, and occasionally assassination of their journalists and editors.
In Russia in particular, the situation is mixed.
The government owns or controls most of the mass media – the major newspapers and television stations – but there is an abundance of mostly marginalized publications and radio stations (to say nothing of the Internet) that retain a remarkable degree of independence.
They are not directly censored, but they operate under the chilling knowledge that they can be shut down on vague charges at any moment.
And, of course, most of them are struggling to survive financially.
Yet there’s more to journalism than keeping an eye on the government.
Journalism’s other task is to reflect a society back to itself – to spread an accurate picture of its current situation, to share information about the activities of private citizens and businesses as they build civil society, and to encourage citizens to become active in improving their own lives and developing their communities.
Consider health care.
As far as I’m concerned, the ultimate goal should be not so much a better health care system, but a population so healthy that it hardly needs health care.
But we can start with what exists, and by so doing create demand for the rest.
In the United States, people are already rating their own doctors at sites such as RateMDs.com and vitals.com; third-party doctor and hospital ratings are available at HealthGrades.com.
Civil-society groups don’t often run hospitals directly, but they can make their performance more transparent.
So there are plans afoot to develop and distribute tools to analyze information, discover correlations (data-mining), and display the results as graphs and charts.
But, again, health really begins at home, so the real victory – and one where such civil-society cooperation may have a more immediate impact – is to give people better data about themselves and what they should be doing for their own health.
That includes everything from nutritional information and baby care, to (ultimately) records of each person’s own health and treatments, and it starts with using new media to reach people where they live, with content that’s relevant.  In the Soviet Union, they used to call this “sanitary propaganda,” but it was widely disregarded.
One Russian friend told me, “Whenever we would read an article about the health dangers of butter, we would immediately run out and buy as much butter as we could find, because we knew it meant there would be a butter shortage.”
Today, that type of information is called “healthy lifestyle promotion.”
We are also working on a project along these lines, reaching out to target populations with two-way new media such as the Internet and mobile phones, rather than harangues in newspapers and TV.
Imagine a program where pregnant women could sign up by cell phone for weekly reminders and updates, and to answer questions such as, “Is the baby kicking?”
If not, she could be referred to a local clinic.
When I made those same points in a wrap-up to the Civil Society Summit as a whole, I was interrupted by none other than US president Barack Obama, who was in Moscow for his summit with President Dmitry Medvedev but also took the time to listen our gathering of civil-society organizations.
Obama apologized for arriving late, and added: “That’s why we have civil society.
You just can’t rely on politicians!”
Clarity about Austerity
MILAN – I have just had the privilege of speaking at the main annual conference of Germany’s Economic Council, the economic and business arm of the Christian Democratic Union, the current governing party.
Chancellor Angela Merkel and Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble were among the other speakers.
It was an interesting event – and, more important, an encouraging one.
It seemed clear that Germany (or at least this rather large gathering of government, business, and labor leaders) remains committed to the euro and to deeper European integration, and recognizes that success will require Europe-wide burden-sharing to overcome the ongoing eurozone crisis.
The reforms in Italy and Spain are rightly reviewed as crucial, and there appears to be a deep understanding (based on Germany’s own experience in the decade and a half following reunification) that restoring competitiveness, employment, and growth takes time.
Greece has no good options, but a serious contagion risk remains to be contained in order to prevent derailment of the fiscal and growth-oriented reforms in Italy and Spain.
In the face of high systemic risk, private capital is leaving banks and the sovereign-debt markets, causing governments’ borrowing costs to rise and bank capitalization to fall.
This in turn threatens the functioning of the financial system and the effectiveness of the reform programs.
Thus, the central European Union institutions, along with the International Monetary Fund, have an important role to play in stabilization and the transition to sustainable growth.
Their efforts are needed to bridge the gap created by the exodus of private capital, thereby enabling the reform programs to be completed and begin to take effect.
The IMF’s role reflects the huge stake that the rest of the world – advanced and developing countries alike – has in Europe’s recovery: it is a high-return investment.
All of this seemed to me to be well understood among German politicians and business leaders.
Moreover, this kind of support is and should be conditional on the extent of the reforms carried out in Italy and Spain, the eurozone’s third- and fourth-largest economies, respectively.
Labor-market liberalization in pursuit of competitiveness and growth is crucial – and remains to be implemented.
Buying time for reform to work requires socialization of short-term risk.
There is no other way to keep bond yields under control and banks functioning, and there is no ironclad guarantee that the reform programs needed to do the job will be approved.
Eurobonds, viable in the longer term, are thus premature, because they imply a relaxation of conditionality, thereby weakening incentives to implement reforms.
But if it all works, sharing risk now will not be expensive in the end. It might even yield a positive return.
What, then, of the much-discussed conflict between austerity and growth?
I believe that it is based on a fairly serious misunderstanding.
For Germans, austerity, in the form of sustained wage and income restraint, was an important part of the growth-oriented reforms that their country completed in 2006.
Much time and effort was devoted to ensuring that the considerable burden of restoring flexibility, productivity, and competitiveness was shared equitably across the population.
But, on the receiving end of the message in southern Europe (and across the Atlantic), “austerity” is interpreted largely in fiscal terms – as an excessively rapid and potentially growth-destroying drive to cut deficits faster than the economy can structurally adjust and fill the gap in aggregate demand.
In other words, harsh austerity is being viewed largely through a Keynesian lens.
Finding the right balance between excessively rapid and dangerously slow deficit reduction is important, and not all that easy.
But that is just one component of rebalancing.
Growth is essential to bringing down public debt/GDP ratios, and thus is a key part of fiscal stabilization.
And it is true that the benefits of deficit reduction, if achieved too fast, will be more than offset by the negative effect on growth.
At the same time, to restart an economy’s growth and employment engines, other measures are needed, and vary somewhat across countries, owing to different initial conditions.
But they generally include removing rigidities and other barriers to competition in labor, product, and service markets; investment in skills, human capital, and the technology base of the economy; and rebuilding safety nets in ways that promote and support, rather than impede, structural adjustment.
These reforms require the sacrifice of certain kinds of protections, as well as of income and consumption growth.
The benefits come in the form of sustainable patterns of growth and employment in the future.
Discipline and austerity thus entail inter-temporal and intergenerational choices about the price to be paid now – and how fairly that burden is to be borne – for greater economic opportunity and social stability in the future.
After all, restoring stability and growth is only partly about reviving short-term aggregate demand.
It is also about structural reform and rebalancing, which comes at a cost.
Achieving a sustainable pattern of growth requires choices that affect not just the level of aggregate demand, but also its composition – for example, investment versus consumption.
Whether one calls this austerity or something else is a matter of semantics.
But the confusion that has resulted is anything but harmless.
On the contrary, it has become a major impediment to a common understanding of current challenges, and thus to achieving a broad consensus on the right path forward – one with well-defined and differentiated responsibilities – in confronting them.
Clarity about Diamonds
PRINCETON – Diamonds have an image of purity and light. They are given as a pledge of love and worn as a symbol of commitment.
Yet diamonds have led to gruesome murders, as well as widespread rapes and amputations.
Charles Taylor, a former president of Liberia currently facing war crimes charges at a special court in The Hague, is alleged to have used diamonds to fund rebels in Sierra Leone’s civil war.  The case against Taylor represents only one of several examples in which diamonds have facilitated widespread human rights violations.
When diamonds’ role in fueling violent conflict in Africa gained worldwide attention, the diamond industry established the Kimberley Process in order to keep “blood diamonds” out of international trade.
The initiative has met with some success, although it has not completely halted trade in diamonds from conflict-torn countries like the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Recently, however, concern has been expressed – from within the diamond trade – that the scope of the Kimberley Process is too limited, and that consumers have thus been lulled into believing that there are no longer any ethical problems with diamonds. That is far from the truth.
The problem came to a head this year when the Kimberley Process began to certify diamonds from Marange, in Zimbabwe.
The Marange diamond field, discovered in 2006, is one of the richest ever found.
According to Diamonds and Clubs, a recent report from Partnership Africa Canada, soldiers have press-ganged peasant farmers into working in mining syndicates at Marange.
The soldiers then take half the proceeds.
There have also been extensive beatings and arbitrary detentions.
When Farai Maguwu, a Zimbabwean human rights activist, disseminated information about the abuses, he was arrested (he has since been released).
Zimbabwean authorities claim that the violent human rights abuses have stopped, but the ethical problem with Marange diamonds goes much deeper.
Soon after the field was discovered, the Zimbabwean military took control of the area.
According to the Zimbabwean finance minister, Tendai Biti, four years after the military took over the diamond fields, the national treasury has received not one penny of royalties from the sale of Marange diamonds.
Zimbabwe’s military and political elite has appropriated the diamond field’s immense wealth for itself, with no benefits for the millions of desperately poor Zimbabweans who need the kind of services that the country has the resources to provide.
This is not, of course, the first time that the discovery of resources in an undeveloped country has led to riches for a few rather than greater prosperity for all.
Teodoro Obiang, the dictator of tiny, oil-rich Equatorial Guinea, has an official salary of $60,000, but owns six private jets and a $35 million house in Malibu, as well as other houses in Maryland and Capetown and a fleet of Lamborghinis, Ferraris, and Bentleys.
Most of the people over whom Obiang rules live in extreme poverty, with an average life expectancy of 49 years and an infant mortality rate of 87 per 1,000 live births (in other words, more than one child in twelve dies before its first birthday).
Nigeria and Angola are other glaring examples of countries that have failed to use their oil wealth for the benefit of their people.
Paradoxically, resource-rich developing countries are often worse off than comparable countries that lack those resources.
One reason for this is that large resource endowments provide a huge financial incentive for attempts to overthrow the government and seize power.
Rebels know that if they succeed, they will gain immense personal wealth, be able to reward those who backed their coup, and have enough arms to keep themselves in power, no matter how badly they rule.
Unless, of course, some of those whom they arm are themselves tempted by the prospect of controlling all that wealth.
Thus, the resources that should benefit developing countries instead become a curse that brings corruption, coups, and civil wars.
If we use goods made from raw materials that are obtained from a poor country without the proceeds being used to benefit the people of that country, we become complicit in a particularly iniquitous form of grand larceny.
It is therefore encouraging that concerns about Zimbabwean diamonds are being raised within the diamond trade itself.
The Rapaport Group, an international network of companies providing services to the diamond industry, refuses to list Marange diamonds on its diamond-trading platform, RapNet.
Martin Rapaport, chairman of the group, has called for free access to the diamond fields by non-governmental organizations and industry representatives to monitor the human rights situation.
More significantly, in a speech in Mumbai earlier this year, he laid out requirements for legitimizing Marange diamonds that included some assurance that “the revenues from the diamond sales are distributed legally and in a way that reasonably and fairly benefits the people of Zimbabwe.”
There is a need for higher standards than those set by the Kimberley Process.
If consumers insist on buying only ethical diamonds, traders might be able to push the demand back to their sources.
And, if the diamond industry can put itself on an ethical footing, it might send a message to other industries that deal in resources that are effectively being stolen from some of the world’s poorest people.
The Interest-Rate Enigma
BASEL – Today, the United States government can borrow for ten years at a fixed rate of around 2.5%.
Adjusted for expected inflation, this translates into a real borrowing cost of under 0.5%.
A year ago, real rates were actually negative.
And, with low interest rates dominating the developed world, many worry that an era of secular stagnation has begun.
How problematic low real rates are depends on the reason for their decline.
The prevailing view is that the downward trend largely reflects a fall in equilibrium or “natural” interest rates, driven by changes in saving and investment fundamentals.
In other words, a higher propensity to save in emerging economies, together with investors’ growing preference for safe assets, has increased the supply of saving worldwide, even as weak growth prospects and heightened uncertainty in advanced economies have depressed investment demand.
This perceived decline in “natural” interest rates is viewed as a key obstacle to economic recovery, because it impedes monetary policy’s capacity to provide sufficient stimulus by pushing real rates below the equilibrium level, owing to the zero lower bound on nominal rates.
How to stem the decline in equilibrium rates has thus become the subject of lively debate.
Conspicuously absent from the debate, however, is the role of financial factors in explaining the trend decline in real rates.
After all, interest rates are not determined by some invisible natural force; they are set by people.
Central banks pin down the short end of the yield curve, while financial-market participants price longer-dated yields based on how they expect monetary policy to respond to future inflation and growth, taking into account associated risks.
Observed real interest rates are measured by deducting expected inflation from these nominal rates.
Thus, at any given point in time, interest rates reflect the interplay between the central bank’s reaction function and private-sector beliefs.
By identifying the evolution of real interest rates with saving and investment fundamentals, the implicit assumption is that the central bank and financial markets can roughly track the evolution of the equilibrium real rate over time.
But this is by no means straightforward.
For central banks, measuring the equilibrium interest rate – an abstract concept that cannot be observed – is a formidable challenge.
To steer rates in the right direction, central banks typically rely on estimates of unobserved variables, including the equilibrium real rate itself, potential output, and trend unemployment.
These estimates are highly uncertain, strongly model-dependent, and subject to large revisions.
Moreover, central banks’ policy frameworks may be incomplete.
By focusing largely on short-term inflation and output stabilization, monetary policy may not pay sufficient attention to financial developments.
Given that the financial cycle is much more drawn out than the business cycle, typical policy horizons may not allow the authorities to account adequately for the impact of their decisions on future economic outcomes.
The fact that financial booms and busts can occur amid relatively stable inflation does not help.
With financial-market participants as much in the dark as central banks, things can go badly wrong.
And so they have.
Over the last three decades, several credit-induced boom-bust episodes have caused major, sustained damage to the global economy.
It is difficult to square this reality with the view that interest rates, which set the price of leverage, have been on an equilibrium path all along.
The focus on fundamental saving and investment determinants of interest rates is entirely logical from the perspective of mainstream macroeconomic models, which assume that money and finance are irrelevant (“neutral”) for the output path in the long run.
But successive crises have shown that finance can have long-lasting effects.
Financial factors, especially leverage, not only can amplify cyclical fluctuations; they can also propel the economy away from a sustainable growth path.
Indeed, a growing body of evidence shows that output is permanently lower in the wake of a financial crisis.
All of this suggests that the trend decline in real interest rates does not just passively mirror changes in underlying macroeconomic fundamentals.
On the contrary, it also helps drive them.
Low interest rates can sow the seeds of financial booms and busts.
Policies that do not lean against the booms but ease aggressively and persistently during busts induce a downward bias in interest rates over time, and an upward bias in debt levels.
This creates something akin to a debt trap, in which it is difficult to raise rates without damaging the economy.
The accumulation of debt and the distortions in production and investment patterns induced by persistently low interest rates hinder the return of those rates to more normal levels.
Low rates thus become self-reinforcing.
This alternative perspective highlights the trade-off inherent in ultra-accommodative monetary policy.
Monetary policy cannot overcome structural impediments to growth.
But the actions that central banks take today can affect real macroeconomic developments in the long term, primarily through their impact on the financial cycle.
These medium- to long-term side effects need to be weighed carefully against the benefits of short-term stimulus.
While low interest rates may be a natural response to perceptions of a chronic demand shortfall, such perceptions are not always correct – and can be very costly over time.
Laying the foundations of a sustained recovery requires measures to strengthen public- and private-sector balance sheets, together with structural reforms aimed at raising productivity and improving growth potential.
More stimulus may boost output in the short run, but it can also exacerbate the problem, thus compelling even larger dosages over time.
An unhealthy dependence on painkillers can be avoided, but only if we recognize the risk in time.
Toward a Green New Deal
LONDON – The global agreement reached in Paris last week is actually the third climate agreement reached in the past month.
The first happened at the end of November, when a group of billionaires led by Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg, and Jeff Bezos announced the creation of a $20 billion fund to back clean-energy research.
On the same day, a group of 20 countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, India, China, and Brazil, agreed to double their investment in green energy, to a total of $20 billion a year.
Of the two pre-Paris announcements, it was that of the Breakthrough Energy Coalition (BEC) – Gates and his fellow entrepreneurs – that grabbed most of the headlines.
This is not surprising, given the strong association in the popular imagination between innovation and the private sector.
If a technological breakthrough is needed in the fight against climate change, whom should we expect to provide it, if not the wizards of Silicon Valley and other hubs of free-market innovation?
Just as in previous technological revolutions, rapid advances in clean energy will require the intervention of a courageous, entrepreneurial state, providing patient, long-term finance that shifts the private sector’s incentives.
Governments must make bold policy choices that not only level the playing field, but also tilt it toward environmental sustainability.
Then – and only then – will private financing follow.
So far, however, austerity has prevented sufficient public financing.
One hopes that the Paris agreement changes that.
As with the information technology revolution, advances in clean energy will require the involvement of both the public and the private sector.
Because we do not yet know which innovations will be the most important in decarbonizing the economy, investment must be allocated to a wide array of choices.
Long-term, patient finance must also be available to help companies minimize uncertainty and bridge the so-called “Valley of Death” between basic research and commercialization.
The BEC’s argument – that the “new model will be a public-private partnership between governments, research institutions, and investors” – shines a welcome spotlight on the relationship.
Unfortunately, however, aside from Gates and his colleagues, there are few signs that the private sector can be counted on to lead the way.
The energy sector has become over-financialized; it is spending more on share buybacks than on research and development in low-carbon innovation.
The energy giants ExxonMobil and General Electric are the first and tenth largest corporate buyers of their own shares.
Meanwhile, according to the International Energy Agency, just 16% of investment in the US energy sector was spent on renewable or nuclear energy.
Left to their own devices, oil companies seem to prefer extracting hydrocarbons from the deepest confines of the earth to channeling their profits into clean-energy alternatives.
Meanwhile, government R&D budgets have been declining in recent years – a trend driven partly by under-appreciation of the state’s role in fostering innovation and growth, and more recently by austerity in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.
Tight budgets are straining the agencies that could be driving path-breaking innovation.
The US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) was a catalyst for the IT revolution.
By contrast, the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) has a 2015 budget of $280 million – barely a tenth of DARPA’s.
In 1981, energy accounted for 11% of the total US public R&D budget.
Today, it accounts for just 4%.
Meanwhile, problematic demand-side policies are also in crisis, impeding the deployment of existing renewable-energy technologies.
The main public-sector bodies playing a leading role in promoting the diffusion of green-energy technologies are state development banks.
Indeed, Germany’s KfW, the China Development Bank, the European Investment Bank, and Brazil’s BNDES are four of the top ten investors in renewable energy, amounting to 15% of total asset finance.
The public sector can – and should – do much more.
For example, subsidies received by energy corporations could be made conditional on a greater percentage of profits being invested in low-carbon innovations.
After all, it was this kind of condition – imposed on the US telephone company AT&T in the early twentieth century, in exchange for being allowed to retain its monopoly – that led to the creation of Bell Labs, a crucial incubator of innovation.
Similarly, while charitable donations by billionaires certainly should be welcomed, companies should also be made to pay a reasonable amount of taxes.
After all, as the BEC’s manifesto points out, “current governmental funding levels for clean energy are simply insufficient to meet the challenges before us.”
And yet, in the UK, for example, Facebook paid just £4,327 in tax in 2014, far less than many individual taxpayers.
The willingness of Gates and other business leaders to commit themselves and their money to the promotion of clean energy is admirable.
The Paris deal is also good news.
But they are not enough.
If the low-carbon revolution is to be achieved, we will need both the public and private sectors to commit more fully to green innovation, from both the supply and demand sides.
New Politics for Clean Energy
NEW YORK – The diplomats have done their job, concluding the Paris climate agreement in December.
And political leaders gathered last week at the United Nations to sign the new accord.
But implementation is surely the tough part.
Governments need a new approach to an issue that is highly complex, long term, and global in scale.
At its core, the climate challenge is an energy challenge.
About 80% of the world’s primary energy comes from carbon-based sources: coal, oil, and gas.
When burned, they emit the carbon dioxide that causes global warming.
By 2070, we need a world economy that is nearly 100% carbon-free to prevent global warming from running dangerously out of control.
The Paris agreement recognizes these basic facts.
It calls on the world to cut greenhouse-gas emissions (especially CO2) to net-zero levels in the second half of the century.
To this end, governments are to prepare plans not only to the year 2030 (the so-called Nationally Determined Contributions, or NDCs), but also to mid-century (the so-called Low-Emission Development Strategies, or LEDS).
The world’s governments have never before attempted to remake a core sector of the world economy on a global scale with such an aggressive timeline.
The fossil-fuel energy system was created step by step over two centuries.
Now it must be comprehensively overhauled in just 50 years, and not in a few countries, but everywhere.
Governments will need new approaches to develop and implement their LEDS.
There are four reasons why politics as usual will not be sufficient.
First, the energy system is just that: a system of many interconnected parts and technologies.
Power plants, pipelines, ocean transport, transmission lines, dams, land use, rail, highways, buildings, vehicles, appliances, and much more must all fit together into a working whole.
Such a system cannot be overhauled through small incremental steps.
A deep overhaul requires system-wide re-engineering to ensure that all parts continue to work effectively together.
Second, there are still many large technological uncertainties in moving to a low-carbon energy system.
Should vehicles be decarbonized through battery-electric power, hydrogen fuel cells, or advanced biofuels?
Can coal-fired power plants be made safe through carbon capture and storage (CCS)?
Will nuclear energy be politically acceptable, safe, and low cost?
We must plan investments in research and development to resolve these uncertainties and improve our technological options.
Third, sensible solutions require international energy cooperation.
One key fact about low-carbon energy (just like fossil fuels) is that it is not generally located where it will ultimately be used.
Just as coal, oil, and gas must be transported long distances, so wind, solar, geothermal, and hydropower must be moved long distances through transmission lines and through synthetic liquid fuels made with wind and solar power.
Fourth, there are of course powerful vested interests in the fossil-fuel industry that are resisting change.
This is abundantly clear in the US, for example, where the Republican Party denies climate change for the sole reason that it is heavily funded by the US oil industry.
This is certainly a species of intellectual corruption, if not political corruption (it’s probably both).
The fact that the energy system involves so many complex interconnections leads to tremendous inertia.
Shifting to a low-carbon energy system will therefore require considerable planning, long lead times, dedicated financing, and coordinated action across many parts of the economy, including energy producers, distributors, and residential, commercial, and industrial consumers.
Policy measures such as a tax on carbon emissions can help to address some – but only some – challenges of the energy transition.
Here is another problem.
If governments plan only 10-15 years ahead, as is typical in energy policy, rather than 30-50 years, they will tend to make poor system-related choices.
For example, energy planners will move from coal to lower-carbon natural gas; but they will tend to underinvest in the much more decisive shift to renewable energy.
Similarly, they may opt to raise fuel standards for internal-combustion automobiles rather than to push the needed shift to electric vehicles.
In this sense, planning 30-50 years ahead is vital not only to make the correct long-run choices, but also to inform the correct short-term choices.
The UN’s Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project has shown how long-term plans can be designed and evaluated.
None of these challenges sits easily with elected politicians.
The decarbonization challenge requires consistent policies over 30-50 years, while politicians’ time horizon is perhaps a tenth of that.
Nor are politicians very comfortable with a problem that requires large-scale public and private financing, highly coordinated action across many parts of the economy, and decision-making in the face of ongoing technological uncertainties.
Small wonder, then, that most politicians have shied away from this challenge, and that far too little practical progress has been made since the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change was signed in 1992.
One key step, I believe, is to remove these issues from short-term electoral politics.
Countries should consider establishing politically independent energy agencies with high technical expertise.
Of course, key energy decisions (such as whether to deploy nuclear energy or to build a new transmission grid) will require deep public participation, but planning and implementation should be free of excessive partisan politics and lobbying.
Just as governments have successfully given their central banks some political independence, they should give their energy agencies enough leeway to enable them think and act for the long term.
At the next global climate meeting (COP22 in Marrakesh in November), Morocco’s government and my team at the UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network will join with other partners to co-host a “Low-Emissions Solutions Conference.”
This conference will bring together energy experts from UN member countries, businesses, and cities to work on highly practical approaches to deep decarbonization.
With the Paris climate agreement now in force, we must move urgently to effective implementation.
A Climate Apollo Program
LONDON – In 1961, when the United States was faced with the threat of falling behind the Soviet Union in the space race, President John F. Kennedy called for a program – eventually known as Project Apollo – to put a man on the moon before the end of the decade.
The program’s clearly articulated vision – and the resources and effort mustered in its service – ensured its success.
Just eight years after Kennedy’s announcement, astronaut Neil Armstrong pressed his footprint into the lunar dust.
As representatives from 196 countries prepare to gather in Paris at the end of the year to craft an agreement to tackle global warming, it is becoming clear that we need a similar project.
In early June, I joined David King, a former chief scientific adviser to the British government, former BP CEO John Browne, and several other co-authors in a call for a Global Apollo Program.
Until now, the diplomatic effort to prevent dangerous climate change has focused on coordinating national cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions.
But what is needed is more spending, not just more coordination.
The decade-long effort we propose would require the whole planet to work together to make a breakthrough in the fight against climate change.
It would seek to reduce the cost of electricity from sources that do not emit greenhouse gases below that of coal power by 2025.
In order to achieve this, countries joining the program would pledge to devote at least 0.02% of their GDP toward the effort.
David Attenborough, the British naturalist and broadcaster, has said of the proposal, “at last, we have an authoritative, practical, and comprehensive plan that could avert the catastrophe that is threatening our planet.”
Bjørn Lomborg, known for his skepticism toward traditional approaches to fighting climate change, has described this idea as “a much smarter approach and more likely to actually succeed.”
Indeed, the most frequently floated proposals leave much to be desired.
Many in Paris will argue in favor of putting a price on carbon, which most economists believe would channel consumption away from carbon-intensive fuels.
But there are doubts about whether such a policy would be political feasible.
John Watson, CEO of Chevron, recently rejected carbon pricing as unworkable.
“It’s not a policy that is going to be effective, because customers want affordable energy,” he said.
“They want low energy prices, not high energy prices.”
Similarly, national leaders in the developing world – where some three billion people do not have access to affordable energy – are under immense pressure to deliver standard-of-living improvements.
They are likely to shy from policies that raise the cost of energy.
But there are significant obstacles to the widespread use of solar energy and other sources of renewable electricity, including a desperate need for cheaper, more efficient means of energy storage and transmission.
Currently, only 2% of the world’s investment in research and development is allocated to clean energy; at this rate, solutions to these problems are unlikely to be found anytime soon.
The Global Apollo Program would double these investments and coordinate the effort to bridge the technological gaps, bringing forward the day when we could eliminate coal and other carbon-intensive fuels.
Following the recent G-7 summit in Germany, the leaders of the world’s largest economies issued a pledge to “work together and with other interested countries to raise the overall coordination and transparency of clean energy research, development, and demonstration, highlighting the importance of renewable energy and other low-carbon technologies.”
But an initiative like the Global Apollo program will succeed only if the world’s emerging powers, such as China and India, throw their weight behind it.
They will have a chance to do so at the G-20 summit in Turkey in November.
The 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris must produce an agreement to introduce a price on carbon worldwide.
But that approach will not work without a coordinated strategy to reduce the cost of carbon-free energy.
If countries sign up to the Global Apollo Program as part of the agreement in Paris, the meeting might just mark one giant leap for mankind in the fight against climate change.
Cleaning Up Economic Growth
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has promised that the G-8 meeting on July 6-8 at Gleneagles, Scotland, which he will chair, will focus on two of the most important and longstanding global problems—Third-World poverty and global warming.
For a long time, these two issues seemed to be at odds.
The developing world understandably does not want to sacrifice its growth for a global public good, especially when the United States, the richest country in the world, seems unwilling to sacrifice even a little of its luxurious life style.
Led by Papua New Guinea and Costa Rica, a group of developing countries, a new rainforest coalition has now come forward with an innovative proposal, not only offering to commit to greenhouse-gas limits, but also showing how this can be done in a way that will promote their development.
Developing countries have long provided a vital global public good: maintaining global environmental assets.
Their rainforests are a vast storehouse of biodiversity, and forests are major carbon sinks, reducing the level of CO2 in the atmosphere.
I served on the International Panel for Climate Change in the mid-1990’s, reviewing the scientific evidence concerning the magnitude of increases in greenhouse gasses and their economic and social consequences.
The PNG government would like to do the right thing, to maintain its natural capital for future generations.
But officials there believe that that they have currently no choice.
A huge mistake was made (for a variety of reasons) at Kyoto.
While countries can be compensated for planting forests, they cannot be compensated for avoiding deforestation.
Countries like PNG would thus be doubly better off if they cut down their ancient hardwood trees and replanted.
But this makes no sense economically or socially.
These countries should be given incentives to maintain their forests.
(There are, as always, technical issues to be resolved, concerning monitoring and measurement, but these can be overcome easily with modern technologies.)
At the very least, markets like ETS should credit emissions reductions that result from limiting deforestation.
Without such a program, unfortunately, developing countries have neither the means nor incentives to underwrite conservation.
There are some 2.7 billion people in over 60 developing countries that are home to the world’s tropical forests. Cutting down the hardwood forests – even when they presently receive just 5% of the final price in, say, New York – is the only way people can make ends meet.
Some have suggested waiting to address this issue until 2012, when a revised protocol is supposed to come into effect.
But, can we wait?
At currents rates of deforestation, the combined contributions to greenhouse gas concentrations from Brazil and Indonesia alone would offset nearly 80% of the emission reductions gained from the Kyoto protocol.
What is so impressive about the new rainforest initiative is that it comes from the developing countries themselves; it represents their creativity and social commitment. For the first time, developing countries seem willing to undertake the kinds of commitments that Europe, Japan, and the other advanced industrial countries (except the US) have made to avoid what could be a global disaster.
Costa Rica, for example, has already shown that a system of paying for the provision of environmental services (like maintaining natural forests) can work in ways that preserve the environment and boost the economy.
Compensating the developing countries for providing these environmental services would be one way of substantially increasing aid – and at the same time, providing these countries with the right market incentives.
From a global point of view, the best use of these resources is to maintain the forests, which is even possible with managed cutting.
This is an initiative around which all countries can and should rally. In a world divided – between rich countries and the poor, between those focusing on environmental protection and those concentrating on growth – this initiative can unite us all.
The G-8 leaders should heed the call.
A Bright Future for Clean Technology
MUNICH – Observers might be forgiven for thinking that so-called clean technology's moment in the sun has passed.
Over the last two years, many clean-tech equity indexes have performed poorly.
In Europe, solar power took a hit after the European Commission decided to phase out subsidies for renewable energy by 2017.
The installation of solar panels fell by nearly 60% in Germany in 2013, and by 70% in Italy.
Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, less than 30% of early-stage venture-capital-funded clean-tech deals were financed.
The truth is that we have been here before.
The convulsions in the clean-tech sector are simply symptoms of a cycle that characterizes emerging technologies: excitement, inflated expectations, and consolidation – ultimately followed by stability and the resumption of growth.
Indeed, underlying recent developments are signs of a much more significant transformation: clean tech is becoming commercially viable.
Confidence in the clean-tech sector's future is rooted in the need for sustainable solutions for a planet that is supporting an ever-wealthier population.
Over the next 20 years, the number of middle-class consumers is expected to rise to some three billion, from 1.8 billion today. Their new lifestyles will require resources, including energy.
This surge in demand will occur at a time when finding, developing, and extracting new sources of energy and resources will be increasingly challenging and expensive.
Over the last 12 years, for example, the average real construction cost of an oil well has doubled, and in recent years new mining discoveries have been few, despite the industry's best (and often expensive) efforts.
But clean-energy costs are trending in the opposite direction, ripening these solutions at a time when need – particularly in some of the world's largest developing cities – is becoming acute.
One pivotal question for the future of clean tech has been whether it needs regulatory support to thrive.
To be sure, the withdrawal of subsidies in Europe hit the sector hard.
But, even as Germany and Italy lost their first- and second-place rankings in terms of new solar-power installations, China and Japan took their place.
Globally, the solar-power industry has grown at an average annual rate of 57% since 2006.
Regulatory support has been effective in creating demand and allowing sources of renewable supply to reach scale.
But such support has not always been economically efficient.
One lesson from the German experience is that sudden changes in regulation can create peaks and valleys in demand that are not helpful to an industry that is still emerging.
The biggest risk in many markets is not that subsidies and other supports will be withdrawn, but that the regulatory structure will not adapt as the sector develops.
As industries mature, the case for policy support weakens.
And, indeed, solar power increasingly appears to be able to survive without regulatory help.
A thriving global marketplace goes a long way toward leveling the playing field across all resource options.
During the last five years, dozens of solar manufacturing companies have failed, only to be replaced by stronger, more innovative, and more efficient players.
More than one-quarter of cumulative global solar photovoltaic capacity was installed just in the past year.
The International Energy Agency, which has been conservative regarding solar energy's prospects, now expects it to be the world's largest power source by 2050.
Nonetheless, concerns about the future of clean tech have made new projects more difficult to finance.
But innovative new schemes, such as clean-tech bonds and third-party financing, are changing the picture.
Third-party ownership, in which a company installs and maintains solar panels, in exchange for either a set monthly rate or a fixed price per unit of power, has driven up adoption rates in California, financing more than two-thirds of new installations in 2012 and 2013.
Similarly, new partnerships with large industry incumbents – such as the tie-up between Daimler and Tesla and the controlling stake that Total took in SunPower – are reducing the cost of finance for smaller firms.
Meanwhile, clean-tech companies are becoming more sophisticated and creative.
An entire new industry has been created around the use of information technology to reduce energy consumption.
Some companies, such as C3 Energy, offer electric utilities software that can analyze their electrical networks to improve grid operations and asset utilization, thereby increasing profits.
Smart-grid hardware has been deployed widely in the past decade, and as companies figure out how to use big data and analytic tools, it will become much more important.
Google's acquisition of Nest Labs for $3.2 billion is a good example of the value that companies are placing on this kind of data.
All of this adds up to an industry that Bloomberg calculates reached $310 billion in investment last year.
This is not a “niche" segment, but an asset-intensive industry on its way to commoditization.
Clean tech is maturing and adopting proven management practices in operations, marketing, sales, and distribution.
Increasingly, the industry is implementing approaches that have ensured success in other sectors, such as reducing procurement costs and deploying lean principles in manufacturing.
As clean-tech businesses continue to scale up, there will be additional opportunities to improve.
The shakeout in the clean-tech industry has been tough; but it has also been typical of emerging technologies, and, by weeding out the weaker players, it has made the sector more robust.
This is a global segment meeting a growing global need.
There is little room for doubt that the clean-tech industry can expect plenty of sunny days ahead.
Clearinghouse Over-Confidence
CAMBRIDGE – To reduce the chance that a financial meltdown like that of 2007-2008 will recur, regulators are now seeking to buttress institutions for the longer-run – at least when they can turn their attention from immediate crises like those of Greece’s debt, America’s ceiling on governmental borrowing, and the potential eurozone contagion from sovereign debt to bank debt.
Central to their effort has been to bolster clearinghouses for derivatives – instruments that exacerbated the implosion at AIG and others in the last financial crisis.
But a clearinghouse is no panacea, and its limits, although easy to miss, are far-reaching.
When a company seeks to protect itself from currency fluctuation, it can reduce its exposure to the target currency with a derivative (for example, it promises to pay its trading partner if the euro rises, but gets paid if it falls).
Although the company using the derivative reduces its exposure to the risk of a failing euro, the derivative comes packaged with a new risk – counterparty risk.
The company risks that if its trading partner fails – as AIG, Bear Stearns, and Lehman did – it won’t be paid if the euro falls.
Worse, as we saw in the financial crisis, if many financial institutions have many such contracts, a rumor of insolvency can induce all of one institution’s derivative counterparties to demand collateral or payment simultaneously, triggering a run that resembles a classic bank run, which could then spread to other firms.
To reduce the risk of runs in derivatives markets, regulators around the world are poised to require that derivatives trades be carried out through clearinghouses or exchanges.
The clearinghouses will have many advantages, but not as many as regulators might think.
But, first, how does a clearinghouse work?
After the company needing currency-risk protection makes its euro-dollar trade with a bank, each of them turns its side of the trade over to the clearinghouse.
The resulting obligations between the company and bank become obligations to and from a middleman, the clearinghouse.
The clearinghouse protects itself by getting an up-front deposit from the bank (in case the bank fails in, say, 2015), and by monitoring the bank’s total “book” with the clearinghouse.
When the bank wins on a derivatives trade, the clearinghouse pays the bank; when the bank loses, it pays the clearinghouse.
When the bank has many trades on the clearinghouse’s books, the clearinghouse is fine if these trades net out to about zero; systemic risk, regulators insist, is thereby reduced, because the financial system needn’t worry about collecting the debts, one-by-one.
This is true, but only for as far as the netting process goes.
The clearinghouse also enhances transparency, because it can report its aggregate exposures to the regulator, who is better positioned to regulate a central clearinghouse than to regulate many opaque banks.
This, too, this should strengthen the financial system.
But risks – many of them systemic, and many of them big – remain.
Unfortunately, the clearinghouse structure obscures them.
Most obviously, as many trades move from the banks to the clearinghouse, the clearinghouse itself will become a systemically vital institution. It will be too big to fail.
Equally problematic is the fact that, while the clearinghouse and its participants can net wins and losses to reduce risk for those inside the clearinghouse, the clearinghouse does not assuredly eliminate the basic risk facing the entire financial system.
Often, it merely transfers that risk to creditors outside the clearinghouse.
Here’s why: Let’s imagine that a weak financial institution (say, Bank of America), has two separate contracts, one with AIG and one with Citibank.
BofA owes $100 million to each.
The contract with AIG is a derivatives contract, which goes through the clearinghouse; but the contract with Citibank is another kind of contract, maybe just a regular loan, and does not go through the clearinghouse.
BofA also has a contract with, say, Bear Stearns through the clearinghouse for $100 million, with Bear Stearns on the losing end.
Without a clearinghouse, BofA has a $100 million asset (the $100 million that Bear owes it) and owes $200 million.
Having only $100 million (if these obligations are its only assets and liabilities), BofA would have to pay AIG and Citibank $50 million each.
Each would suffer a $50 million loss.
If AIG is systemically vital, its inability to collect the full $100 million could cause it to fail.
This is where the clearinghouse protects AIG, whose winning contract with BofA nets out against Bear’s losing contract with BofA.
The clearinghouse here eliminates counterparty risk for these three, but only by transferring the risk to Citibank, which, instead of losing $50 million, ends up losing the full $100 million.
In this stripped-down example, AIG, Bear Stearns, and BofA – as well as their attorneys, lobbyists, and supportive policymakers – promote the clearinghouse on the grounds that it reduces risk for its participants.
And, as advertised, it does — but only for its participants.
Citibank, however, now loses $50 million more, because it can’t crack into the clearinghouse’s assets.
If that extra loss pushes a systemically vital Citibank over the precipice, the clearinghouse has not reduced systemic risk as advertised.
Whether the clearinghouse reduces systemic risk depends on the relative systemic importance of those inside and those outside the clearinghouse – AIG versus Citibank in this basic example – not on the clearinghouse’s capacity to reduce risk among its members.
In this example, if Citibank is precarious and is as systemically vital as AIG, the clearinghouse has obscured that it has saved AIG only by transferring risk from the clearinghouse to Citibank, which then fails.
Much recent regulatory activity has focused on enabling, enhancing, and requiring clearinghouses for these kinds of financing arrangements.
Yes, clearinghouses offer many benefits, including greater transparency, better pricing, and better regulatory focus, and we should try to make them viable.
But regulators around the world have overestimated their overall benefit.
Too much of what is justified as reducing systemic risk is really just offloading risk onto others.
How Climate Action Can Make America Great
SINGAPORE – Climate change is the single biggest challenge facing humankind.
Yet the next president of the United States – the world’s second-largest greenhouse-gas emitter and a critical actor in climate policy – does not believe it is happening, or at least that humans have a role in driving it.
If Donald Trump actually wants to “Make America Great Again,” as his campaign slogan declared, he will need to change his attitude and embrace the climate agenda.
So far, the situation does not look promising.
Despite a mountain of scientific data, Trump claims that there is no evidence that humans contribute to global warming.
He once even called climate change a “hoax,” invented by the Chinese to make US manufacturing less competitive (though he later walked back that accusation).
He has not, however, rethought his broader skepticism about human-driven climate change.
Reflecting this line of thinking, Trump has announced his intention to reverse carbon-emission limits for coal-fired power plants, step up fossil-fuel production, and roll back support for wind and solar power.
He has also pledged to pull the US out of the global climate-change agreement concluded last December in Paris.
Such a reversal would be catastrophic for global efforts to tackle climate change.
Just as US President George W. Bush’s refusal to sign the Kyoto Protocol on climate change in 2005 initiated a spiral of rising emissions, a decision by Trump not to fulfill America’s commitments under the Paris agreement could spur others to follow suit.
After all, many countries are already worried about the costs of meeting their national commitments, especially at a time of sluggish economic recovery.
And burning fossil fuels remains, in most economic activities, cheaper than using cleaner energy (when one does not account for the relevant environmental damage).
Of course, in the longer term, burning more fossil fuels will drive up health-care costs and impede worker productivity.
Then there are the economic and human costs of increasingly frequent and severe climate-related disasters – including floods, droughts, storms, and heat waves, all of which are already on the rise worldwide.
To be sure, Trump recently met with the former US vice president and vocal climate activist Al Gore.
Nonetheless, it seems unlikely that Trump will change his tune on climate change, not least because the cabinet members he has selected are largely singing the same song.
The good news is that he may not have to.
In fact, there are actions that Trump can take for other ends – from boosting the US economy to enhancing America’s global influence – that would also advance the climate agenda.
The first such action is to increase investment in research and development in climate-friendly sectors, such as energy efficiency and storage, renewable-energy systems, and safer and smaller cars.
Technological breakthroughs in these areas – which the US is particularly qualified to realize – would be great for business.
And building high-tech production and efficient energy sectors may be Trump’s best chance of fulfilling his campaign promise to create a large number of jobs for Americans.
As much as Trump might like to revive steel and coal in the so-called Rust Belt states that were crucial to his electoral victory, that is likely impossible (as is bringing back large numbers of manufacturing jobs from abroad).
Indeed, coal power is already on its way out in the US, as health and environmental (not just climate) concerns force plants to shut down.
Natural-gas production, meanwhile, is at an all-time high; its 33% share in power generation now exceeds that of coal.
Renewable-energy sources and nuclear power are also on the rise, a trend that is almost certain to continue.
To create a Rust Belt revival, Trump must capitalize on these trends, advancing a more innovative, energy-efficient approach, much like the one that is helping to support growth in the economies of California and New York.
Trump could reinforce progress in dynamic and profitable energy-efficient industries by entrenching energy efficiency in construction codes.
New buildings and other infrastructure should feature energy-efficient lighting (including better use of sunlight), heating, and air conditioning.
There are also huge payoffs from retrofitting existing buildings for more efficient energy use.
There is one more key reason why Trump, the climate-skeptic, might be convinced to sustain progress on climate action: preserving and enhancing America’s international influence.
Other prominent global leaders – including Chinese President Xi Jinping, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel – have expressed concern about the devastation caused by pollution and environmental degradation.
If the US repudiates its leadership role in this area, it risks considerable reputational damage.
Global climate leadership will require the US, first and foremost, to fulfill its Paris commitments.
It is vital that Trump upholds America’s Clean Power Plan, which establishes state-by-state targets for carbon-emissions reductions, with the goal of lowering national emissions from electricity generation by one-third relative to their 2005 level by 2030.
The extension of tax credits for renewable-energy producers and consumers would go a long way toward advancing this goal.
But even achieving the Paris agreement’s goals will not be enough to avert a catastrophic rise in global temperature.
We must overshoot our targets by advancing clean energy, clean transport, and clean industry.
For that, American know-how and savvy will be indispensable.
Trump already wants to invest in energy and infrastructure.
If he does so in a climate-friendly way, the US will reap enormous benefits – and so will the rest of the world.
If the mogul-turned-president does not recognize the threat that climate change poses, he should at least be able to recognize a tremendous business opportunity when he sees one.