In the meantime, infrastructure is crumbling even within the vital extractive industry, while manufacturing is internationally uncompetitive.
The Russian armaments industry has lost its strong position with India and China, once its two main customers. Despite the hype about nanotechnology and a “Russian Silicon Valley” at Skolkovo, spending on Rampamp;D is a mere one-fifteenth of the US level, and one-quarter of China’s.
As a proportion of GDP, it has been halved since the early 1990’s, and is now just 1% of GDP.
Scientists and researchers, once the pride of the Soviet Union, have vanished, often lured by more rewarding opportunities, at home or abroad.
Indeed, Russian universities are almost absent from global rankings: only two appear in the Shanghai University Top-500 list and, at the very bottom, among the 400 rated by The Times Higher Education Supplement.
Russia also fares poorly – 63rd – in the Global Competitiveness Index released by the World Economic Forum, well behind all developed countries and even many developing countries.
The same holds for innovation capacity and technology.
Yet there are hints of hope. Russia no longer lags behind the developed world in Internet use, which has provided space for unregulated speech, allowing users to circumvent the official – and overwhelmingly pro-Putin – news media.
Moreover, after lengthy negotiations, Russia recently reached an agreement with the World Trade Organization to join, implying the need to comply with all relevant obligations regarding transparency and trading rules.
But comprehensive transformation of Russia’s economy remains doubtful.
One of Russia’s leading independent economists, Sergei Guriev, the rector of the New Economic School in Moscow, soberly noted in 2010 that
“meaningful reforms look highly unlikely – for the simple reason that they would harm the interests of Russia’s ruling elites.
In any resource-rich and undemocratic country, the political class and the business interests that surround it have little or no incentive to support stronger property rights, the rule of law, and competition.
Indeed, such structural changes would weaken the elite’s grip on political and economic power.
The status quo – opaque rules, arbitrary decision-making, and lack of accountability – allows insiders to enrich themselves, especially by obtaining a share of commodity-export revenues.”
When Russia marks the twentieth anniversary of the collapse of the Soviet Union this Christmas, it will have much to celebrate.
Unfortunately, what hasn’t changed will give it much to rue.
Putin’s Choice
BRUSSELS – Vladimir Putin’s return to the Kremlin as Russia’s president was always a foregone conclusion.
But, when he is sworn in on May 7, he will retake formal charge of a country whose politics – even Putin’s own political future – has turned unpredictable.
Putin’s return to the presidency, following a period of de facto control as prime minister, was supposed to signify a reassuring continuation of “business as usual” – a strong, orderly state devoid of the potentially destabilizing effects of multiparty democracy and bickering politicians.
Instead, the Russian people have now challenged the status quo.
Their reaction to Putin’s plan – from the announcement last September that President Dmitri Medvedev would stand aside for his mentor, to the deeply flawed parliamentary and presidential elections – and their accumulated resentment of Kremlin cronies’ massive enrichment, has placed pressure on Putin and the top-down system of government that he created.
How Putin, an astute politician, responds to that pressure will determine his political legacy.
And the West’s response to Putin’s return to the presidency could have a marked effect on whether he presses for liberalizing reforms and survives, or follows his KGB-honed authoritarian instincts and stokes further protest.
Nothing illustrates Russia’s malaise under Putin better than the case of Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer working for a British investment fund.
He uncovered a massive tax fraud and alleged widespread collusion by the authorities.
His reward for exposing this crime was to be imprisoned and mistreated until he died in mysterious circumstances.
The Russian authorities are bizarrely continuing to prosecute him posthumously, as well as continuing to carry out the tax scams that he exposed.
The United States Congress is currently debating a law that would impose asset freezes and visa bans on the 60 people identified as having had some responsibility for Magnitsky's detention and death.
Many of the law’s supporters want it to replace the so-called Jackson-Vanik amendment, a Cold War-era law that restricts US trade with Russia – and that the Obama administration is pushing to repeal.
Such a change would be doubly beneficial: it would both enhance trade and hold to account people responsible for egregious human-rights abuses.
Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, the House of Commons recently passed a resolution along the same lines as the proposed US legislation.
London is a favorite destination for wealthy Russians, and the British government is now considering whether to support such an initiative, although there are indications that it will maintain an unofficial and unpublished list of the banned individuals in order to forestall legal challenges.
In Ottawa, the Canadian parliament has called for similar measures, including asset freezes against those responsible for Magnitsky's death, as has the European Parliament, which has called for the European Union’s member states to take collective action.
Introducing such targeted sanctions would be an indisputable sign that the West will not compromise on its fundamental values – values that Putin’s Russia claims to share.
It would also set a precedent that could be extended to all of those in Russia and other countries who regularly violate human rights, and not just those rights concerning physical inviolability.
For example, such measures could be extended to cover all of those who abuse the fundamental right of legal due process, such as the right to a fair trial.
Doing so would highlight the famous case of former oil magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky, whose political ambitions alone landed him in prison, and who has been declared, after a second trial, a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
Such measures could also include the abuse of prisoners’ rights, such as the case of Khodorkovsky’s former legal counsel Vasily Alexanyan, who was denied treatment for HIV in jail, and was released only after the intervention of the European Court of Human Rights.
Medvedev’s announcement one day after Putin’s election on March 5 that the Khodorkovsky case will be reviewed is a hopeful start.
Imposing travel sanctions on suspected human-rights abusers is a sensible and practical way forward.
It would show that the West does not seek to punish Russia or Russians generally, but only those individuals about whose role in human-rights violations the West has good evidence.
And it would remind Russia of its international legal obligations, specifically as a member of both the OSCE and the Council of Europe, which has 47 member states, including Russia and others who flout some its conventions.
In the past, Putin successfully marketed himself as a strongman, the epitome of stability, a guarantor against chaos. But now Putin’s style of government is Russia’s primary source of instability, as the country’s middle class takes to the streets in protest against the corruption and inefficiency of his rule.
The West has an opportunity – and an obligation – to convince Putin that protecting his own interests requires profound and permanent democratic reform in Russia, starting with an unambiguous commitment to the rule of law.
And Putin has a rare opportunity, as he begins his third term as President, to restore his deeply tarnished reputation.
Putin’s Deadly “Great Game”
President Vladimir Putin will visit Ukraine, the scene of his biggest foreign policy blunder, this weekend.
Given his myopic actions at home, where he seems increasingly incapable of dealing with any institution that has any degree of autonomy, this seems unlikely.
For example, Putin recently abolished elections in Russia’s provinces.
From now on, presidential appointees will rule a country that is as complex and multi-national as the EU or the US.
That’s not a recipe for sophisticated thinking.
Indeed, elected officials in Russia have become an endangered species.
The Kremlin black art of manipulating elections by deception and other means – called “political technology” by locals – will now be used only in other countries’ elections in, as these are the only real elections the Kremlin has to worry about, so neutered have Russia’s own votes become.
The justification for canceling elections in Russia is the need to fight terrorism – the end that now justifies all means.
How did it happen that every contemporary problem, particularly in Russia, seems to have been reduced to terrorist attacks and counter-terrorist operations?
Poverty, racism, and ideological legacies are just as visible now as they were three or thirteen years ago.
Terrorism has not exacerbated them.
Security forces have not helped resolved them.
On the contrary, the “double terror” induced by terrorism and counter-terrorism distracts public attention from those problems that, as some of us still remember, produced terrorism.
Palestine and Chechnya, two sites of pain and terrorist infection, have not healed.
Their national independence is now more elusive than it was before the terrorist era began.
The past was, of course, far from perfect, but governments and peoples everywhere appeared more capable of tolerating failure.
When battles were lost, talks began.
These talks eventually resulted in the formation of respected countries, from Italy in the nineteenth century, to India in the middle of the twentieth century, to Eritrea near that century’s end.
Try to imagine Putin as Russia’s leader in 1920, when Poland gained its independence from Russia, or in 1991, when Georgia did.
Would he ever have engaged in peace talks?
Nowadays, Rudyard Kipling’s imperialist Great Game is decomposing into a vicious circle.
Security forces respond to the growth of terrorism.
The growth of terrorism responds to the strengthening of security forces.
The heavier the hand, it seems, the stronger the resistance; the stronger the resistance, the heavier the hand.
Real issues are buried beneath the crimes of the terrorists and the mistakes of the security forces.
With every turn of the circle, both parties, terrorists and security forces, grow closer to each other.
Their common interest is continuation of the game.
Opposing parties use the same weapons, develop comparable tactics, and preach increasingly similar ideals.
So it goes, until the rules of the game change.
But why would they?
In Russian history, there is an analogous situation.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, socialist revolutionaries led by Evno Asef embarked on a series of terrorist attacks against state officials.
Somewhere along the line, Asef became a double agent.
Sometimes he killed an official who was not on good terms with the police.
At other times, the police simply did not want to betray their precious agent.
Manipulating each other, the terrorists and the security guys became indistinguishable.
Call this the “Asef” effect.
Once such an alliance was shaped, nothing but revolution could stop it – in this case, the Bolshevik revolution.
So the game must be stopped, if only for the survival of innocent bystanders – the rest of us.
If you do not see humanity in your counterpart, you will not talk to him.
You will either use him or kill him.
So the “other” is elevated to the very center of high politics.
This is the Asef effect in action.
The Bolsheviks did it to the bourgeoisie.
The Nazis did it to the Jews.
But classical empires learned not to do it to colonized people.
Over time, they invented fascinating ways to control their subjects, combining education, bribery, and force.
Learning the great art of Orientalism, the classical empires knew how to keep talking while keeping their distance.
Abolishing democracy in Russia’s provinces, including Muslim-populated regions such as Tatarstan and Dagestan, is a deadly act.
Civil peace in these areas was one of the few accomplishments of which contemporary Russia could be proud.
So is Putin suicidal?
Unfortunately not.
He owes his career to Chechnya, as Bush may owe his presidency to Iraq.
But Chechnya, obliging as it is, is small, poor, and idiosyncratic.
Converting vast areas of Russia into new Chechnyas, Putin and his clique calculate that – sooner rather than later – they will play out their games of terror and security with millions of Muslims in the oil-rich plains of Eurasia.
Putin\u0027s Gold-Medal War
LONDON – What does the “Olympics War,” otherwise known as Russia’s invasion of Georgia, really mean?
The war itself was, of course, predicable and predicted. Its results are equally clear.
First, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin remains in unambiguous charge in Moscow.
He may play a “good cop-bad cop” routine with President Dmitri Medvedev.
But the bad cop, Putin, is the real boss.
Second, Putin cannot stand Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, who admittedly is not an easy man to like.
The Russian thought the Georgian had become too big for his boots. He waited for Saakashvili to go a step too far, and then came down on him and his poor country like a ton of bricks.
Third, Russia has been stirring up trouble in South Ossetia and Abkhazia for years.
Moscow wants to keep Georgia weak.
It plays the same game in Transdniestria to undermine Moldova.
If an outsider had tried similar tactics in Chechnya, the Russians would rightly have howled with rage.
Fourth, today’s Russian leaders, like nineteenth-century Czars, want a sphere of influence around their borders.
So far as they are concerned, the countries that were once part of the Russian empire in the Soviet Union should enjoy only limited sovereignty.
The message being transmitted from Georgia to Ukraine and the Central Asian Republics is heard very loudly.
Russia has in particular opposed its neighbors joining NATO.
What is NATO against, the Russians ask?
Where is NATO’s front line?
Are we Russians really the enemy?
If so how should we react?
Russia’s actions have had the reverse effect to what was presumably intended; the invasion of Georgia has made a powerful case for further NATO enlargement.
Fifth, Georgia itself provides an important link to Caspian energy for all those Europeans who do not want to be totally dependent on pipelines controlled by Russia.
Indeed, Georgia is Russia’s choke point in its policy of using oil and gas as strategic foreign policy weapons, which it has done repeatedly.
The Swedish Defense Research Agency has reported that out of 55 deliberate gas supply interruptions, explicit threats, or coercive price actions by Russia since 1991, only 11 had nothing to do with politics.
America has reacted strongly – at least verbally – to Russia’s attack on its neighbor, in which the Russian army moved in first and made things safe for the Russian-backed unofficial South Ossetian militias to burn and pillage Georgian property.
But America is not in a strong position to go any further.
Its moral authority has been compromised in the Bush years, it cannot put more troops on the ground to defend Georgian sovereignty, and, even if it could, doing so would escalate the crisis.  
America’s position is further weakened in the absence of a strong and united European response.
But you can forget about seeing that.
Russia knows that when it comes to conducting a serious foreign and security policy, Europe is all mouth.
Russia has pushed Europe around for years on energy issues, cutting bilateral deals with the bigger countries and opposing efforts to create a common European energy policy.
There were other times when we have stood by while a militaristic European power insisted that it had the right to intervene wherever it wanted to advance the interests of those who claimed shared ethnicity from the Baltics to the Caucasus.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy claims to have brought peace to Georgia. Yet it looks suspiciously as though the deal that ended the fighting will leave Russian troops in that truncated country for years.
So what, exactly, will Europe do?
Perhaps initially Europeans should be cautious.
But I doubt whether anything tougher than strongly worded communiqués will ever be employed.
Will we stop talking about our allegedly shared values with Russia?
Will we press the pause button on further discussion of how to integrate Russia fully into the international community?
Will we cut off some of our contacts with Russia, reconsider its membership of the G8, or delay its entry to the WTO and OECD?
Will we put to the side for the time being negotiations on a partnership and cooperation agreement between the EU and Russia?   
I suspect that the answer to each of these questions is a resounding “no.”
It will be business pretty much as usual as Europeans prepare cheerfully in the years ahead for the Winter Olympics in Sochi, just up the road from the Russian missiles and tanks on Georgian soil.
Meanwhile, Europeans will continue to talk about their crucial role in world affairs.
It is enough to make even the cynical shake their heads in disbelief.
You could not make it up.
Europe's approach is weak and will cause bigger problems in the future.
So Putin wins the gold medal in his favorite event - bullying his smaller neighbors.
Putin’s Imperial Dreams
To divide a people in order to conquer them is an immoral strategy that has endured throughout recorded history.
From Alexander the Great to Stalin the Cruel, variants of that strategy have been used to keep nations in thrall to the will of an emperor.
We are now seeing this strategy at work again as President Vladimir Putin stealthily seeks to restore Kremlin supremacy over the lands treated as “lost” when the USSR imploded in 1991.
In so overplaying his hand in Ukraine’s recent election, however, Putin clearly revealed to the world his neo-imperialist designs.
In the wake of the euphoric mass protests in Kyiv, Russia’s president has since said that he can work with whatever government Ukraine’s people choose.
These are mere words, for in mind and action Putin does not want anyone to rule Ukraine that he has not put in place.
No price is too high to achieve that end, so traditional threats about dividing Ukraine have been used.
I speak as someone who has been on the receiving end of Russian imperialist designs.
When Lithuania and then the other Baltic States – Estonia and Latvia – which were occupied by Stalin early in WWII, seized their opportunity for freedom in 1990-91, the Kremlin did not sit on its hands.
It knew that the rest of Russia’s colonies – the so-called “Soviet republics” – would want to follow the ungrateful Baltic countries into freedom.
Although Russia’s rulers were by then communists in name only, they didn’t hesitate to reach for the old Leninist recipes. They began to foster and incite splits and confrontations.
They stoked supposed resentments among different national or ethnic communities based on Lenin’s idea that even small groups of villages could demand territorial autonomy.
Note the word “territory.”
The demands were never about normal cultural autonomy as a means of continued identity and supposed self-protection.
Only territorial autonomy, it seems, would do.
This way, minorities become easily manipulated majorities. Divide enough, stoke enough resentment, and a nation becomes nothing more than a ruined society within a national territory.
Arm some of these manufactured minority structures so that they can demand autonomy at the barrel of a gun, and you get the kind of chaos the Kremlin can use to reassert its control.
Fortunately, Lithuanians – as well as Estonians and Latvians – understood this game.
It failed also in Crimea when Russia sought to deploy its old strategy of divide and rule there in 1991.
But these defeats did not inspire the Kremlin to abandon the basic strategy.
On the contrary, Russia’s imperial ambitions persisted, and persistence has paid off.
Around the Black Sea, Russia has called into being a series of artificial statelets.
Georgia and Moldova have both been partitioned through the creation of criminal mini-states nurtured by the Kremlin and which remain under its military umbrella.
Indeed, in the very week that Putin was meddling in Ukraine’s presidential election, he was threatening to blockade one of those statelets, Georgia’s Abkhazia region, after it had the temerity to vote for a president the Kremlin did not like.
Moldova has been particularly helpless in the face of the Kremlin’s imperial designs.
A huge Russian garrison remains deployed in Transdneister, where it rules in collaboration with local gangs.
Proximity to this lawless territory has helped make Moldova the poorest land in Europe.
To the east, Armenia and Azerbaijan were pushed into such bloody confrontation at the Kremlin’s instigation that the only way for them to end their ethnic wars was to call in the Russians – as in Transdneister – for a kind of “Pax Ruthena.”
Now Ukraine’s people may face a similar test after supporters of Viktor Yanukovych threatened to seek autonomy should the rightful winner of the country’s presidential vote, Viktor Yushchenko, actually become president.
Who can doubt that the hand of Russia is behind this?
Would Moscow’s mayor Yuri Luzkhov, a loyal creature of Putin, have dared to attend the rally where autonomy was demanded without the sanction of the Kremlin’s elected monarch? Indeed, Putin openly claims this part of Ukraine as a Russian “internal matter.”
It is to be hoped that Ukraine’s Russian-speaking citizens, having witnessed the economic despair – and sometimes the bloodshed – caused by the Kremlin’s manufactured pro-autonomy movements, will realize that they are being turned into Putin’s pawns.
The test for Viktor Yushchenko and his Orange revolutionaries, as it was for Lithuania’s democrats in 1990-91, is to show that democracy does not mean that the majority suppresses any minority.
Lithuania passed that test; I am confident that Viktor Yushchenko and his team will do so as well.
But Europe and the world are also being tested. Russia is passing from being the Russian Federation of Boris Yeltsin to a unitary authoritarian regime under Vladimir Putin and his former KGB colleagues.
Europe, America, and the wider world must see Putin’s so-called “managed democracy” in its true light, and must stand united against his neo-imperialist dreams.
The first step is to make Russia honor its binding commitment to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as to the Council of Europe, to remove its troops from Moldova and Georgia.
Any plans to “defend” Yanukovych and the eastern part of Ukraine by military force must be confronted.
The History of Russia’s Future
MOSCOW – Strategic vision has never been a Russian attribute, and it certainly was absent in 2012.
Russia’s vast territory continually seems to obscure for its leaders the need to plan for the future, while its seemingly infinite supply of natural resources convinces them that the country can handle any contingency.
As a result, Russia is perpetually unprepared for the future.
Indeed, just as its leaders failed to prepare for the fall of communism, the softening of the Russian economy shows that they are poorly equipped for the coming decades, which will be characterized by depleted resources, a declining population, and shrinking territory.
Vladimir Putin’s return to the presidency this year marked a new low for Russian strategic vision.
After all, the past is the only future that Putin has ever wanted for the country.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, the Kremlin lost not only control of vast portions of territory, but also half of the USSR’s nearly 300 million people.
Since then, the population has fallen by millions more, owing to Russia’s high mortality rate, especially among men.
Over the same period, the population of the United States has grown from 248 million to more than 300 million.
Despite calls by the Russian public for reform – from modernization of the military and decrepit and corrupt legal institutions to diversification of the economy beyond natural-resource extraction and the military-industrial complex – Putin has stuck to his autocratic guns.
When Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov tried to reform Russia’s armed forces – by expanding the military’s training in modern defense techniques, cutting costs, and boosting efficiency – he was replaced by Sergei Shoigu, Moscow’s former governor and a die-hard Putin loyalist, who restored the outdated system.
Even the army’s new uniforms, which border on the comic with their eighteenth-century epaulets and World War II jackets, invoke the past, rather than provide the comfort and efficiency needed in modern warfare.
More ominously, in a move reminiscent of Stalin, Putin has initiated a new anti-extremism law, according to which anyone can be accused of terrorism, espionage, being a foreign agent, or disseminating hatred.
The law has proven to be a powerful tool in stifling dissent, which can include mass protests against election fraud, journalists working to expose corruption, or a librarian in Siberia fulfilling a patron’s request for a banned book.
Likewise, Putin’s foreign policy remains mired in old Russian obsessions, beginning with restoring the empire in whatever form possible.
In his effort to prove that losing its imperial status has not diminished Russia’s global role, Putin has meddled relentlessly in international decisions, opposing sanctions against Iran and supporting Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, even as it slaughters its own citizens.
Furthermore, while Russia has finally joined the World Trade Organization, doubts about the country’s human-rights record persist.
In 2009, for example, Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer, was accused of embezzlement after uncovering a fraudulent tax-refund scheme run by Russian officials.
He died in prison after he was badly beaten and denied medical treatment.
In response, the US Congress has just enacted the Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act, which prohibits anyone implicated in Magnitsky’s detention or death – or others suspected of gross human-rights abuses – from entering the US or using its banking system.
Similar laws have been adopted in Canada and across Western Europe.
But, instead of admitting the crime and working to bring the perpetrators to justice, Russia’s leaders have fought back, declaring that certain Europeans and Americans will, in turn, be barred from visiting Russia.
Putin’s unwillingness to heed popular discontent, and his failure to develop relations with the West during his 12 years in power, has backed him into a corner – and he is running out of ideas.
In his most recent attempt to restore Russia’s empire, he announced the creation of the Eurasian Economic Union with Belarus and Kazakhstan.
(Putin is courting the other ex-Soviet Central Asian countries, as well as Ukraine and Georgia).
But, even here, the President is bullying the very leaders he seeks to woo.
Given that Ukraine’s participation would significantly enhance the union’s legitimacy, Russia is using all available tactics – from lower gas prices to trade sanctions – to persuade its leaders to join.
But Ukraine’s President Viktor Yanukovych, who nurtures his own thuggish reputation, wants no part of it.
Putin’s effort to unify the ex-Soviet states is hardly the only initiative that exemplifies his flawed vision.
In order to appeal to the leaders of East Asia’s fast-growing economies – which Putin has called the most important factor for Russia’s long-term success – the government spent billions of dollars this year to modernize the dilapidated port of Vladivostok.
But, given that Asian leaders view Russia as little more than a natural-resource milk cow, it is far from clear that the investment will pay off, particularly given the absence of a comprehensive economic-development plan for the region.
Putin hopes that harsh policies, at home and abroad, will allow him to maintain a stranglehold on Russia.
But they have merely ensured the country’s decline.
As 2013 begins, Russia is back on the hamster wheel of history, treating the past as prologue – and thus wasting its resources and blighting its people’s lives.
Putin’s Last Stand
WASHINGTON – On April 2-4, NATO will hold its biggest summit ever in Bucharest, the capital of its new member, Romania.
Incredibly, NATO has invited its fiercest critic, Russian President Vladimir Putin, to attend.
For the first time since 2002, he will.
His presence is an embarrassment to NATO, but an even greater disgrace for Russia.
The two biggest issues in Bucharest will be whether to invite Albania, Croatia, and Macedonia to join NATO, and whether to offer applications to Ukraine and Georgia to start so-called “membership action plans.”
These questions should be decided by NATO’s members, not outsiders.
In February 2007, Putin, in an anti-Western tirade delivered in Munich, declared: “I think it is obvious that NATO expansion does not have any relation with the modernization of the Alliance itself or with ensuring security in Europe.
On the contrary, it represents a serious provocation that reduces the level of mutual trust.”
So Putin’s views about NATO are clear.
He will scandalize the summit by seeking to intimidate the former Soviet clients in the room.
Such an aggressive attitude benefits a country’s foreign policy only up to a point – one that Putin passed long ago.
Initially, he acted as an able diplomat and accommodator, but since his Munich speech, Putin has begun uniting the West against Russia.
In his speech on May 9, 2007, commemorating Russia’s victory in World War II, Putin compared the United States with Nazi Germany: “We have a duty to remember that the causes of any war lie above all in the mistakes and miscalculations of peacetime, and that these causes have their roots in an ideology of confrontation and extremism.
It is all the more important that we remember this today, because these threats are not becoming fewer, but are only transforming and changing their appearance.
These new threats, just as under the Third Reich, show the same contempt for human life and the same aspiration to establish an exclusive dictate over the world.”
Serious politicians do not speak like that.
These are the rants of Putin’s few remaining friends – Venezuela’s Hugo Chavez, Iran’s Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, and Belarus’s Alyaksandr Lukashenka.
At home, awareness is rising that Putin is damaging Russia’s interests by insulting and intimidating everybody.
He is isolating his country among the world’s pariahs; worse yet, he has achieved little.
When Putin became president in 2000, he named accession to the World Trade Organization as his foreign policy priority.
He failed, because he gave in to petty protectionist interests, imposing a timber embargo against Finland and Sweden, a fish embargo against Norway, and various agricultural embargos against Lithuania, Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, and others.
Russia’s foreign policy is focused on the interests of its state-dominated corporations, notably Gazprom, which has concluded agreements with many foreign countries and companies for monopolistic deliveries.
But a Gazprom pipeline typically costs three times as much per kilometer as a similar Western pipeline, because of “leakage” (kickbacks and waste).
The primary purpose of Russia’s foreign policy seems to be to tap Russia’s state companies for the benefit of Kremlin officials.
But customers do not trust suppliers who cut deliveries, raise prices unpredictably, expropriate competitors, and let production decrease in the way Gazprom and Russia’s other state companies have done.
As a result, Russia’s gas exports to Europe have started declining.
Putin��s foreign policy also is evidently intended to whip up populist chauvinism.
Beating up on foreigners may boost his authoritarian rule, but this, too, has a price.
Not only the US and Europe, but all former Soviet republics feel alienated by Putin’s aggressive tactics.
Many are seeking to shield themselves from Russia’s capricious embargos – for example, by seeking alternative energy supplies.
Arguably, Russia has improved its relations with China under Putin, but at the cost of acceding to China’s demands for two big disputed islands over which the two countries fought in 1969.
Putin’s apparent aim was to secure financing for Rosneft’s purchase of the Yugansk oil field, which was part of the Yukos confiscation.
Yet China, too, is wary of Putin, and has been sending warm signals to leaders of former Soviet republics, such as Ukraine’s Yuliya Tymoshenko.
Russia’s nationalists are also outraged by Putin’s foreign policy, because it has alienated former Soviet republics and weakened Russia’s military.
The nationalist Council for National Strategy published a devastating report on the decay of Russia’s military under Putin.
Russian military procurement, it claims, has plummeted. For example, only three new military aircraft have been purchased since 2000.
True, armaments costs have risen sharply, but only because Putin’s KGB friends, who monopolize weapons production, have stolen inordinate amounts.
Yet, despite this spending shortfall, Putin seems obsessed with making pointless and provocative gestures, such as resuming long-range nuclear bomber flights off the American coast.
In the early 1990’s, many westerners and Russians wanted Russia to become a full-fledged member of both the European Union and NATO, on the condition that Russia became a full-fledged democracy.
Unfortunately, the West never made that offer, and Russian democracy went astray.
Russia should be given a new chance, but only after Putin has departed.
Russia is no enemy of the West; Vladimir Putin is.
Putin’s Rules of Attraction
CAMBRIDGE – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s covert aggression in Ukraine continues – and so do Western sanctions against his country.
But the economy is not all that is under threat; Russia’s soft power is dwindling, with potentially devastating results.
A country can compel others to advance its interests in three main ways: through coercion, payment, or attraction.
Putin has tried coercion – and been met with increasingly tough sanctions.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Putin’s main European interlocutor, has been expressing her frustration with Russian policy toward Ukraine in increasingly harsh terms.
Whatever short-term gains Putin’s actions in Ukraine provide will be more than offset in the long term, as Russia loses access to the Western technology it needs to modernize its industry and extend energy exploration into frontier Arctic regions.
With Russia’s economy faltering, Putin is finding it increasingly difficult to employ the second tool of power: payment.
Not even oil and gas, Russia’s most valuable resources, can save the economy, as Putin’s recent agreement to supply gas to China for 30 years at knockdown prices demonstrates.
This leaves attraction – a more potent source of power than one might expect.
China, for example, has been attempting to use soft power to cultivate a less threatening image – one that it hopes will undermine, and even discourage, the coalitions that have been emerging to counterbalance its rising economic and military might.
A country’s soft power rests on three main resources: an appealing culture, political values that it reliably upholds, and foreign policy that is imbued with moral authority.
The challenge lies in combining these resources with hard-power assets like economic and military power so that they reinforce one another.
The United States failed to strike this balance with respect to its 2003 invasion of Iraq.
While America’s military power was sufficient to defeat Saddam Hussein’s forces quickly, it did so at the expense of its attractiveness in many countries.
Likewise, though establishing a Confucius Institute in Manila to teach Filipino people about Chinese culture may help to cultivate China’s soft power, its impact will be severely constrained if China is simultaneously using its hard power to bully the Philippines in the territorial dispute over the Scarborough Shoal.
The problem for Russia is that it already has very little soft power with which to work.
Indeed, as the political analyst Sergei Karaganov noted in 2009, Russia’s lack of soft power is precisely what is driving it to behave aggressively – such as in its war with Georgia the previous year.
To be sure, Russia has historically enjoyed considerable soft power, with its culture having made major contributions to art, music, and literature.
Moreover, in the immediate aftermath of World War II, the Soviet Union was attractive to many Western Europeans, owing largely to its leadership in the fight against fascism.
But the Soviets squandered these soft-power gains by invading Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968.
By 1989, they had little soft power left.
The Berlin Wall did not collapse under a barrage of NATO artillery, but under the impact of hammers and bulldozers wielded by people who had changed their minds about Soviet ideology.
Putin is now making the same mistake as his Soviet forebears.
Despite his 2013 declaration that Russia should be focusing on the “literate use” of soft power, he failed to capitalize on the soft-power boost afforded to Russia by hosting the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi.
Instead, even as the Games were proceeding, Putin launched a semi-covert military intervention in Ukraine, which, together with his talk of Russian nationalism, has induced severe anxiety, particularly among ex-Soviet countries.
This has undermined Putin’s own stated objective of establishing a Russia-led Eurasian Union to compete with the European Union.
With few foreigners watching Russian films, and only one Russian university ranked in the global top 100, Russia has few options for regaining its appeal.
So Putin has turned to propaganda.
Last year, Putin reorganized the RIA Novosti news agency, firing 40% of its staff, including its relatively independent management.
The agency’s new leader, Dmitry Kiselyov, announced in November the creation of “Sputnik,” a government-funded network of news hubs in 34 countries, with 1,000 staff members producing radio, social media, and news-wire content in local languages.
But one of the paradoxes of soft power is that propaganda is often counterproductive, owing to its lack of credibility.
During the Cold War, open cultural exchanges – such as the Salzburg Seminar, which enabled young people to engage with one another – demonstrated that contact among populations is far more meaningful.
Today, much of America’s soft power is produced not by the government, but by civil society – including universities, foundations, and pop culture.
Indeed, America’s uncensored civil society, and its willingness to criticize its political leaders, enables the country to preserve soft power even when other countries disagree with its government’s actions.
Similarly, in the United Kingdom, the BBC retains its credibility because it can bite the government hand that feeds it.
Yet Putin remains bent on curtailing the role of non-governmental organizations and civil society.
Putin may understand that hard and soft power reinforce each other, but he remains seemingly incapable of applying that understanding to policy.
As a result, Russia’s capacity to attract others, if not to coerce and pay them, will continue to decline.
Putin’s Year of Living Dangerously
MOSCOW – In the spring of 2008, Russian President Vladimir Putin was on top of the world.
Oil and gas prices were sky high, with export revenues flooding the Kremlin’s coffers.
The country’s once powerful military, which collapsed with the demise of communism in 1991, was being rebuilt.
And Putin’s handpicked successor, Dmitri Medvedev, had been eased into power, while Putin downshifted into the premiership.
The United States, moreover, remained a perfect foil for a leader with pretensions to global leadership.
The Bush administration’s incoherent foreign policy included a plan to build a missile defense shield in Poland and the Czech Republic, which allowed Putin to revive the Old Europe/New Europe divisions that began with the Iraq war, with this split appearing to enhance Russian influence on the continent.
Russia’s seeming military revival also played a part in boosting the domestic economy.
In 2007, Putin addressed the Olympic Committee (in English), and persuasively argued that the Games will “play a major role in Russia’s future. They will help Russia’s transition as a young democracy.”
In May 2008, Russia won the world hockey championship, beating Canada.
In June, it almost won the Euro 2008 football championship, losing in the semi-finals to Spain.
Next came the Eurovision Song Contest, an annual competition of pop (rarely first class) European singers, at which Russia’s Dima Bilan gained first prize for his musical clip “Believe.”
That, too, helped rekindle a sense of national pride, extending from the Kremlin to the streets.
Russians habitually respond with black humor to events both good and bad, and the events of 2008 were no exception.
One joke nicely encapsulates the hubris that Putin and his Kremlin allies felt: Putin and Medvedev discuss their newly found invincibility.
“Eurovision, hockey, soccer, smooth presidential transition – what a lucky streak,” muses Medvedev.
“Indeed, time to initiate World War III,” enthuses Putin.
But, as usual, pride precedes a fall.
The fall began with an event that Putin perceived as a mighty triumph – his blitzkrieg in August against Georgia.
Yes, the Kremlin was able to smack down the uppity Mikheil Saakashvili’s hope of reuniting his country by force.
But the world saw in Russia’s onslaught against so puny an antagonist a thuggish state determined to recapture its lost empire.
All the post-Cold War certainties in Europe melted away, and with them went Putin’s reputation as a reliable manager of Russia’s economy.
Capital began to flee the country, which may not have mattered had the world economy not tanked in September.
But tank it did, taking Russia’s economy with it.
The reserves that Russia accumulated during the oil boom years are steadily being drained away.
With oil prices collapsing, this pool of resources won’t be refilled quickly.
That could prove to be devastating, because all of Russia’s fiscal assumptions were based upon high oil prices continuing for years to come.
Nevertheless, Putin is trying to spend his way out of the crisis.
But such efforts are unlikely to be enough, because the heavy-handed state-dominated economy – with ex-KGB agents now embedded at the top of most state companies – lacks both the nimbleness and the diversification to recover speedily.
Moreover, with animosity between East and West at their highest since the Cold War’s end, Russia’s trading partners are anxiously looking for other options, which may mean that Putin has damaged Russia’s long-term prospects for an export-led recovery as well. 
Indeed, the Georgian war antagonized not only the west, but also China, which has a vital strategic interest in maintaining the post-Cold War geo-strategic settlement.
China, after all, has no desire to see a “Soviet Reunion” on its border.
Besides antagonizing China, the Georgian war also exposed the hollowness of Russia’s military re-armament.
Yes, the Russian army could smash Georgia and most of its ex-Soviet neighbors, but its performance in Georgia shows that it remains the same lumbering, badly motivated outfit that it was in the 1990’s.
Now that America is no longer saddled with a president loathed around the world, Putin has lost one of the key tools that had helped him boost Russia’s international standing.
Aid to agriculture, a declining sector, consumes over 40% of spending and little is spent on the future (R&amp;D) or on fields in which the EU must assume new responsibilities, such as internal and external security.
Moreover, contributions from national budgets constitute the vast majority of revenues.
Member state governments consider these revenues “their money” and compare them to “their receipts.”
Thus, EU budget negotiations are framed exclusively in terms of what national treasuries have to pay and what farmers and regions at home receive.
European citizens have no clear perception of the Union’s total cost and are only interested in preserving transfers in their favor indefinitely. 
The increasing detachment of the budget from the Union’s objectives is sustained by decision-making procedures that authorize the European Council, representing member governments, to take all the important decisions according to a rule of unanimity, with the European Parliament and the European Commission confined to a minor role.
Negotiations for the new multi-year fiscal framework for 2007-13, already underway, are not tackling the issue, because the longer-term interests of the EU are absent from the negotiating table.
Neither of the two proposals on the table makes sense.
The Commission is proposing to increase budgetary appropriations to 1.24% of the EU’s combined gross national income.
Without cuts in spending on agriculture, this would increase the national contributions of net payers to unsustainable levels, with scant value added to common policies.
In contrast to the Commission, the stated intention of a growing number of member states is to limit appropriation commitments to 1% of GDP.
This would squarely shift most of the adjustment burden onto structural funds, a sure harbinger of bitter rows between old recipients and new entrants.
What kind of budget makes sense?
Agricultural spending is a major distorting factor in the EU economy; therefore, all price support and subsidies should be scrapped.
Payments to farmers to keep them out of poverty should be shifted onto national budgets. 
Substantial resources must continue to be devoted to promoting income convergence among the poorer member countries.
However, support should be limited in time and phased out as countries enjoy rising standards of living as a result of integration.
To this end, eligibility should be based on objective, transparent criteria of relative economic and social development.
The EU’s role in fostering productivity gains, economic growth, and employment should increase, with as much as a quarter of spending from the EU budget devoted to human capital and research.
Research spending should be made more effective by scrapping bureaucratic management by the Commission and Council and opening all national research funds to EU-wide competition.
Substantial resources will be needed for the Union to play its full role in the world and to provide strong security inside and outside its borders.
Altogether, this does not seem to require a major increase in the Union’s resources: 1% of aggregate GDP would suffice to perform these tasks.
On the revenue side, reform should rescind all links between national treasuries and the EU budget, so that the cost of Europe is made directly visible to the Union’s citizens.
National tax systems should “dedicate” to Europe the revenue from one particular tax.
Efficiency and equity require that this tax be levied on a broad base, harmonized at the EU level, and set at a modest rate.
A small surcharge on the existing VAT is the best, and, indeed, the only feasible, solution.
This will require changing the EU’s Constitutional Treaty once it enters into force.
Moreover, it would be useful to synchronize budgetary decisions with the Parliament’s electoral terms.
The EU budget should become a main theme in European Parliament election campaigns, increasing voter interest and thus turnout.
Amending the Constitutional Treaty will not be feasible until 2009.
But a lot could be achieved now if the European Parliament sends out the right political signals in the ongoing budgetary negotiations.
It should tell the Council that it will accept a lower ceiling on overall spending, but that it will want to have a greater say over the composition of spending. 
By accepting the ceiling on total expenditures, the European Parliament would gain credibility with governments and the electorate.
In exchange, it will have a right to affirm its role in deciding what European public goods should be financed from the EU budget.
Putting Lebanon Together
Today’s crisis in Lebanon is a crisis of the Lebanese state.
It is this structural crisis that must be addressed if the violence is to stop.
When Israel withdrew its forces from southern Lebanon in 2000, the international understanding was that the Lebanese government would re-assert its authority in the evacuated area.
Hezbollah, which led the armed struggle against Israeli occupation, was to disarm and re-invent itself as a political force, representing the Shiite community that was historically marginalized by Lebanon’s ruling Maronite, Sunni, and Druze elites.
None of this happened.
Instead of deploying its forces in southern Lebanon, the weak government in Beirut acquiesced in Hezbollah’s determination to turn the area into a staging ground for attacks against Israel.
Over the last six years, Hezbollah established a virtual state-within-a-state: its militia became the only military force in southern Lebanon, setting up outposts along the frontier with Israel, sometimes only a few meters away from the border.
Occasionally, Hezbollah shelled Israel, and its leader, Hassan Nassrallah, continued his blood-curdling invective, not only against Israel and Zionism, but against all Jews.
UN Security Council resolution 1559, which explicitly called for the disarming of all militias and the reassertion of Lebanese government authority in the south, went unheeded.
After the much-heralded “Cedar Revolution” of 2005, Hezbollah even joined the Lebanese government, while at the same time maintaining its armed militia and control of the south.
Israel, for its part, still reeling from the trauma of its ill-begotten war in Lebanon in 1982, chose not to respond to Hezbollah’s attacks and hoped that the attacks would not escalate.
Yet such absurd situations tend to explode, as occurred with Hezbollah’s abduction of two Israeli soldiers within Israeli territory.
The continued existence of Hezbollah’s illegitimate state-within-a-state can no longer be tolerated.
Yet Lebanon itself is too weak to assert its sovereignty.
On the other hand, Israel will not allow Hezbollah to re-establish itself along its border, or to maintain its missile capability.
Hezbollah is to free immediately, and without conditions, the two Israeli solders; Israel is to stop its military activities in Lebanon; Lebanon’s government is to ask for international assistance in implementing resolution 1559; For this purpose, a robust and adequately armed international implementation force is to be established. To succeed, this force must act very differently from the UN’s previous failed efforts in Lebanon.
The existing UN force in southern Lebanon, UNIFIL, is a sad joke.
Like the UN presence in Srebrenica during the Bosnian war, UNIFIL has given the UN a bad name: it never stopped terrorists from attacking Israel, nor did it stop the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
What is needed is a military delegation that has a clear mandate to use force.
It should be international, with the UN’s blessing, but it should not be a UN force.
It could be based on NATO capabilities, with a strong European ingredient.
To add legitimacy for its delicate mission within an Arab country, soldiers from Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and perhaps Pakistan, should be added.
The mission of such a force should be to help deploy – by force, if necessary – the Lebanese Army in southern Lebanon, to participate in disarming Hezbollah, and to patrol the Israeli-Lebanese border, ensuring that no incursions take place from either side.
Last but not least: it is not widely known that one anomaly of Lebanon’s status until this very day is that Syria has not fully recognized its existence as a sovereign nation (in Syrian school textbooks, Lebanon figures as part of Greater Syria).
Consequently, there are no normal diplomatic relations between the two countries – no Syrian embassy in Beirut and no Lebanese embassy in Damascus.
This is absurd and dangerous, and the hapless Arab League has never truly addressed it.
To bolster Lebanese independence and security, and in line with UN resolution 1559, which brought about the withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon, Syria should be pushed to recognize Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence.
Hezbollah’s existence as a mini-state in southern Lebanon is a flagrant violation of Lebanese sovereignty.
That vacuum of legitimate authority created the present crisis, and it must be extirpated.
Lebanon itself cannot establish its sovereignty in the country’s south, and Israeli military force is incapable of doing it.
Empty words from St. Petersburg, Brussels, or UN headquarters will not suffice, nor will a mere ceasefire, as that would simply return the area to square one.
Instead, fundamental change is needed.
Only an effective military force, with international legitimacy, can supply it.
Otherwise, we are all condemned to the continuation of the present cycles of violence.
Qatar’s Jihad
ABU DHABI – Qatar may be tiny, but it is having a major impact across the Arab world.
By propping up violent jihadists in the Middle East, North Africa, and beyond, while supporting the United States in its fight against them, this gas-rich speck of a country – the world’s wealthiest in per capita terms – has transformed itself from a regional gadfly into an international rogue elephant.
Using its vast resources, and driven by unbridled ambition, Qatar has emerged as a hub for radical Islamist movements.
The massive, chandeliered Grand Mosque in Doha – Qatar’s opulent capital – is a rallying point for militants heading to wage jihad in places as diverse as Yemen, Tunisia, and Syria.
As a result, Qatar now rivals Saudi Arabia – another Wahhabi state with enormous resource wealth – in exporting Islamist extremism.
But there are important differences between Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Qatar’s Wahhabism is less severe than Saudi Arabia’s; for example, Qatari women are allowed to drive and to travel alone.
In Qatar, there is no religious police enforcing morality, even if Qatari clerics openly raise funds for militant causes overseas.
Given this, it is perhaps unsurprising that, whereas Saudi Arabia’s sclerotic leadership pursues reactionary policies rooted in a puritanical understanding of Islam, Qatar’s younger royals have adopted a forward-thinking approach.
Qatar is the home of the Al Jazeera satellite television channel and Education City, a district outside of Doha that accommodates schools, universities, and research centers.
Similar inconsistencies are reflected in Qatar’s foreign policy.
Indeed, the country’s relationship with the United States directly contradicts its links with radical Islamist movements.
Qatar hosts Al Udeid air base – with its 8,000 American military personnel and 120 aircraft, including supertankers for in-flight refueling – from which the US directs its current airstrikes in Syria and Iraq.
Camp As-Sayliyah – another facility for which Qatar charges no rent – serves as the US Central Command’s forward headquarters.
In July, Qatar agreed to purchase $11 billion worth of US arms.
Moreover, Qatar has used its leverage over the Islamists that it funds to help secure the release of Western hostages.
And it hosted secret talks between the US and the Pakistan-backed Afghan Taliban.
To facilitate the negotiations, Qatar provided a home, with US support, to the Taliban’s de facto diplomatic mission – and to the five Afghan Taliban leaders released earlier this year from US detention at Guantánamo Bay.
In other words, Qatar is an important US ally, a supplier of weapons and funds to Islamists, and a peace broker all at the same time.
Add to that its position as the world’s largest supplier of liquefied natural gas and the holder of one of its largest sovereign-wealth funds, and it becomes clear that Qatar has plenty of room to maneuver – as well as considerable international clout.
Germany’s government found that out when it was forced to retract its development minister’s statement that Qatar played a central role in arming and financing the Islamic State.
Qatar’s growing influence has important implications for the balance of power in the Arab World, especially with regard to the country’s rivalry with Saudi Arabia.
This competitive dynamic, which surfaced only recently, represents a shift from a long history of working in tandem to export Islamist extremism.
Both Qatar and Saudi Arabia generously supplied weapons and funds to Sunni extremists in Syria, opening the door for the emergence of the Islamic State.
Both have bolstered the Afghan Taliban.
And both contributed to Libya’s transformation into a failed state by aiding Islamist militias.
During the 2011 NATO campaign to overthrow Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi, Qatar even deployed ground troops covertly inside Libya.
Today, however, Qatar and Saudi Arabia are on opposite sides.
Qatar, along with Turkey, backs grassroots Islamist movements like the Muslim Brotherhood and its offshoots in Gaza, Libya, Egypt, Tunisia, Iraq, and the Levant.
That pits it against Saudi Arabia and countries like the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, and Jordan, whose rulers view such movements as an existential threat, with some, including the House of Saud, investing in propping up autocratic regimes like their own.
In this sense, Qatar’s tack has produced a rare schism within the Gulf Cooperation Council, whose members collectively possess nearly half of the world’s oil reserves.
The proxy competition among rival monarchies, which led some of them to withdraw their ambassadors from Qatar in March, is intensifying violence and instability throughout the region.
For example, the UAE, with Egyptian assistance, secretly carried out airstrikes in August to stop Qatari-aided Islamist militias from gaining control of the Libyan capital, Tripoli.
Qatar’s leaders are willing to challenge their neighbors for a simple reason: They believe that the grassroots Islamist movements they support – which, in their view, represent majority political aspirations – eventually will win.
Anticipating that such groups will increasingly shape Arab politics, displacing strongman regimes, Qatar has set out to empower them.
In doing so, Qatar is destabilizing several countries and threatening the security of secular democracies far beyond the region.
For the sake of regional and international security, this elephant must be tamed.
Qatar’s Source of Arab Springs
CAMBRIDGE – There’s a joke making the rounds in the Middle East these days: three of Egypt’s former presidents, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Anwar el-Sadat, and Hosni Mubarak, meet in hell and ask each other how they fell.
Nasser replies “poison”; Sadat says “assassination”; and Mubarak answers “Al Jazeera.”
During the 15 years that it has broadcast from Qatar, Al Jazeera has served as far more than a traditional television station.
With its fearless involvement in Arab politics, it has created a new venue for political freedom, which has culminated in its unreserved support for Arab revolutions.
Al Jazeera has pushed the boundaries of information by providing live coverage of major developments in the Arab world and elsewhere.
It is a platform for political and religious opposition groups in the Arab countries.
It hosts Israeli spokespersons and embraces state-of-the-art broadcasting techniques.
In short, it has become a global brand and a role model for other Arab media.
Success breeds confidence, but it also attracts envy.
Al Jazeera has no shortage of enemies, from the most radical Islamic fundamentalists to American and Israeli intelligence gatherers.
And, between these two extremes, there is fierce debate over whether Al Jazeera is friend or foe.
Liberals who welcome it as a beacon of freedom and progress in the Arab world confront those who accuse it of Islamism and religious radicalization.
Islamists who praise it as a platform for their own views must deal with the fact that it also offers a voice to Israelis.
Al Jazeera journalists are household names; they also suffer more harassment, imprisonment, and fatalities than their colleagues at other major news organizations.
Al Jazeera is not a tool of the CIA, Israel, or Al Qaeda.
Rather, it is the sophisticated mouthpiece of the state of Qatar and its ambitious Emir, Hamad Al Thani.
Simply put, the Al Jazeera success story would not have been possible without Qatar’s backing.
For Al Thani, Al Jazeera is integral to the national “branding” of Qatar and its foreign-policy aspirations.
The motivation for these aspirations is unclear, but a number of ideas are worth pondering.
After deposing his father in a palace coup in 1995, Al Thani was suddenly confronted with a hostile Saudi Arabia and Egypt, whose elites despised the ambitious young ruler and preferred his more timid father.
Qatar was perceived as increasingly rebellious, routinely defecting from the collective and mundane line of Gulf countries’ politics – inviting further pressures from the “big brothers.”
In response, under the young Emir’s firm hand, Al Jazeera delivered a more assertive line of criticism against governments, such as those of Egypt and Saudi Arabia, that other Arab mainstream media would do their best to avoid alienating.
Having received carte blanche from Qatar’s political leadership to support the Arab revolutions, Al Jazeera became fully engaged in live coverage of events in Tunisia, and then in Egypt, by relying on social-media networks away from the eyes of local security officials.
Its coverage was filled with Arab masses declaring their demands to the world.
Banned from local media and mostly on the run, revolutionaries used Al Jazeera to reach – and mobilize – their own people.
The channel canceled its regular programs, and was transformed into a round-the-clock workshop of live news and interviews, switching from one revolution to another.
So, while the Arab Spring has been a genuine popular uprising against decades of corrupt and oppressive authoritarian regimes, its rapid spread, which caught almost everyone by surprise, was due in part to the influence of Al Jazeera, which became the voice of the voiceless throughout the Middle East.
As for Qatar itself, Al Thani provided various forms of support to all of the Arab revolutions, except in Bahrain, where the Saudis and, more pointedly, the Americans, drew a very sharp red line.
Al Thani’s political audacity stems partly from Qatar’s enormous gas resources, which have allowed him to develop vigorous policies in all areas, especially in foreign affairs.
Protecting himself and Qatar by hosting the largest American military base outside the United States, his strategy has been to wrest control from regional third parties who might otherwise dominate the smaller Gulf states.
At the same time, Qatar has created strong links with both Israel and many Islamist movements, including Hamas and Hezbollah.
It has been an aggressive and risky foreign policy, but Al Thani clearly believes that he can fill a regional leadership vacuum.
His support, via Al Jazeera, of the Arab Spring’s revolutions – and of the new generation of leaders that they have spawned – has only strengthened Qatar’s position.
The falling regimes consistently maintained that Al Jazeera wasn’t neutral.
They were right.
The QE Placebo
BRUSSELS – It has now been nearly half a year since the European Central Bank declared its intention to buy some €1.1 trillion ($1.3 trillion) worth of eurozone bonds.
When it first announced the so-called “extended asset-purchase program” in January, the ECB emphasized that it was only expanding an existing program, under which it had been buying modest quantities of private-sector bonds, to cover government paper.
But this pretense of continuity was just that: a pretense.
In reality, by purchasing large volumes of government bonds, the ECB was crossing the Rubicon; after all, it is explicitly prohibited from financing governments.
The ECB’s defense was that that the program was the only way to move inflation closer to its target of approximately 2%.
Moreover, it pointed out, it was merely following the example of other major central banks, including the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and especially the US Federal Reserve, whose program of quantitative easing (QE) entailed the purchase of more than $2 trillion worth of long-term securities from 2008 to 2012.
Legal uncertainty aside, whether the ECB’s decision to pursue QE can be justified ultimately depends on its impact.
But, after six months, that impact remains difficult to assess.
One reason for this is that long-term interest rates are affected not just by the actual bond purchases, but also by financial markets’ expectations about future monetary policy.
Indeed, just one day after the ECB made its announcement – and weeks before the purchases began – interest rates fell by a fraction of a percentage point throughout the eurozone.
When the purchases began, rates did continue to fall for a few weeks, so much so that many were concerned that there would not be enough German bonds to meet the ECB’s country-debt quota (determined according to eurozone member states’ GDP and population).
But rates have since risen again, and have now returned, in real terms, to pre-QE levels.
In this sense, the ECB’s bond-buying program has been a failure.
Other indicators, however, paint a different picture.
Notably, price growth turned positive last month, suggesting that the threat of deflation has been eliminated.