And China cannot move toward a more market-oriented, efficient, and innovative economy with bloated state-owned enterprises blocking the way.
Whether China can develop and implement a viable new economic-growth model in post-crisis conditions depends on whether President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang can revive the legacy of their predecessors, Deng Xiaoping and Zhu Rongji.
In other words, China’s future – and that of the global economy – depends on how committed its leaders are to overcoming vested interests and pursuing comprehensive structural and policy reform.
While many in the West contend (and perhaps hope) that China will not succeed in transforming its economy, Xi and Li are acutely aware of the previous growth model’s unsustainability – and the challenges that changing it will entail.
For example, in March, Li said that implementing the needed market reforms “will be very painful, and even feel like cutting one’s wrist.”
And both Xi and Li have indicated the government’s willingness to tolerate slower GDP growth in the short term for the sake of building a stronger, more sustainable economy.
The final question is whether Europe and Japan will recover their “animal spirits.”
Given Europe’s current malaise and the waning impact of so-called “Abenomics” in Japan, it is difficult to believe that their economies, which fueled global output growth for several decades, will regain their former stature.
Indeed, Europeans and Japanese have largely given up hope of doing so.
Although European Union leaders have managed to keep the eurozone intact, they lack a long-term strategy to lift their economies out of the doldrums.
The seriousness of Europe’s situation is reflected in growing acceptance of the high unemployment – and youth-unemployment rates of over 50% – that some EU countries, including Spain and Greece, now face.
Meanwhile, the first two “arrows” of Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic program – radical monetary-policy easing and increased government spending – seem to have given the country’s long-stagnant economy a lift.
But the third and most important arrow – structural reform – has so far had little impact.
And, after more than two decades of political turmoil and economic decline, the Japanese public has become skeptical of official promises of economic revival.
Fortunately, the US and Chinese economies are underpinned by societies that remain dynamic, vibrant, and hopeful.
Young people in other parts of Asia, especially India and the ten ASEAN countries, are similarly optimistic – as well they should be.
Asia’s middle-class population is expected to experience explosive growth in the coming years, rising from 500 million people in 2010 to 1.75 billion in 2020.
Africa, with its population of one billion, is also gaining economic momentum, contributing further to the rapid expansion of the global middle class, which is expected to surge from 1.8 billion in 2010 to 3.2 billion in 2020 and to 4.9 billion people – more than half of the world’s population – in 2030.
Despite the massive challenges that countries like Syria, Somalia, Egypt, and Afghanistan currently face, and global challenges like food security and climate change, the world has reason to be hopeful about the future.
Notwithstanding today’s tragic and terrifying headlines, we may be entering a new golden age of human history.
China’s Visionary Stimulus
SHANGHAI – In March of last year, the first session of China’s 12th National People’s Congress began with then-Premier Wen Jiabao delivering his tenth and final “report on the work of the government.”
When he had finished, the 3,000 representatives in attendance gave him a resounding ovation that was surely a response to more than the report; it was a display of praise and respect for his achievements as the head of China’s government.
Since then, however, assessments of Wen’s leadership – particularly his stewardship of the economy – have varied widely.
Whereas Wen’s supporters remain adamant that he fundamentally supported a shift toward democracy and a market economy for China, his critics lambast him for failing to fulfill his promises of political and economic reform.
As Wen’s successor, Li Keqiang, attempts to engineer deep systemic reforms, understanding Wen’s policy decisions could not be more relevant.
Wen’s most contentious economic policy was the CN¥4 trillion ($586 billion) stimulus package that his government launched in response to the 2008 financial crisis.
Though the policy succeeded in buttressing China’s economic growth, it was widely criticized as an overreaction – one that led to excessive monetary expansion.
Indeed, the surge in bank loans caused China’s M2 (a broad measure of the money supply) to soar, from 150% of GDP in 2008 to some 200%, or more than CN¥100 trillion, today.
The massive injection of liquidity into China’s economy has contributed to rising debt, especially among local governments and firms, while fueling massive real-estate bubbles, and resulting in significant excess capacity.
Over the last 18 months, Li’s government has been attempting to address these challenges, by overhauling China’s industrial structure, reducing excess production capacity, restricting lending, containing the shadow banking sector, and curbing real-estate investment.
And he has had some success – at the expense of economic growth.
Though the current rate of 7% is comfortable, it is far lower than the double-digit rates that prevailed prior to 2008.
Given the need for further economic restructuring – and in view of long-term demographic trends, which will reduce the labor supply – pre-2008 growth rates are unlikely to be restored.
This is fine with Li, who recognizes that structural transformation and industrial upgrading – not an unsustainable credit-led growth model – is the key to achieving high-income status.
But there is more to assessing Wen’s stimulus than the growth/reform trade-off.
The policy also helped to expand China’s foreign trade and boost its external financial strength (with a robust balance-of-payments position, large international reserves, and a stable currency), thereby creating space for Li to carry out his ambitious reform agenda.
At the same time, the global financial crisis triggered a shift in the relative price of assets worldwide.
As developed countries were plunged into debt crises, with shrinking asset values and declining exchange rates, China’s international purchasing power grew.
This, together with Wen’s stimulus, bolstered China’s investment and financing capabilities considerably.
Countries like New Zealand and Peru, unable to depend on developed countries for export demand, signed bilateral free-trade agreements with China.
Likewise, when developed countries cut back on their foreign investment, China stepped in to inject much-needed capital into the global economy.
And China’s external financing activities do not end there.
In 2009-2010, China also invested heavily in the International Monetary Fund, with the People’s Bank of China announcing in 2009 that it would buy up to 32 billion special drawing rights (the IMF’s quasi-currency) – the equivalent of about $50 billion.
Over the same period, China signed multiple bilateral currency-swap agreements, offered policy loans and special assistance, and contributed to regional investment funds.
In the coming years, China’s engagement with the developing world will continue to deepen.
The National People’s Congress has discussed using a portion of China’s foreign-exchange reserves to finance infrastructure projects in developing countries.
Such a Chinese “Marshall Plan” could seek to strengthen developing countries’ capacity to absorb Chinese goods, or it could advance a broader development agenda.
Some central-bank officials have even advocated the establishment of a supra-sovereign wealth fund for developing-country investment.
China’s continued development demands that it continues to enlarge its capacity and influence in foreign assistance.
The global economic crisis accelerated the timetable for this process considerably, forcing China’s leaders to pursue it simultaneously with the economy’s structural transformation.
In this respect, Wen gave Li an invaluable head start.
How Fast Will China Grow?
BEIJING – In the 35 years since China’s transition to a market economy began, the country has grown at an average rate of 9.8% – an explosive and unprecedented rise.
But there are signs that the Chinese miracle is coming to an end – or at least that the country’s economic growth is slowing.
China’s growth rate has been falling since the first quarter of 2010.
In 2014, it was a relatively anemic 7.4%.
China’s economic growth is likely to continue to face stiff headwinds this year as well, at least when compared to previous decades.
As policymakers draw up the country’s 13th five-year plan, they will grapple with a fundamental question: How fast can China expect to grow?
In setting a country’s GDP target, the first thing to understand is the economy’s potential growth rate: the maximum pace of expansion that can be attained, assuming favorable conditions, internally and externally, without endangering the stability and sustainability of future growth.
As Adam Smith discussed in An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, economic growth depends on improvements in labor productivity, which today result from either technological innovation or industrial upgrading (the reallocation of productive capacity into new sectors with higher added value).
But developed countries at the innovation frontier are at a disadvantage.
To benefit from new technology, they must create it.
Developing countries, by contrast, possess a “latecomer advantage,” because they can achieve technological advances through imitation, importation, integration, and licensing.
As a result, their costs and risks are lower.
Over the last 150 years, developed economies have grown at an average rate of 3% per year, whereas some developing countries have achieved annual growth rates of 7% or higher for periods of 20 years or longer.
To calculate how much of a latecomer advantage China has after 35 years of unprecedented growth, one needs to look at the gap between its levels of technological and industrial development and those of high-income countries.
The best way to see this is by comparing its per capita income, adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP), with those of developed countries.
The larger the gap in per capita income, the larger the latecomer advantage and the greater the potential for growth.
In 2008, China’s per capita income was just over one-fifth that of the United States.
This gap is roughly equal to the gap between the US and Japan in 1951, after which Japan grew at an average annual rate of 9.2% for the next 20 years, or between the US and South Korea in 1977, after which South Korea grew at 7.6% per year for two decades.
Singapore in 1967 and Taiwan in 1975 had similar gaps – followed by similar growth rates.
By extension, in the 20 years after 2008, China should have a potential growth rate of roughly 8%.
But potential growth is just one part of the story.
Whether it can be achieved depends on domestic conditions and the international environment.
In order to exploit its latecomer advantage, China must deepen its reforms and eliminate its economy’s residual distortions.
Meanwhile, the government should play a proactive role in overcoming the market failures – such as externalities and coordination problems – that are certain to accompany technological innovation and industrial upgrading.
China has the potential to maintain robust growth by relying on domestic demand – and not only household consumption.
The country suffers no lack of investment opportunities, with significant scope for industrial upgrading and plenty of potential for improvement in urban infrastructure, public housing, and environmental management.
Moreover, China’s investment resources are abundant.
Combined central- and local-government debt amounts to less than 50% of GDP – low by international standards.
Meanwhile, private savings in China amount to nearly 50% of GDP, and the country’s foreign-exchange reserves have reached $4 trillion.
Even under comparatively unfavorable external conditions, China can rely on investment to create jobs in the short term; as the number of jobs grows, so will consumption.
The external scenario, however, is gloomier.
Though developed countries’ authorities intervened strongly in the aftermath of the global financial crisis in 2008, launching significant fiscal- and monetary-stimulus measures, many of their structural shortcomings remain unresolved.
“Abenomics” in Japan has yet to yield results, and the European Central Bank is following in the footsteps of America and Japan, pursuing quantitative easing in an effort to shore up demand.
Employment in the US is growing, but the rate of workforce participation remains subdued and the economy has yet to attain the 6-7% growth rates usually recorded in a post-recession rebound.
The US, Europe, and Japan are likely to experience continued sluggish performance, inhibiting China’s export growth.
As a result, Chinese growth is likely to fall below its potential of 8% a year.
As policymakers plan for the next five years, they should set China’s growth targets at 7-7.5%, adjusting them within that range as changes in the international climate dictate.
Such a growth target can help to stabilize employment, lower financial risk, and achieve the country’s goal of doubling income by 2020.
China Adjusts
BAHRAIN – China watchers are waiting to see whether the country has engineered a soft landing, cooling down an overheating economy and achieving a more sustainable rate of growth, or whether Asia’s dragon will crash to earth, as others in the neighborhood have before it.
But some, particularly American politicians in this presidential election year, focus on only one thing: China’s trade balance.
True, not long ago the renminbi was substantially undervalued, and China’s trade surpluses were very large.
That situation is changing.
Forces of adjustment are at work in the Chinese economy, so foreign perceptions need to adjust as well.
China’s trade surplus peaked at $300 billion in 2008, and has been declining ever since.
(Indeed, official data showed a $31 billion deficit in February, the largest since 1998.)
It is clear what has happened.
Ever since China rejoined the global economy three decades ago, its trading partners have been snapping up its manufacturing exports, because low Chinese wages made them super-competitive.
But, in recent years, relative prices have adjusted.
The change can be measured by real exchange-rate appreciation, which consists partly in nominal renminbi appreciation against the dollar, and partly in Chinese inflation.
China’s government should have let more of the real appreciation take the form of nominal appreciation (dollars per renminbi). But, because it did not, it has shown up as inflation instead.
The natural price-adjustment process was delayed.
First, the authorities intervened in 1995-2005, and again in 2008-2010, to keep the dollar exchange rate virtually fixed.
Second, workers in China’s increasingly productive coastal factories were not paid their full value (the economy has not completed its transition from Mao to market, after all).
As a result, China continued to undersell the world.
But then the renminbi was finally allowed to appreciate against the dollar – by about 25% cumulatively during 2005-2008 and 2010-2011.
Moreover labor shortages began to appear, and Chinese workers began to win rapid wage increases.
Beijing, Shenzhen, and Shanghai raised their minimum wages sharply in the last three years – by 22% on average in 2010 and 2011.
Meanwhile another cost of business, land prices, rose even more rapidly.
As costs rise in China’s coastal provinces, several types of adjustment are taking place.
Some manufacturing is migrating inland, where wages and land prices are still relatively low, and some export operations are shifting to countries like Vietnam, where they are lower still.
Moreover, Chinese companies are beginning to automate, substituting capital for labor, and are producing more sophisticated goods, following the path blazed by Japan, Korea, and other Asian countries in the “flying geese” formation.
Finally, multinational companies that had moved some operations to China from the United States or other high-wage countries are now moving back.
Productivity is still higher in the US, after all.
Like certain other aspects of the US-China economic relationship, China’s adjustment is reminiscent of Japan with a 30-year lag.
Japan’s trade balance fell into deficit in 2011, for the first time since 1980.
Special factors have played a role in the last year, including high oil prices and the effects of the March 2011 tsunami.
But the downward trend in the trade balance is clear.
Even the current account showed a deficit in January.
This development has received relatively little attention in the US and other trading partners, which is curious, given that, two decades ago, Japan’s big trade surplus was the subject of intense focus and worry – just like China’s now.
At the time, some influential commentators warned that the Japanese had discovered a superior economic model, featuring strategic trade policy (among other attractions), and that the rest of us had better emulate them.
Either that, or the Japanese were “cheating,” in which case we needed to stop them.
Most economists rejected these “revisionist” views, and argued that Japan’s current-account surplus was large because its national saving rate was high, which reflected demographics, not cultural differences or government policies.
The Japanese population was relatively young, compared to other advanced economies, but was rapidly aging, owing to a declining birth rate since the 1940’s and rising longevity.
That view has been vindicated.
In 1980, 9% of Japan’s population was 65 or older; now the ratio is more than 23%, one of the highest in the world.
As a consequence, Japanese citizens who 30 years ago were saving for their retirement are now dissaving, precisely as economic theory predicted.
As the national saving rate has come down, so has the current-account surplus.
China faces a similar demographic trend, and also a push to unleash household consumption in order to sustain GDP growth.
As in Japan, the downward trend in China’s saving rate will show up in its current account.
The laws of international economics still apply.
Will China’s Infrastructure Bank Work?
CAMBRIDGE – With China set to lead a new $50 billion international financial institution, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), most of the debate has centered on the United States’ futile efforts to discourage other advanced economies from joining.
Far too little attention has been devoted to understanding why multilateral development lending has so often failed, and what might be done to make it work better.
Multilateral development institutions have probably had their most consistent success when they serve as “knowledge” banks, helping to share experience, best practices, and technical knowledge across regions.
By contrast, their greatest failures have come from funding grandiose projects that benefit the current elite, but do not properly balance environmental, social, and development priorities.
Dam construction is a leading historical example.
In general, there is a tendency to overestimate the economic benefits of big infrastructure projects in countries riddled by poor governance and corruption, and to underestimate the long-run social costs of having to repay loans whether or not promised revenues materialize. Obviously, the AIIB runs this risk.
That said, there are huge infrastructure needs across developing Asia, and it is high time for China to play a greater role in international lending institutions.
Moreover, the official US argument – that China should invest its money in existing institutions, such as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, because a Chinese-led bank would likely have governance problems – smacks of hypocrisy.
Good governance?
Is the US prepared to relinquish its historical prerogative to choose the World Bank president?
Likewise, the US worries that China may use the AIIB to advance China’s economic and political interests.
But anyone who is even vaguely familiar with the US approach to multilateral lending knows that no other country has been as adept at exploiting its power and leverage for strategic gain.
With China’s growing importance in the world order, it needs to be given space to forge its own approach to global economic leadership.
Frankly, a relatively small infrastructure bank seems as good a place as any to start.
Besides, China is already pouring money into the developing world, often through highly opaque channels.
To the extent that the AIIB normalizes a portion of Chinese development assistance, and subjects it to scrutiny from the new bank’s advanced-country members, the new bank’s existence should be all for the better.
With its penchant for constant experimentation and improvement, one might even hope that China will draw lessons and apply them to all of its developing-country lending.
Who knows, maybe the existing development banks will learn something.
While the world should generally welcome China’s initiative, the real question is what kind of aid developing Asia needs.
Anyone who has worked in developing countries understands that weak institutions and poor governance are often far bigger obstacles to growth than a lack of funds.
And, however great a project looks on paper, practical implementation is often a sobering experience.
Costs invariably far exceed initial estimates, and planners often woefully underestimate the skills and funding needed to ensure maintenance and repairs.
My interpretation of the World Bank’s record is that its role has been most consistently positive when it helps countries with “soft” development infrastructure: technical assistance and serving as a global knowledge bank.
When its main role has been to provide financial muscle, the results have been less impressive.
In China itself, for example, World Bank money has not been so important quantitatively, yet the Chinese generally credit the Bank for having helpful blueprints and information.
Indeed, a strong case can be made that development aid would be more effective if it took the form of outright grants, rather than loans that ultimately need to be repaid.
Headline aid numbers might seem less impressive, but long-run results would be better.
Moreover, the world is awash in liquidity right now, and even where a government’s own money is inadequate, it is often possible to establish public-private partnerships to build genuinely high-return projects.
Competent government is a far scarcer commodity than cash.
Unfortunately, it is far from clear that the Chinese model of infrastructure development can be exported universally.
China’s strong central government overwhelms opposition from people displaced by new roads, bridges, and dams, and for many years ran roughshod over environmental concerns and workers’ rights.
The parallels to the old Soviet Union are striking.
Some developing countries in Asia work differently.
In democratic India, for example, it took eight years to rebuild Mumbai’s airport, because courts forced the government to respect the rights of squatters on its outskirts.
Given the legacy of problematic loans and projects funded by Western-led infrastructure banks, it is reasonable to ask whether another one is needed, as opposed to reforming existing institutions.
Still, if the AIIB views itself mainly as a knowledge bank, rather than a funding vehicle, it could provide real added value.
We should evaluate the AIIB by how it chooses and fosters projects, not just by how much financing it provides.
Asia’s Multilateralism
NEW YORK – The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are poised to hold their annual meetings, but the big news in global economic governance will not be made in Washington DC in the coming days.
Indeed, that news was made last month, when the United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Italy joined more than 30 other countries as founding members of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB).
The $50 billion AIIB, launched by China, will help meet Asia’s enormous infrastructure needs, which are well beyond the capacity of today’s institutional arrangements to finance.
One would have thought that the AIIB’s launch, and the decision of so many governments to support it, would be a cause for universal celebration.
And for the IMF, the World Bank, and many others, it was.
But, puzzlingly, wealthy European countries’ decision to join provoked the ire of American officials.
Indeed, one unnamed American source accused the UK of “constant accommodation” of China.
Covertly, the United States put pressure on countries around the world to stay away.
In fact, America’s opposition to the AIIB is inconsistent with its stated economic priorities in Asia.
Sadly, it seems to be another case of America’s insecurity about its global influence trumping its idealistic rhetoric – this time possibly undermining an important opportunity to strengthen Asia’s developing economies.
China itself is a testament to the extent to which infrastructure investment can contribute to development.
Last month, I visited formerly remote areas of the country that are now prosperous as a result of the connectivity – and thus the freer flow of people, goods, and ideas – that such investments have delivered.
The AIIB would bring similar benefits to other parts of Asia, which deepens the irony of US opposition.
President Barack Obama’s administration is championing the virtues of trade; but, in developing countries, lack of infrastructure is a far more serious barrier to trade than tariffs.
There is a further major global advantage to a fund like the AIIB: right now, the world suffers from insufficient aggregate demand.
Financial markets have proven unequal to the task of recycling savings from places where incomes exceed consumption to places where investment is needed.
When he was Chair of the US Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke mistakenly described the problem as a “global saving glut.”
But in a world with such huge infrastructure needs, the problem is not a surplus of savings or a deficiency of good investment opportunities. The problem is a financial system that has excelled at enabling market manipulation, speculation, and insider trading, but has failed at its core task: intermediating savings and investment on a global scale.
That is why the AIIB could bring a small but badly needed boost to global aggregate demand.
So we should welcome China’s initiative to multilateralize the flow of funds.
Indeed, it replicates American policy in the period following World War II, when the World Bank was founded to multilaterize development funds that were overwhelmingly coming from the US (a move that also helped to create a cadre of first-class international civil servants and development professionals).
The World Bank’s assistance was sometimes overburdened by prevailing ideology; for example, the free-market Washington Consensus policies foisted on recipients actually led to deindustrialization and declining income in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Nonetheless, US assistance was, overall, far more effective than it would have been had it not been multilateralized.
Had these resources been channeled through America’s own aid agency, policymaking would have been subject to the vagaries of development thinking (or the absence of reflection) from one administration to another.
New attempts to multilateralize flows of assistance (including the BRICS countries’ launch of the New Development Bank last July) are similarly likely to contribute significantly to global development.
Some years ago, the Asian Development Bank defended the virtues of competitive pluralism.
The AIIB offers a chance to test that idea in development finance itself.
Perhaps America’s opposition to the AIIB is an example of an economic phenomenon that I have often observed: firms want greater competition everywhere except in their own industry.
This position has already exacted a heavy price: had there been a more competitive marketplace of ideas, the flawed Washington Consensus might never have become a consensus at all.
America’s opposition to the AIIB is not unprecedented; in fact, it is akin to the successful US opposition to Japan’s generous New Miyazawa Initiative of the late 1990s, which offered $80 billion to help countries in the East Asian crisis.
Then, as now, it was not as if the US were offering an alternative source of funding. It simply wanted hegemony.
In an increasingly multipolar world, it wanted to remain the G-1.
The lack of money, combined with America’s insistence on flawed ideas about how to respond to the crisis, caused the downturn to be far deeper and longer than it should have been.
That said, US opposition to the AIIB is harder to fathom, given that infrastructure policy is much less subject to the influence of ideology and special interests than other policymaking areas, such as those dominated by the US at the World Bank.
Moreover, the need for environmental and social safeguards in infrastructure investment is more likely to be addressed effectively within a multilateral framework.
The UK, France, Italy, Germany, and the others who have decided to join the AIIB should be congratulated.
One hopes that other countries, both in Europe and Asia, will join as well, helping to fulfill the ambition that infrastructure improvements can raise living standards in other parts of the region, as they have already done in China.
China and a New Balance of Power
SHANGHAI – The last rival superpower to the United States, the Soviet Union, collapsed in 1991.
But, apart from its military strength, the USSR was never really powerful enough to counterbalance US influence.
In the late 1980’s, Japan seemed capable of challenging America’s industrial leadership, but by the 1990’s it lost its competitive edge.
China might itself wish to be a major force in a multi-polar world, but has been plagued by its lack of overall strength.
Given these realities, China sees the expanding European Union as a likely counterweight to unchecked US power.
In terms of economic output, today’s EU is on par with the US.
But it has yet to build a strong defense system that can respond effectively either to regional contingencies or to global needs.
What would be the strength of such a system if and when it is developed, and how will it compare with that of the US?
In assessing America’s strength, China follows US debates on the merits of a uni-polar or a multi-polar world with keen interest.
Some Americans favor a uni-polar system in which the US dominates.
Such a Pax Americana would cost the country less to sustain, but the world would worry if America adopts a wrong policy, as has been the case in Iraq.
The US certainly has a right to curb terrorists like those who staged the attack on September 11, 2001.
But the “war on terror” did not warrant the decision to attack a sovereign state and topple its government on the flawed presumption that it housed weapons of mass destruction and was linked to the 2001 attacks.
The US went to war despite strong opposition from France, Germany, Russia, China, and other United Nations Security Council members.
France and Germany have since sought to restore good relations with the US, but continue to disapprove of the war.
The Middle East, always a region of concern for Europe, has become even less stable as a result of the war.
American leadership has been one of the war’s casualties.
In China, the concept of an independent European defense – embodied in the European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP), as well as the EU’s Rapid Reaction Force (RRF) and various police missions – is thus generally seen as necessary and effective in a multi-polar world system.
China observes that on most security matters, the ESDP will (for now) mimic American security interests, because the EU and US share fundamental values of human rights and democracy.
Moreover, many EU members have simultaneously pledged their defense capabilities to NATO, which has been led by the US since its creation.
But the ESDP, once fully developed, will not necessarily follow America’s lead unconditionally, especially if American policy continues to deviate from the norm of international law, as in Iraq.
As a result of acquiring a pan-European defense capacity, the Europeans are likely to play a more independent role than at present in managing intra-European security relations and carrying out global missions.
China welcomes this expanded security role for the EU.
Although it remains wary of international intervention by the EU, the substance and pattern of ESDP operations are likely to win China’s respect for several reasons.
First, China’s leaders note that the ESDP gives priority to the legitimacy of its missions.
So far, all ESDP missions have respected international law and governmental arrangements among disputing parties.
Most of its military or police missions have been based on UN Security Council resolutions, and ESDP missions outside Europe have been at the invitation of local authorities.
Of course, ESDP security missions, even those in accordance with Security Council resolutions, may not operate within the UN system – the EU prefers its own independent leadership.
The ESDP does not necessarily require Security Council authorization as a condition for its missions, and it retains an independent role in executing them.
However, when compared with the US, the ESDP (in Chinese eyes) cares far more about international legitimacy, backed by the authority of the UN.
Second, the ESDP is concerned with good governance and institution building.
The EU is keen to restore or establish human rights, stability, and prosperity.
Outside Europe, the ESDP acts to enhance governance rather than promote regime change, and the EU has often assisted governments’ efforts to improve security conditions.
Third, the ESDP is open to international cooperation.
The EU works with either non-EU states, such as NATO members like Canada, Norway, and Turkey, or applicants for EU membership.
The ESDP cooperates with the UN and other regional organizations, such as the African Union and ASEAN.
When the EU reaches out, it tends to play a leading role in these collaborations.
There are good reasons to expect that China will continue to accept an independent European security mechanism.
There is little concern, if any, about the ESDP intervening in internal Chinese affairs, such as Taiwan.
Indeed, China wants a strong and independent Europe, and from that vantage point it is not too early for China to envisage a truly multi-polar global system.
China and India Exposed
BERKELEY – Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao’s forthcoming trip to India, following hard on the heels of President Barack Obama’s recent visit, will provide another opportunity for the media to gush about the growing global economic clout of China and India.
We can be sure that the soft underbellies of both economies will be kept hidden from view.
After a couple of centuries of relative stagnation, these two countries, containing nearly two-fifths of the world’s population, have experienced remarkably rapid income growth in the last three decades.
In manufacturing and services (particularly software, business processing, etc.), respectively, China and India have made huge strides internationally, and their acquisition of global companies has attracted considerable attention.
But some dubious assertions have, through constant repetition in recent, often breathless, accounts about the two economies, become part of conventional wisdom. Much of what really goes on inside these two large countries is often left out.
For example, in terms of value added (the value of output after deducting the cost of materials and components), China, contrary to popular impression, is not yet the manufacturing center of the world.
The Chinese produce about 15% of value added in world manufacturing, while the United States contributes about 24% and the European Union about 20%.
Similarly, while India’s information technology-enabled services have gained an international reputation, the total number of people employed in this sector is less than 0.5% of India’s workforce.
As such, it cannot, by itself, transform the Indian economy.
Chinese growth is widely regarded as furiously export-driven, but domestic investment has in fact been the major component.
Even at the height of global trade expansion in 2002-2007, exports (in value-added terms) accounted for only a little more than one-quarter of GDP growth, whereas domestic investment contributed a substantially larger share.
Moreover, contrary to popular belief, much of the dramatic poverty reduction in China over the last three decades was due not to integration into the global economy, but to domestic factors like growth in the agricultural sector (where mass poverty was concentrated).
This is attributable largely to public investment in rural infrastructure, and, in the initial period, to institutional changes in agrarian production organization and an egalitarian distribution of land-cultivation rights.
Expansion of exports of labor-intensive manufactures has nonetheless lifted many Chinese out of poverty.
That is not true of India, where exports are still mainly skill- and capital-intensive.
Economic reform clearly has made the Indian corporate sector more vibrant and competitive, but most of the Indian economy is not in the corporate sector (public or private).
Indeed, 92% of the labor force is employed in the informal sector.
Indian poverty reduction has been significant, but not substantial.
However, in terms of non-income indicators of poverty – for example, child mortality, malnutrition, and school dropouts – India’s performance has been dismal (in some respects worse even than in sub-Saharan Africa).
In the financial media, China and India have become poster children for market reform and globalization, even though in matters of privatization, property rights, deregulation, and lingering bureaucratic rigidities, both countries have in many ways departed from economic orthodoxy.
According to the US-based Heritage Foundation’s widely cited Index of Economic Freedom, China and India are relegated to the group described as “mostly unfree.”
Out of a total of 157 countries in 2008, China ranked 126th and India 115th.
Although socialist economic policies in both countries inhibited initiative and enterprise, a positive legacy of that period cannot be denied.
It is arguable, for example, that Chinese socialism provided a strong launching pad for growth, particularly in terms of a solid base of education and health, rural electrification, a safety net enabled by equitable distribution of land rights, regional economic decentralization, and high female participation in the labor force.
Moreover, a major part of the socialist legacy in both countries is the cumulative effect of the state’s active role in technological development.
Unlike in India, where the private corporate sector is the most dynamic sector, in China state-controlled companies are some of the globally more successful.
Even in famous private Chinese companies like Lenovo and Huawei Technologies, the ownership structure is highly convoluted, and the boundaries of state and private control rights blurred.
The recent purchase of Volvo by the private Chinese automaker Geely generated much publicity, but most of the money was put up by municipal governments.
Powerful political families run many Chinese state-owned enterprises.
Indeed, there is some evidence that the overwhelming majority of multi-millionaires in China are relatives of high-ranking Communist Party officials.
And, thanks to the large pool of savings generated by Chinese households and state-owned companies, the Chinese economy can for the time being bear the waste and misallocation implied by such crony capitalism.
Without political reform, the long-run viability of such a system is in doubt.
Premier Wen himself indicated as much in a speech in August that was widely noted abroad, but largely blacked out in Chinese media.
The global media should now go further, and begin to examine the many features of the rise of China and India that depart from the simplistic narrative of the triumph of market reform.
China and Russia in the New World Disorder
Can Kosovo achieve independence without the tacit consent of Russia, and can there be a humanitarian and political solution to the tragedy in Darfur without the active goodwill of China?
The two crises have nothing in common, but their resolution will depend in large part on whether these two permanent members of the United Nations Security Council use their veto power.
Comparing the respective abilities of Russia and China to block key international initiatives makes no sense in itself, but it does constitute a useful tool for understanding the transformation of the international system that is now taking place as a direct consequence of the relative decline of America’s global power.
From that standpoint, the deepening of chaos in the Middle East poses both opportunities and risks for Russia and China, which may force them to define the roles they want to play and the images they want to project in the world.
The key question is this: Is Russia taking giant steps in the “wrong direction” while China is taking “minuscule” steps in the “right direction”?
Superficially, Russia and China may give the impression that they are pursuing the same path when they both proclaim with pride that they are “back” on the world stage.
But this boast means different things for each country.
For China, a deeply self-confident country, to be “back” simply means regaining the country’s historical centrality in the world after an absence of more than two centuries.
After all, at the end of the eighteenth century, China became the world’s first producer of manufactured goods, and it perceives itself as a center of civilization unequalled by any other in Asia, if not the world.
China’s renewed self-confidence is based on its remarkable economic prowess, which is derived not from natural resources, but from productivity and creativity.
Whatever the huge political, social, and economic tensions may exist, there is a “feel good” factor in China, a sense of progress, with the 2008 Olympics in Beijing figuring as the symbolic moment that will proclaim to the world the scale of the country’s achievements.
Above all, with the exception of the Taiwan issue, China is a satisfied status quo power when it comes to the evolution of the international system – a patient actor that finds it perfectly legitimate to behave and to be seen as the world’s number two power.
By contrast, the Russians remain insecure about their status in the world.
Russia’s explosive “revisionist” behavior on the eve of the recent G8 summit is an indication of the Kremlin’s “unsatisfied” nature.
Because they know they are less potent, particularly in demographic and economic terms, Russians feel they have to do “more.”
For them, to say “Russia is back” means that the humiliating Yeltsin years are over, and that they now must be treated as equals, particularly by the United States.
Russians are nostalgic not for the Cold War as such, but for the international status they lost when it ended.
Now that America is no longer a “hyperpower” with no strategic challengers, Russia has reasserted its status as a “superpower,” a claim that is not necessarily supported by reality.
Unlike the Chinese, the Russians do not create economic wealth, but merely exploit their energy and mineral resources.
Moreover, unlike the Chinese, they have not always been confident of their position in the world.
Torn between Europe and Asia in cultural and political terms, victimized by a dark, narcissistic instinct that pervades their reading of their past and their visions of the future, it should surprise no one that Russia is now behaving like a “revisionist” power.
Unsatisfied with their inner identity, it is only natural that Russians should demand changes that make them feel more secure and proud.
Less than 20 years ago, the Czech Republic and Poland were part of their sphere of influence, so Russians understandably cannot accept the US unilaterally implanting its security system there.
Of course, in their respective judgments on Russia and China, the West – and Europeans in particular – may be demonstrating selective emotions.
“We” tend to be less demanding of China than of Russia, because we tend to see Russia as “European” (at least culturally).
As a result, the culture of physical violence and verbal provocation that is gaining ground in Putin’s Russia is deeply disturbing, whereas we tend to judge Chinese misdeeds with a greater sense of distance, if not indifference.
But the differences between Russia and China today may prove to be less significant tomorrow if the deterioration in the Middle East imposes a sense of collective responsibility on all five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
It is one thing for Russia and China to exploit America’s growing difficulties from Gaza to Kabul; but it is quite another if the situation deteriorates to the point of general destabilization in the region.
Indeed, the Middle East’s deepening problems may impose a sense of restraint in Russia and China by forcing them to calculate not in terms of their global “nuisance value” vis-à-vis the West, but in terms of their ability to make a positive and stabilizing contribution to the world order.
China and the Afghan Endgame
BEIJING – Ever since US President Barack Obama decided to begin withdrawing American troops from Afghanistan, global interest in what role (if any) China will play in determining that war-ravaged country’s future has grown dramatically.
After all, China is not merely a neighbor of Afghanistan, but the world’s most important rising power – indeed, a “world power,” as Mike Mullen, Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff proclaimed in Beijing this past June.
If China proves itself willing to help shore up Afghan President Hamid Karzai’s administration, it will not seek to gain any immediate advantage from the withdrawal of US forces.
But, despite the billions of dollars China has invested in developing Afghanistan’s natural resources, it is hard to see it undertaking a policy of broader and proactive engagement there.
One reason why China is wary of assuming a bigger role in Afghanistan, despite the country’s undoubted importance for regional stability, is that America’s war there has been controversial in China from the outset.
Chinese nationalists believe that the war was undertaken by the US partly in order to place its military near one of China’s most sensitive borders.
Moreover, to supply its Afghan forces, the US deepened its military footprint in Central Asia by renting the Manas Air Base in Kyrgyzstan, which also shares a border with China.
In the eyes of Chinese nationalists, these efforts were all the part of an American conspiracy to encircle China.
Thus, Chinese nationalists can’t wait to see the back of America’s Afghan military presence.
For Chinese strategic realists, any support for America’s efforts to help end the Afghan insurgency should be part of a broader China-US bargain.
China might agree not to undermine America as it withdraws only if the US agrees to rethink its arms sales to Taiwan, or to pull back from its commitment to support Japan’s claims to the Diaoyu/Senkaku islands, the ownership of which China disputes.
Obviously, such deals will be unwelcome in the US.
Given that neither Chinese foreign-policy camp believes that it will get what it wants out of cooperating with the US, both simply want America’s withdrawal to happen as soon as possible, without concern for what Afghanistan will look like afterwards.
For both camps, only great-power politics matters for China’s national security, and if diplomacy cannot influence the balance of power, there is little reason to engage with an issue.
For Chinese liberals, Afghanistan is fraught with ethnic threats.
By recklessly denying China’s request to extradite Uighur extremists to China for trial, the US showed scant regard for an issue of paramount importance – the threat posed to China’s hard-won unity by separatists.
Muslim Uighurs from Xinjiang province were captured in Taliban training campus and jailed at Guantánamo Bay with other international terrorists from 2002 through 2009.
China thought their extradition necessary to undercutting international sympathy for Uighur independence seekers.
But the US worried about the potential for human-rights abuses in China and rejected the Uighurs’ extradition.
Indeed, former President George W. Bush welcomed Rebiya Kadeer, a leader of the exiled Uighur independence movement, to the White House, embittering many Chinese.
And given that the Uighur bastion of Xinjiang is close to China’s borders with Afghanistan and Pakistan, the US was unwise to raise Chinese hackles in this way.
Of course, a stable, orderly, and secular Afghanistan serves China’s interests as much as it benefits the rest of the world.
Yet few Chinese are willing to confess that the US-led Afghanistan war, which removed the Taliban and Al Qaeda from their dominant roles in the country, improved China’s domestic security.
That refusal is clearly the result of the “structural” ambivalence that now exists between the US and China.
The extent to which China will engage Afghanistan positively will depend in large part on whether China rids itself of the prevailing zero-sum mindset and facilitates America’s military withdrawal by doing what it can to stabilize the country.
China can help by stiffening the resolve of Pakistan’s military to move more aggressively to contain Taliban extremists on its territory; open border regions to help resupply NATO forces in Afghanistan; and invest in the country’s infrastructure.
Indeed, China’s relations with Pakistan have assumed greater importance recently, owing to the tensions that now exist between Pakistan and the US.
The Obama administration’s challenge nowadays is to calibrate its recent suspension of some military aid to Pakistan in order to maximize its leverage without pushing the government even closer to the extremists.
By working with the US on Pakistan, China can help secure its own interest in a strong Pakistani campaign against the militants on its territory.
Regardless of the Bush-era disputes with the US over the Uighur prisoners at Guantánamo, China is in a better position to tell its “all-weather” friends in Islamabad that stabilizing Afghanistan is not only an American objective, but a significant Chinese goal as well.
China’s cooperation may not be essential to defeating Al Qaeda and other militants in Afghanistan, but it will be if lasting peace and stability is to be realized.
Chinese and US interests in Afghanistan are unlikely ever to be perfectly aligned, but the two sides can and must learn to cooperate for their own benefit, and that of the region.
The challenge for China is to exert its power and influence in a way that harmonizes with the US, despite widespread displeasure among Chinese at America’s position on a variety of issues, from Taiwan to the East and South China seas.
The Two Innovation Economies
HONG KONG – For 250 years, technological innovation has driven economic development.
But the economics of innovation are very different for those at the frontier versus those who are followers striving to catch up.
At the frontier, the innovation economy begins with discovery and culminates in speculation.
From scientific research to identification of commercial applications of new technologies, progress has been achieved through trial and error.
The strategic technologies that have repeatedly transformed the market economy – from railroads to the Internet – required the construction of networks whose value in use could not be known when they were first deployed.
Consequently, innovation at the frontier depends on funding sources that are decoupled from concern for economic value; thus, it cannot be reduced to the optimal allocation of resources.
The conventional production function of neoclassical economics offers a dangerously misleading lens through which to interpret the processes of frontier innovation.
Financial speculation has been, and remains, one required source of funding.
Financial bubbles emerge wherever liquid asset markets exist.
Indeed, the objects of such speculation astound the imagination: tulip bulbs, gold and silver mines, real estate, the debt of new nations, corporate securities.
Occasionally, the object of speculation has been one of those fundamental technologies – canals, railroads, electrification, radio, automobiles, microelectronics, computing, the Internet – for which financial speculators have mobilized capital on a scale far beyond what “rational” investors would provide.
From the wreckage that has inevitably followed, a succession of new economies has emerged.
Complementing the role of speculation, activist states have played several roles in encouraging innovation.
They have been most effective when pursuing politically legitimate missions that transcend narrow economic calculation: social development, national security, conquering disease.
In the United States, the government constructed transformational networks (the interstate highway system), massively subsidized their construction (the transcontinental railroads), or played the foundational role in their design and early development (the Internet).
Activist states around the world have funded basic science and served as early customers for the novel products that result.
For a quarter-century starting in 1950, the US Department of Defense – to cite one crucial example – combined both roles to build the underpinnings of today’s digital economy.
For countries following an innovative leader, the path is clear.
Mercantilist policies of protection and subsidy have been effective instruments of an economically active state.
In the US, the first profitable textile mills blatantly violated British patents.
And ferociously entrepreneurial private enterprise was supported by a broad array of state investments, guarantees, and protective tariffs, in accordance with the “American System” inspired by Alexander Hamilton and realized by Henry Clay.
The great, neglected German economist Friedrich List, a student of Hamilton’s work, laid out an innovation roadmap for his own country in 1841, in his National System of Political Economy.
It has been used repeatedly: by Japan beginning in the last decades of the nineteenth century; by the Asian Tigers in the second half of the twentieth century; and now by China.
List noted how Britain’s emergence as “the first industrial nation” at the end of the eighteenth century depended on prior state policies to promote British industry.
“Had the English left everything to itself,” he wrote, “the Belgians would be still manufacturing cloth for the English, [and] England would still have been the sheepyard for the [Hanseatic League].”
Coherent programs to promote economic catch-up are relatively straightforward.
But the transition from follower to leader at the frontier of the innovation economy is more challenging and elusive.
The US managed the transition roughly between 1880 and 1930, combining the professionalization of management with a speculative taste for new technologies – electrification, automobiles, and radio – and state tolerance of the Second Industrial Revolution’s great industrial monopolies, which invested their super-profits in scientific research.
The post-World War II invocation of national security as the legitimizing rationale for an economically active state extended America’s leadership.
It is not yet clear whether East Asia’s economic powerhouses will succeed in making the transition from follower to frontier.
To begin, the “national champions” of the catch-up phase must be rendered accessible to competitive assault.
More generally, the state’s role must shift from executing well-defined programs to supporting trial-and-error experimentation and tolerating entrepreneurial failure.
And the debilitating “corruption tax” that seems inevitably to accompany economic revolutions must be curbed, as it was in Britain during the nineteenth century and America during the twentieth.
Here is the moment of strategic uncertainty.
The “made in America” digital economy exhibits ample momentum in the private sector.
But leadership of the next new economy – the low-carbon economy – is open.
America is suffering the consequences of a generation-long effort to render the state illegitimate as an economic actor.
Europe is mired in its oxymoronic commitment to “expansionary fiscal austerity.”
Can China manage the economic, cultural, and political transitions necessary to assume the leadership role now up for grabs?
I find it intriguing to go back almost 200 years and consider Britain’s political economy when the First Industrial Revolution was gathering steam.
England in 1820 was governed by a corrupt oligarchy that exercised power in intimate collaboration with a national religious establishment.
Political legitimacy was validated by fear of anarchy, the terrifying reality of which had been observable across the Channel within living memory.
Arbitrary, draconian repression was the rule: under the “Bloody Code” of criminal justice, more than 100 felonies were punishable by death or transportation.
The patent system was notoriously expensive and inaccessible.
England’s rulers sought in vain to keep a lid on the greatest explosion of economic energy and financial wealth in human history.
Over a long generation, England was transformed.
From the Great Reform Act of 1832 to the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 – and on to the civil-service reforms initiated in 1853 and the Representation of the People Act of 1867 – Britain pursued its unique path toward a relatively stable and sustainable democratic capitalism.
No doubt China’s own path will be as distinctive as the processes by which it has reached its current moment of opportunity.
Whether or not its path proves to be as progressive as England’s may determine who assumes the mantle of global economic leadership.
Graft or Growth in China?
BEIJING – Chinese President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign, which has already brought down many high-ranking “tigers” in the government, has been widely touted as a key component of the deep structural reforms that China needs if it is to build a more sustainable, inclusive, and market-based economy.
But worries abound that, in a country where government officials play a major role in promoting economic growth, rooting out corruption might undermine prosperity.
Some have cited the recent struggles of luxury hotels and restaurants (which, in China, are supported largely by government spending) as evidence that the anti-corruption campaign is discouraging growth-enhancing activity.
But the decline is likely to be temporary, with new customers emerging after a period of adjustment.
A more credible concern is whether efforts to root out corruption weaken the incentive for government officials to promote growth.
After all, high levels of growth translate into large rents that can, through corrupt practices, be distributed to the officials themselves, as well as to their friends and protégé.
Eliminate such practices, the logic goes, and officials will be unable to reap large rewards from economic growth – and thus will be less motivated to encourage it.
But this argument is far from airtight.
Among the most common forms of corruption is the “sale” of government positions – a practice that has little to do with growth, especially when it is conducted by high-ranking officers in the army, such as the Peoples’ Liberation Army generals who have been arrested during the campaign for trading promotions for bribes.
Another major concern is that, if businesses are no longer able to “grease the wheels” – that is, bribe officials to allow them to circumvent excessive regulations – their performance could suffer.
And, indeed, even after 30 years of reform, China’s economy remains bound by red tape, which drags down productivity considerably.
But there are holes in this logic, too.
Most important, for such bribery to boost economic growth in any significant or sustainable way, it would have to be conducted by a wide range of businesses – not just the wealthiest and best connected.
That is not the case today; most Chinese officials who have been charged so far have taken bribes from a single businessman, thereby allowing his business to acquire a monopoly position.
So, while bribery in China may facilitate growth to some extent, it does not produce the kind of competitive business environment that supports long-term gains.
Indeed, the reality is that corruption imposes a large, often random, tax on businesses, not least by discouraging officials from cutting red tape for all firms – a move that really would boost growth.
The conclusion is clear: the costs of corruption far outweigh the benefits – and not only in China.
Since World War II, many countries have attempted the transition from low- to high-income status, but only 13 have succeeded – and all had relatively low levels of official corruption.
Given this, one might ask how China managed to achieve such impressive growth over the last 20 years, despite rampant corruption.
The answer probably lies in its “selectocracy.”
Unlike in a democracy, where citizens elect their government officials based on whatever criteria they choose, in China’s selectocracy, the Chinese Communist Party chooses officials for promotion based on their ability to advance the party’s main objectives – especially growth.
Of course, political connections and loyalty also factor into promotion decisions, especially at higher levels of government.
But, as the US-based political scientist Pierre Landry and his colleagues have observed, economic growth is key, particularly among officials at the county and municipal levels, where much of the government’s growth-enhancing activities – such as infrastructure investment – take place.
Promotions provide officials with a strong positive incentive to boost growth.
Consider Liu Zhijun, the former railway minister, who propelled China’s frenzy of high-speed rail construction.
His yearning for professional achievement – and, especially, his desire to be promoted – motivated his significant contributions to China’s GDP growth.
But Liu also engaged in massive abuses of power – including accepting more than $10 million in bribes by the time he was arrested in 2011 – that resulted in significant economic losses for the state.
His (suspended) death sentence should help to deter other officials from choosing the same path.
If corrupt officials can make such significant contributions to growth, imagine what law-abiding officials could do.
All they need are strong incentives to be proactive.
In this sense, China’s “selectocracy,” which promises promotions to the officials who prove most effective in promoting growth, could be the key to explaining the country’s impressive economic track record.
China as a Superpower
YALTA – Given its rapid and successful development, there can be no doubt that the People’s Republic of China will become one of the dominant global powers of the twenty-first century. Indeed, despite the massive problems that the country is confronting, it could even emerge as the global power.
But it would be a mistake to assume that the reemergence of so-called “XXL powers” like China and India will simply bring a continuation of Western traditions.
We will have to deal with a different type of superpower.
Ever since the European powers set sail at the end of the fifteenth century to conquer the world, historiography and international politics have become accustomed to a certain pattern: military, economic, and technological power is translated into the exercise of influence over other countries, conquest, and even global dominance and empire.
This was particularly true in the twentieth century, when, in the wake of two world wars, the United States and the Soviet Union replaced the European world powers on the global stage. The Cold War and the period of US global dominance after 1989/1990 followed this pattern as well.
But China’s rise to global power, I believe, will not, owing to its massive population of 1.2 billion people, which threatens to overstretch the structures of any kind of government system and its decision makers. This is all the more true in times of rapid fundamental change, as is occurring in China now.
The permanent danger of overstretching the country’s internal political structures is unlikely to permit any imperial foreign-policy role.
Insofar as this is true, the United States won’t be replaced as the dominant power unless and until it abdicates that role. This may sound simple, but it will have far-reaching consequences for the coming century’s international order.
The vital interests guiding Chinese policy are internal modernization, the ruling regime’s political stability and survival, and the country’s unity (which includes Taiwan). These interests are unlikely to change for a long time.
As a result, China will become a largely inward-looking superpower, which – precisely for that reason – will pursue its foreign-policy interests in a completely unsentimental manner.
Militarily, China will focus primarily on its regional supremacy, because the country’s unity depends on it.
Otherwise, though, the transformation of China’s economy and society will be all-important, because the regime’s stability depends on it.
For the Chinese leadership, this means that a growth rate of about 10% per year will be essential for a long time.
Otherwise, the rapid and fundamental transformation of the country from a largely agrarian to an ultra-modern industrialized society could not proceed without destabilizing the system.
But this focus on internal growth will have massive political consequences, both domestically and in foreign-policy terms.
Domestically, China will be the first country that, due to its sheer size and required GDP growth, is forced to pursue a “green” economy. Otherwise, China would quickly reach its “limits to growth,” with disastrous ecological and, as a result, political consequences.
Since China will be the most important market of the future, it will be decisive in determining not only what we produce and consume, but how.
Consider the transition from the traditional automobile to electric transport. Despite European illusions to the contrary, this will be decided in China, not in the West.
All that will be decided by the West’s globally dominant automobile industry is whether it will adapt and have a chance to survive or go the way of other old Western industries: to the developing world.
In foreign-policy terms, China will attempt to protect its domestic transformation by securing resources and access to foreign markets.
Sooner or later, though, China’s government will come to realize that America’s role as a global regulator is indispensible for China’s vital foreign-policy interests, because China is unable to assume that role, other global players aren’t available, and the only alternative to the US would be a breakdown of order.
This US-Chinese tandem will run far from smoothly, and will do little but ameliorate crises and periods of serious economic and political confrontation, like that which is currently looming over the bilateral trade imbalance.
Strategically, however, China and the US will have to rely on one another for a long time. This co-dependency will, at some point, also take shape politically, probably to the chagrin of all other international players, particularly the Europeans.
Europe could change the course of this development only if it presented itself as a serious player and stood up for its interests on the global stage. The “G-2” of China and the US would probably be happy about that.
But Europe is too weak and too divided to be effective globally, with its leaders unwilling to pursue a common policy based on their countries’ own strategic interests.
China’s Brittle Development Model
NEW DELHI – After gaining independence from Britain in 1947, India was something of a poster child for the virtues of democracy – in stark contrast with China, which became a Communist dictatorship in 1949.
Until the 1970s, it was widely argued that, while both countries suffered from extreme poverty, underdevelopment, and disease, India’s model was superior, because its people were free to choose their own rulers.
With China’s economic boom, however, the counterargument – that a repressive political system is more conducive to development – has gained currency.
But while China’s recent performance has been spectacular, India’s model may well stand up better in the long run.
The conversation changed after 1978, when China surged ahead of India economically, causing many to conclude that India’s chaotic democracy was holding back its people.
After all, if China’s leaders want to build a new six-lane expressway, they can bulldoze any number of villages.
In India, widening a two-lane road could incite popular protests and be tied up in court for years.
That old debate has now taken a new twist with the publication of a new book by Daniel A. Bell, a professor at Beijing’s Tsinghua University.
Bell argues that Chinese authoritarianism – specifically, its “political meritocracy” – is a viable model of governance, possibly even superior to the democracy of India and the West.
The economist and philosopher Amartya Sen famously demonstrated that famines do not occur in democracies with a free press, because their governments cannot ignore the suffering.
Bell points out that China has also avoided famine, at least since the Great Leap Forward, and has done better than India on malnutrition.
This, he asserts, proves that a government does not have to be democratic to serve its people effectively.
In fact, Bell argues, China’s merit-based system for selecting and evaluating officials guarantees better leadership than democratic elections, which often lead to victory for ignorance and prejudice.
Despite some weaknesses (notably complacency and corruption), China’s system ensures orderly governance and development.
Democracy does not necessarily do that, so the “politically relevant question,” Bell says, “is whether democratic elections lead to good consequences.”
India debated this question 40 years ago, when then-Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declared a state of emergency.
She suspended civil liberties, locked up opposition leaders, and censored the press, based on the belief that democracy had impeded India’s development.
The issue was resolved in 1977, with an election that defenestrated Gandhi and restored democracy.
But the “bread versus freedom” dilemma remains: Can governments deliver economic growth and prosperity while respecting their citizens’ rights and freedoms?
The dysfunction of Indian politics in recent years, with its fractious coalitions and disrupted parliament sessions, has made that question seem more relevant than ever.
I am not convinced that Bell’s answer is the right one.
Rapid industrialization and development have lifted millions of Chinese out of poverty, but often at the cost of great human suffering.
China may have grown at breakneck speed, but it has broken a lot of necks in the process.
One might like to contrast India’s sclerotic bureaucracy with China’s efficient one, India’s red tape with China’s red carpet for foreign investors, and India’s partisan politics with China’s Party hierarchy.
But there is no doubt that India’s pluralist democracy has enabled it to manage its diversity superbly, giving all citizens the sense that they have a strong stake in their country – and a real influence over how it is run.
In fact, it is India’s large population of poor and disadvantaged citizens – not the elite – that lends Indian democracy its legitimacy.
The poor turn out to vote, because they know that participating in elections is their most effective means of letting the government know their demands.
When they are frustrated with their government, they vote against its leaders in the next election, rather than launching revolts or insurrections.
When violent movements do arise, the democratic process often defuses them through accommodation: Yesterday’s militants become today’s chief ministers – and tomorrow’s opposition leaders.
By contrast, if China’s system faces a fundamental challenge, its only response is repression.
That may have worked so far, but every autocratic state in history has reached a point where repression was no longer enough to ensure order and progress.
If China encounters widespread popular unrest, all bets are off.
The dragon could stumble, while the elephant trundles on.
Moreover, Bell’s perception of China’s meritocracy may be too optimistic.
Given that the Chinese system is rigidly bureaucratic, permitting only gradual ascent up the career ladder, it is impossible for a young and relatively inexperienced but dynamic and inspiring leader – like, say, US President Barack Obama – to emerge.
China would not choose gifted leaders who were failures in their youth, like US Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt or Abraham Lincoln.
Rebels and non-conformists who have flourished in Indian politics – leaders like Mahatma Gandhi or Jawaharlal Nehru – would never have gotten started in China’s system.
Beyond China, Bell cites the success of authoritarian systems like Singapore and Taiwan.
But these countries probably would have been at least as successful without authoritarianism.
The methods they used to promote growth and development are consistent with democratic principles, to the point that many formerly authoritarian states in East Asia managed to carry out successful transitions to democracy, without derailing their development.
Finally, Bell’s view can be refuted by a simple observation: No population that has gained democratic rights has clamored for a return to dictatorship.