After the death of her brother, Kim Jong-il, last year, Kim Kyong-hui was often seen accompanying her nephew on his inspection tours around the country.
Her sudden disappearance has sparked much speculation about the fragility of the “Young General’s” regime; despite her notorious drinking habits, she was widely seen as the power behind Kim Jong-un’s throne.
The truth about her disappearance will, undoubtedly, remain murky for some time.
Kim Jong-il was said to have died suddenly of a heart attack, though he had been dying of cancer for some time – a subterfuge aimed at concealing Kim Kyong-hui’s de facto leadership during her brother’s cancer treatments.
Moreover, before he died, Kim Jong-il made a supreme effort to prepare the ground for his sister to continue as the key decision-maker, even under Kim Jong-un.
He removed leaders who could potentially oppose her, including such senior figures as Lee Yong-chul and Lee Je-gang.
Protecting the Kim dynasty’s rule has become the regime’s alpha and omega.
For Kim Kyong-hui, this has meant overseeing proposals from the Korean Workers’ Party, the military, and the government.
It has meant revising, supplementing, and ratifying other policies, as well as setting the KWP’s general direction.
Once policies are set, her task is to monitor and oversee their execution.
In other words, in North Korea, many of the most routine decisions taken by states elsewhere cannot be left to just anyone – particularly not to those outside the Kim bloodline.
Any decision that could affect the regime’s survival is taken within the dynasty; and, ultimately, in terms of legitimacy, background, experience, and competence, Kyong-hui is viewed as the only suitable decision-maker in the Kim clan.
It is a dizzying life of highly centralized command and control.
To succeed, three lines of power emanate from Kim Kyong-hui – to the Party, the military, and the central government, with each line branching into the smallest corners of North Korean life.
Yet Kim Kyong-hui’s ruling style is quite different from that of her late brother.
Kim Jong-il preferred military rule, and pushed the army to the forefront.
Kim Kyong-hui has returned to the methods of her father, the dynasty’s founder, Kim Il-sung, who viewed party control as the most convenient and reliable means of exercising power.
Particularly for a North Korean woman, party control is a far wieldier tool to elicit the type of absolute loyalty that the Kims need.
Kim Jong-un has done some things that were previously unseen in North Korea – frankly admitting the failure of a missile test, for example, and cavorting with Disney’s Mickey Mouse, a symbol of enemy American culture, while building amusement parks of his own.
But no one should mistake this for a Pyongyang Spring.
Indeed, the regime’s efforts to hide, yet again, a severe food shortage demonstrate that its core values have not changed in the least.
Maintaining this policy stasis is the great challenge facing Kim Jong-un and Kim Kyong-hui.
For, although government is now clearly centered on the party, the regime could yet unravel, and perhaps collapse, if the food shortage is not resolved and other power structures decide to step into the breach.
Given this risk, Kyong-hui’s poor health is a significant hindrance.
Will she run out of time, or will the food shortage be resolved first?
For now, the fate of the Korean peninsula hinges on the health of one woman.
The Battle for Santa Claus’s Home
STOCKHOLM – A couple of years ago, a Canadian minister proudly declared that Santa Claus was a citizen of Canada.
After all, his home and toy factory are at the North Pole, which, according to the minister’s interpretation, belongs to Canada.
Though Santa Claus has not commented on the matter, it is now clear that he could choose several passports when he travels the world on December 24th.
In 2007, a privately funded mini-submarine planted a Russian flag directly beneath his alleged home.
And two weeks ago, Denmark, which has sovereignty over Greenland, staked its own territorial claim, also covering the North Pole.
By filing its claim with the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, Denmark has joined our era’s “great game”: the contest for economic control over a large part of the Arctic.
And Denmark’s claim is massive.
Not only does it seek sovereignty over everything between Greenland and the North Pole; it is also extending its claim to nearly 900,000 square kilometers, all the way to the existing limits of the Russian economic zone on the other side of the Pole – an area 20 times Denmark’s size.
How to assess countries’ claims to Arctic territory hinges on the status of the Lomonosov Ridge, a vast formation that rises from the sea floor and stretches 1,800 kilometers from Greenland to the East Siberian continental shelf.
Everyone agrees that it is a ridge.
The key question is whether it is an extension of the Greenland shelf or an extension of the East Siberia shelf.
Denmark, together with the government of Greenland, now claims that it is the former, giving it the right to extend its economic zone across a huge area at the top of the world.
Though nothing is yet known about the claim that Russia says it will present in the spring, there is no doubt that it will argue the opposite.
And what about the Canadians and their claim?
That remains to be seen, but there have been reports that Prime Minister Stephen Harper is dissatisfied that Canadian scientists are not being sufficiently aggressive in pressing the country’s case.
Nonetheless, for all the hype about a “race for the Arctic,” and despite the rather icy atmosphere among the claimants, there is little reason to fear conflict.
Under the terms of the 2008 Ilulissat Declaration, all of the countries bordering the Arctic Ocean agree to resolve their claims peacefully and based on the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
According to settled procedure, a UN commission will first judge whether the claims have merit.
If they are overlapping, which is highly probable, bilateral negotiations will be held.
Such talks, to put it mildly, could take time.
Norway and Russia negotiated over a far smaller territorial delimitation for four decades.
Both Denmark and Russia have been devoting significant resources to exploring the Lomonosov Ridge.
Denmark has hired Swedish icebreakers for repeated expeditions, and Russia has been deploying special submarines to obtain samples from the ridge and the ocean floor.
The Arctic region has always been strategically vital for Russia, accounting for roughly 85% of Russia’s natural-gas production, which is based primarily in Western Siberia.
The Kremlin has activated a new military command for the Arctic, and is busy reopening air bases and radar stations along its Arctic shoreline.
But it is a very long way from these new Russian bases to virtually everywhere.
And, in addition to the vast distances, there is the harsh climate.
A Canadian military commander, asked what he would do if foreign soldiers attacked his country’s Far North, calmly replied that he would dispatch an expedition to rescue them.
Though Russia had hoped for a rapid increase in shipping along the Northern Sea Route, commercial traffic this year fell by 77%.
Of course, the stakes are too high for Canada, Denmark, and Russia to allow the region’s remoteness and its hostile environment to influence how resolutely they press their claims.
Boundaries like these are fixed once and forever, and no one knows what discoveries, technologies, and opportunities the future might bring.
But for the time being, neither Santa Claus, nor anyone else, has reason to be worried.
The nature of the Lomonosov Ridge will be debated for years to come, while his thoughts – and ours – are likely to be focused on more immediate issues.
Good People, Bad Judgments
NEW YORK – Vidkun Quisling, Norway’s wartime fascist leader whose name has become synonymous with collaboration with evil, lived with his wife in a rather grandiose villa outside of Oslo.
That villa is now the Norwegian Center for Studies of the Holocaust and Religious Minorities, a fine transformation of a tainted place.
Earlier this year, I visited the center for a fascinating exhibition on the first independent Norwegian constitution promulgated in 1814.
It was a remarkably enlightened and progressive document, composed by learned scholars, steeped in history, law, and philosophy.
Some were experts on the Greek classics, others on ancient Hebrew; all were keen readers of Kant and Voltaire.
There is, however, one extraordinary clause: Article II proclaims freedom of religion in the Lutheran state, with the caveat that “Jews shall still be banned from entering the Realm.”
This was peculiar, even at the time.
Napoleon, defeated in that same year, had secured civil rights for Jews in the countries he had conquered.
And just before the clause entered Norwegian law, the King of Denmark had granted citizenship to Jews in his realm.
What is most interesting about Norway’s 1814 constitution is not that it contains this clause, but why.
The stated motives of the intellectuals who created it were not racist; they did not assume Jews to be biologically inferior.
Rather, the question was argued in terms of culture and faith, with Jewish beliefs and customs deemed incompatible with modern, enlightened Western values.
One of the writers of the constitution, Frederik Motzfeldt, argued that Jews would never assimilate themselves with the people of any country.
Another asserted that Judaism encourages its followers to deceive Christians and other Gentiles.
Jews, it was believed, would always form a “state within a state.”
The constitution’s writers were undoubtedly aware that Jews had long been persecuted in other countries, but they concluded that it was not Norway’s problem.
For Norway, it was best not to let them become citizens at all.
Experts in Hebrew culture explained that Judaism and Norway’s constitution were irreconcilable.
Mosaic law was, so the experts said, the only constitution recognized by Jews, and so it should be feared, in the way modern critics of Islam fear Sharia law.
So the main issue was religion, not race – though the two could easily be confused.
As Håkon Harket, the greatest Norwegian scholar on the subject of the anti-Jewish clause, explains: “Even those who fought for civil rights for the Jews held often an ambition to liberate Jews from Judaism.”
The parallels with current notions about Muslims and Islam hardly need to be pointed out.
Now, too, the Enlightenment is often invoked as shorthand for the Western values that are supposedly in danger of “Islamization.”
Now, too, people warn of Muslim tricksters, states within states, the impossibility of assimilation, and the necessity for staunch secularists to free the benighted Muslims from their faith.
To be sure, in 1814, there was no Jewish equivalent of the violent Jihadism that poisons relations with Muslims in the West today.
Nonetheless, there are lessons to be learned from the Norwegian constitution’s misguided anti-Jewish clause, which, it should be noted, was repealed just a few decades later.
Bad judgment can arise even from decent motives, and knowledge (of Islam or of Judaism) is no prophylactic against stupid ideas.
The most important lesson, however, is that it is always foolish – and, indeed, dangerous – to judge people by what we think they believe.
To assume that all Muslims think alike because of their religious background, that they have “a mind” rather than individual thoughts, is as big a mistake as to assume to know the minds of Jews, Christians, or anyone else.
And to claim that something as diverse, and sometimes vague, as a religious faith can be pinned to a fixed ideological position, because of certain ancient texts, is utterly misleading.
There are populist demagogues in the West who would ban the Koran and prohibit Muslims from immigrating to their countries.
They have a following, which might be growing, fueled by the widespread anxiety about terrorism spilling over from the Middle East.
But they are not yet in the majority, and the belief that the West is in imminent danger of being “Arabized” or “Islamized” is not quite yet mainstream.
Yet even mainstream politicians, sometimes for the best of reasons, are in danger of making the same kinds of mistakes as the members of the 1814 Norwegian Constituent Assembly.
British Prime Minister David Cameron, for example, is aiming to crack down on Islamist extremism by banning the expression of ideas that the government deems to be promoting or glorifying it.
People who “reject our values” will be prosecuted, he has declared, “whether they are violent in their means or not.”
Cameron is not a known racist, or a bigot.
He is attempting to tackle a real problem: the promotion of violent extremist ideologies.
But, while people should certainly be punished for acts of violence, going after people purely for what they think – or, worse, what we think they think – has the air of a witch-hunt.
Cameron is right: “key values” like “democracy and tolerance” are fine things, and they ought to be defended.
But it is hard to see how banning ideas, or penalizing those who do nothing more than express them, is the best way to do so.
No safe havens for tax evasion. No safe havens for money laundering and terrorism financing, and no safe havens for “cozy financial regulation.”
These principles are clearly what people in the developed world want to see enforced.
In tough times such as these, money matters.
For the developing world, however, there is another dimension to the phrase “play by the rules.”
People there want to see an end to the safe havens that allow corrupt officials to steal public money and stash it abroad.
So we would add: no safe havens for proceeds from corruption.
On the tax side, there has clearly been progress.
France imposed on its banks strong transparency and reporting requirements for banking activities in tax havens, in addition to the international standard for information exchange.
Others have demonstrated leadership in pursuing companies that pay kickbacks and bribes to foreign officials.
But recovering the billions of dollars stolen by corrupt leaders and officials in the developing world has so far proved to be a lengthy process.
The World Bank Group, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, is working on the Stolen Asset Recovery (StAR) initiative to go after corrupt gains and help spur action to return looted assets to their legitimate owners: the people in the affected developing country.
France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Sweden, Norway, and Switzerland all support this urgent agenda, and agree that impunity for this type of global crime can no longer be tolerated.
Abuse of public authority for private gain is not acceptable.
In the developing world, $20 billion could finance 48,000 kilometers of two-lane paved roads, or provide treatment for 120 million people with HIV/AIDS for a full year.
The G-20 has called for more forceful action against corruption.
We must now go further.
Countries that have not signed the convention should quickly do so.
Those countries that have signed and ratified UNCAC now need to implement it.
Financial institutions should also not do business with non-cooperative jurisdictions – areas that don’t comply with the rules.
Civil society should agitate for action and accountability.
Fighting corruption is vital, not simply because it is the right thing to do, but because failing to do so affects us all.
We now live in a different world where developing countries are a fundamental source of growth, as well as being importers of capital goods and services from developed countries.
When corruption hurts partners with that level of clout, it hurts you, too.
No Shareholders’ Spring
CHICAGO – The ongoing global economic crisis is not only causing incumbent governments to lose elections; it is also shaking corporate boards.
When stock prices and profits seemed to defy gravity, shareholders’ meetings resembled American political conventions: a show to promote a company’s image, rather than a forum to debate contentious issues.
This year’s round of annual general meetings has been different.
Frustrated by low returns, investors are much feistier.
At the moment, the current shareholders’ revolt is failing to achieve any significant result.
For starters, the votes on company managers’ pay are non-binding.
To be sure, compensation committees and boards tend to follow shareholders’ wishes, even if they are not legally obliged to do so.
But they do so mostly out of embarrassment and a sense of guilt, and the changes can be entirely cosmetic.
For example, after receiving only 43% of shareholders’ support, Bruce Gans, an independent director of Hospitality Properties Trust, resigned.
The company then quickly invited him to rejoin the board, filling the vacancy created by his own departure!
When describing shareholders’ struggle to make board members accountable, the right analogy is not the Arab Spring, but the protests at Beijing’s Tiananmen Square two decades ago.
In 1989, the Chinese Government sent troops to repress the country’s pro-democracy movement.
In a similar vein, the Business Roundtable, composed of CEOs of major US corporations, has deployed brigades of lawyers to squelch shareholders’ aspirations.
One of the (few) positive achievements of America’s Dodd-Frank legislation, enacted to address the causes of the financial crisis of 2008, is – or should have been – the requirement that the US Securities and Exchange Commission repeal the current rules that prevent institutional investors from appointing their own representatives to corporate boards.
In fact, the requirement was very timid, posing so many restrictions in terms of quantity and length of ownership as to leave the bar to institutional investors effectively in place.
Still, it was too much for the Business Roundtable, which sued the SEC to stop it.
Argued by Eugene Scalia, the son of US Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, the case against the SEC was won in the US Court of Appeals, DC Circuit, on a technicality – the SEC’s failure to conduct a cost-benefit analysis ahead of time.
This small victory turned into a major defeat for shareholders when the SEC, rather than performing such an analysis and re-proposing the rule, chose to stall.
At a conference last December, I asked SEC Chairwoman Mary Schapiro when her agency was planning to reintroduce the rule.
I even offered to do the cost-benefit analysis for free.
But she confessed that the SEC had many other items on its agenda, and had placed the issue on the back burner – a polite way to say that the SEC, like the heroic students in Tiananmen Square, had surrendered under irresistible pressure.
The violent repression in Tiananmen Square set back China’s move toward democracy by at least 20 years.
Let’s hope that Business Roundtable et al. v. SEC does not mean the same thing for shareholder democracy.
These were among the risks associated with America’s insufficient stimulus, which was designed to placate members of Congress as much as it was to revive the economy.
With soaring deficits, a second stimulus appears unlikely, and, with monetary policy at its limits and inflation hawks being barely kept at bay, there is little hope of help from that department, either. So protectionism is taking pride of place.
The US Treasury has been charged by Congress to assess whether China is a “currency manipulator.” Although President Obama has now delayed for some months when Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner must issue his report, the very concept of “currency manipulation” itself is flawed: all governments take actions that directly or indirectly affect the exchange rate.
Reckless budget deficits can lead to a weak currency; so can low interest rates. Until the recent crisis in Greece, the US benefited from a weak dollar/euro exchange rate.
Should Europeans have accused the US of “manipulating” the exchange rate to expand exports at its expense?
Although US politicians focus on the bilateral trade deficit with China – which is persistently large – what matters is the multilateral balance.
When demands for China to adjust its exchange rate began during George W. Bush’s administration, its multilateral trade surplus was small.
More recently, however, China has been running a large multilateral surplus as well.
Saudi Arabia also has a bilateral and multilateral surplus: Americans want its oil, and Saudis want fewer US products.
Even in absolute value, Saudi Arabia’s multilateral merchandise surplus of $212 billion in 2008 dwarfs China’s $175 billion surplus; as a percentage of GDP, Saudi Arabia’s current-account surplus, at 11.5% of GDP, is more than twice that of China.
Saudi Arabia’s surplus would be far higher were it not for US armaments exports.
Adjustment in the exchange rate is likely simply to shift to where America buys its textiles and apparel – from Bangladesh or Sri Lanka, rather than China.
Meanwhile, an increase in the exchange rate is likely to contribute to inequality in China, as its poor farmers face increasing competition from America’s highly subsidized farms.
This is the real trade distortion in the global economy – one in which millions of poor people in developing countries are hurt as America helps some of the world’s richest farmers.
During the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis, the renminbi’s stability played an important role in stabilizing the region.
So, too, the renminbi’s stability has helped the region maintain strong growth, from which the world as a whole benefits.
Some argue that China needs to adjust its exchange rate to prevent inflation or bubbles.
Inflation remains contained, but, more to the point, China’s government has an arsenal of other weapons (from taxes on capital inflows and capital-gains taxes to a variety of monetary instruments) at its disposal.
But exchange rates do affect the pattern of growth, and it is in China’s own interest to restructure and move away from high dependence on export-led growth.
China recognizes that its currency needs to appreciate over the long run, and politicizing the speed at which it does so has been counterproductive.
(Since it began revaluing its exchange rate in July 2005, the adjustment has been half or more of what most experts think is required.)
Moreover, starting a bilateral confrontation is unwise.
Since China’s multilateral surplus is the economic issue and many countries are concerned about it, the US should seek a multilateral, rules-based solution.
Imposing unilateral duties after unilaterally labeling China a “currency manipulator” would undermine the multilateral system, with little payoff.
China might respond by imposing duties on those American products effectively directly or indirectly subsidized by America’s massive bailouts of its banks and car companies.
No one wins from a trade war.
So America should be wary of igniting one in the midst of an uncertain global recovery – as popular as it might be with politicians whose constituents are justly concerned about high unemployment, and as easy as it is to look for blame elsewhere.
Unfortunately, this global crisis was made in America, and America must look inward, not only to revive its economy, but also to prevent a recurrence.
No Time for Complacency
LONDON – After years of rapid growth, the countries of Eastern Europe have been especially hard hit by the world financial crisis.
Some required billions of dollars of international support.
Even those countries that were better prepared were made painfully aware of the after-effects of crisis: export markets collapsed, commodity prices fell, and credit markets seized up.
In many countries, economic output sank dramatically, more so than in Europe’s west.
This decline seems to have stopped, and the most recent data indicate that the bottom may have been reached.
Yet it is premature to declare the crisis over, because much of the impact and many of the consequences of the crisis have yet to be felt.
We must reckon with a huge increase in bankruptcies – as well as with impaired credit markets and high unemployment.
This, in turn, will place a burden on national budgets and banking systems – and will challenge politicians across the region.
A number of countries have already been forced into drastic budget cuts, which have had a knock-on effect on standards of living.
Twenty years after the fall of the Iron Curtain, the countries of the east are more integrated into international markets than ever before. This brought strong growth rates in good times.
In times of crisis it had a negative impact – although integration has prevented currency collapse or the write-off of national debt, occurrences that we have witnessed during previous crises in emerging markets.
The IMF, the World Bank, and other international financial institutions, such as the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as well as the European Central Bank and the European Commission, have worked together to stabilize the situation.
The G20 has led the way on the international level.
Cooperation and coordination of this kind and at this level were unattainable during earlier financial crises.
Another difference with past financial downturns in emerging markets is that investments in the EBRD region – Eastern Europe, Southeastern Europe, Turkey, and the former Soviet Union – have turned out to be long term, rather than short-term or speculative.
Western entrepreneurs and investors have increasingly come to view Europe’s east as a part of a (now broader) domestic market and have behaved with a longer-term view.
This has brought the region much needed stability.
A healthy banking and financial sector is crucial for stability.
International cooperation has succeeded in preventing banks headquartered in Western Europe, with extensive branch networks in the Eastern Europe, from pulling out.
Yet serious problems remain. An unwillingness to lend and expensive loans in foreign currencies are a real burden to eastern balance sheets.
That is why it has become so difficult for small and medium-sized companies to get new loans or to refinance existing loans.
The EBRD has experienced the change in market conditions first-hand.
We have implemented an anti-crisis program that has concentrated on the financial sector, the real economy, and especially important infrastructure investments, particularly in the crucial area of energy efficiency.
Demand for our loans and project finance is higher than ever: in the first nine months of 2009, we have invested more than €6 billion, twice as much as we did in the same period a year ago.
Yet the EBRD does more than make much-needed loans. Our investments are aimed at the development and support of market economies across the region.
We work with the private sector and not in competition with it.
We mobilize private financing for public goods, such as infrastructure.
Our investments are aimed at overcoming structural problems that have plagued the region.
This crisis has shown that the need for adequately capitalized public institutions is enormous.
This will remain the case for the foreseeable future.
For years to come, the private banking sector will be preoccupied with the consequences of the financial crisis.
As a result, investors value a strong public partner now more than ever before.
The current economic situation has pushed the EBRD to its limits.
It is for this reason that I have suggested a capital increase to the shareholders of the bank – to €30 billion from the current €20 billion.
This would mean that the EBRD could invest up to €10 billion annually over the next five years, enabling us to continue to fulfill our role, providing vital backing and financial support to Eastern Europe and the private sector.
Such investment is more necessary than ever, even at a time of gradual economic recovery.
No Time to Slacken
PITTSBURGH – Almost six months ago, at a moment of great alarm about the global financial and economic crisis, G-20 leaders met for a historic summit in London.
Their collective commitments to stimulate, regulate and restructure global economic activity helped to calm nerves around the world.
Many of the problems that spurred the London summit remain real.
Anxiety levels may have come down, in board rooms and stock markets, but the daily drama for survival continues.  Indeed, for many people it has deepened, in the villages and streets of the world’s least-developed countries – particularly in Africa.
The United Nations and the World Bank predict that the direct and indirect effects of the economic meltdown will be felt in the developing world for a long time to come.
Jobs have gone, incomes have been lost and opportunities foregone.
Tens of millions of people have been added to the hundreds of millions already below the poverty line, reversing progress toward attaining the world’s Millennium Development Goals. 
The London G-20 meeting recognized that the world’s poorest countries and people should not be penalized by a crisis for which they were not responsible.
With this in mind, the G-20 leaders set out an ambitious agenda for an inclusive and wide-ranging response.
If the Pittsburgh summit is not to be an anticlimactic end to the G-20’s ascendancy as a forum for decisive action, the momentum generated must be maintained. Four issues provide the opportunity to do so.
First, G-20 leaders need to follow through with the commitments they’ve made to a Global Plan for Recovery and Reform.
Having recognized its “collective responsibility to mitigate the social impact of the crisis and minimize long-lasting damage to global potential,” the group now needs to review how much support has reached or become accessible to developing countries.
There are some encouraging signs.
For example, in July, the International Monetary Fund commendably announced a substantial increase in concessional lending to least-developed countries.
Several of them, including Ethiopia, Malawi and South Africa, have already been allocated Special Drawing Rights to help them cope with the economic crisis.
But some vulnerable countries are still struggling to finance countercyclical investment and expanded social protection services.
It raises questions about the stringencies of the World Bank’s eligibility criteria and allocation models which can prevent support of the most needy.
This underscores the case for a second area of action – ensuring that developing countries, including least-developed countries, have a greater say in global financial institutions, and strengthening regional bodies such as the African Development Bank.
An equitable and fair global architecture means not only giving a greater say to the major emerging economies. It also means systematically including other developing countries.
The Bretton Woods Institutions such as the World Bank and IMF themselves recognize that becoming more inclusive would make them more relevant to the reality and diversity of today’s global community and more effective as vehicles for addressing climate change adaptation and poverty reduction.
Lastly, the G-20 could also help drive momentum on climate change.
Its members represent the vast majority of global greenhouse gas emissions; agreement among them at Pittsburgh would go a long way towards ensuring that December’s international Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen does not end in hot air.
Progress is needed on emission-reduction targets and on sharing knowledge and technology more widely.
We also have to find a way to provide funding for adaptation and mitigation – to protect people from the impact of climate change and enable economies to grow while holding down pollution levels – while guarding against trade protection in the name of climate change mitigation.
The challenges of our time are many, complex and intertwined.
The G-20 in London was responsive to the concerns and special circumstances of the developing world, which resulted in some big thinking.
Sceptics fear that now that the collective financial threat is perceived, rightly or wrongly, to be manageable, the Pittsburgh Summit will result in a weak compromise that reflects divergent national interests rather than a sense of urgency about tackling climate change, chronic poverty and ineffective global governance.
G-20 leaders need again to manage difficult domestic pressures, overcome narrow agendas and resist populist temptations – and prove the sceptics wrong.
No to Green Fundamentalism
BORDEAUX – Climatology and its emphasis on global warming is a comparatively recent addition to science.
Yet, despite the relative youth of this research, a clear consensus has emerged: climate change – for which human activity is significantly, though not exclusively, responsible – now threatens our way of life, so we must develop the means to combat it.
But I also believe that the fundamentalist approach that can be sensed in certain circles is skirting the limits of the acceptable.
How can fundamentalists advocate limiting economic growth as a solution to the problem of global warming when there are men, women, and children in their hundreds of millions, all over the world, who still lead lives of abject poverty and are in desperate need of help?
People in poor parts of the world have a right to economic development so that they can produce their own food, gain access to clean water, live in adequate shelter, and have all the benefits represented by hospitals and schools.
These are essential human rights, and they can be realized only through economic growth, not stagnation.
At the twentieth century’s start, only one person in ten lived in a town or city.
Today that figure is one in two – 3.3 billion people, according to United Nations statistics – and the percentage of urban dwellers is expected to reach 70% by 2050.
Cities, then, represent the most important development challenge of all.
As cities continue to grow and spread across the world, reducing energy consumption and improving our quality of life require us to ensure that their inhabitants can travel relatively short distances to work
The common expression in France that great rivers are created out of tiny streams captures the sort of strategy for countering global warming through sustainable development that I believe could be effective.
Local actions that are then developed as part of an exchange between cities could have a global impact in the long term.
That is why I am keen to encourage local initiatives that have a global perspective.
Among the issues raised at the Copenhagen climate conference last December was the EU member states’ failure to perfect a post-Kyoto international system for fighting global warming.
Fortunately, though, things have changed since then, with the 110 countries responsible for 80% of greenhouse-gas emissions – including India, China, and Brazil – now giving their support to the Copenhagen agreement.
But it is important not to stop there.
We must try to ensure that future climate-change meetings, like the Cancún summit this winter, are fully exploited as an opportunity to transform well-intentioned declarations into international agreements that apply to developed and developing countries alike.
The Copenhagen agreement envisages the world’s industrialized nations financing emissions reduction and other necessary adjustments in developing countries through a $30 billion aid package, which will rise to $100 billion between now and 2020.
But the agreement fails to specify who will undertake what costs.
Instead, the agreement limits itself to responding to the widely accepted goal of keeping carbon-dioxide levels below 450 parts per million, and the rise in average global temperature below 2°C. But are these targets realistic?
If not, we must bear in mind the warning of the Stern Report that failure to act now would make taking action in the future much more costly.
That all countries taking part in the political process on climate change should be treated equally has ensured that Europe still exerts a good deal of influence.
Things have clearly moved on from Copenhagen, when the priority was to reach agreement between those countries that have been chiefly responsible for global warming.
And if my own country, France, has failed to set a good example to developing countries by equivocating over the terms of a carbon tax, then perhaps the time has come for its national carbon footprint to be linked with the European trading system for CO2.
The sad truth, though, is that the solution of mixing quotas and taxes will not deliver results quickly enough to bring about a genuine and immediate move to low-carbon or even carbon-free economies.
Ever since Copenhagen, a majority of the main greenhouse-gas-emitting countries have been setting out ambitious goals – without hedging them with restrictive conditions.
At the same time, new mechanisms are being put in place to measure and evaluate emissions, which will allow much clearer comparisons between countries.
What remains to be done is to share these efforts in a way that is fair and manageable for all countries.
Will we, then, manage to sign a legal and binding agreement in Cancún?
Will we be able to implement cooperation mechanisms between countries such as the UN’s Collaborative Program on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries – the REDD program – so as to prevent deforestation and encourage technology transfer and financing?
This is the real challenge, and although it may prove ambitious, many countries will arrive at the Cancún conference with renewed hope for the future, thanks to the progress made since Copenhagen.
Markets’ Rational Complacency
NEW YORK – An increasingly obvious paradox has emerged in global financial markets this year.
Though geopolitical risks – the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the rise of the Islamic State and growing turmoil across the Middle East, China’s territorial disputes with its neighbors, and now mass protests in Hong Kong and the risk of a crackdown – have multiplied, markets have remained buoyant, if not downright bubbly.
Indeed, oil prices have been falling, not rising.
Global stock markets have, overall, reached new highs.
And credit markets show low spreads, while long-term bond yields have fallen in most advanced economies.
Yes, financial markets in troubled countries – for example, Russia’s currency, equity, and bond markets – have been negatively affected.
But the more generalized contagion to global financial markets that geopolitical tensions typically engender has failed to materialize.
Why the indifference?
Are investors too complacent, or is their apparent lack of concern rational, given that the actual economic and financial impact of current geopolitical risks – at least so far – has been modest?
Global markets have not reacted for several reasons.
For starters, central banks in advanced economies (the United States, the eurozone, the United Kingdom, and Japan) are holding policy rates near zero, and long-term interest rates have been kept low.
This is boosting the prices of other risky assets such as equities and credit.
Second, markets have taken the view that the Russia-Ukraine conflict will remain contained, rather than escalating into a full-scale war.
So, though sanctions and counter-sanctions between the West and Russia have increased, they are not causing significant economic and financial damage to the European Union or the US.
More important, Russia has not cut off natural-gas supplies to Western Europe, which would be a major shock for gas-dependent EU economies.
Third, the turmoil in the Middle East has not triggered a massive shock to oil supplies and prices like those that occurred in 1973, 1979, or 1990.
On the contrary, there is excess capacity in global oil markets.
Iraq may be in trouble, but about 90% of its oil is produced in the south, near Basra, which is fully under Shia control, or in the north, under the control of the Kurds.
Only about 10% is produced near Mosul, now under the control of the Islamic State.
Finally, the one Middle East conflict that could cause oil prices to spike – a war between Israel and Iran – is a risk that, for now, is contained by ongoing international negotiations with Iran to contain its nuclear program.
So there appear to be good reasons why global markets so far have reacted benignly to today’s geopolitical risks.
What could change that?
Several scenarios come to mind.
First, the Middle East turmoil could affect global markets if one or more terrorist attack were to occur in Europe or the US – a plausible development, given that several hundred Islamic State jihadists are reported to have European or US passports.
Markets tend to disregard the risks of events whose probability is hard to assess but that have a major impact on confidence when they do occur.
Thus, a surprise terrorist attack could unnerve global markets.
Second, markets could be incorrect in their assessment that conflicts like that between Russia and Ukraine, or Syria’s civil war, will not escalate or spread.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy may become more aggressive in response to challenges to his power at home, while Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey are all being destabilized by Syria’s ongoing meltdown.
Third, geopolitical and political tensions are more likely to trigger global contagion when a systemic factor shaping the global economy comes into play.
For example, the mini-perfect storm that roiled emerging markets earlier this year – even spilling over for a while to advanced economies – occurred when political turbulence in a few countries (Turkey, Thailand, and Argentina) met bad news about Chinese growth.
China, with its systemic importance, was the match that ignited a tinderbox of regional and local uncertainty.
Today (or soon), the situation in Hong Kong, together with the news of further weakening in the Chinese economy, could trigger global financial havoc.
Or the US Federal Reserve could spark financial contagion by exiting zero rates sooner and faster than markets expect.
Or the eurozone could relapse into recession and crisis, reviving the risk of redenomination in the event that the monetary union breaks up.
The interaction of any of these global factors with a variety of regional and local sources of geopolitical tension could be dangerously combustible.
So, while global markets arguably have been rationally complacent, financial contagion cannot be ruled out.
A century ago, financial markets priced in a very low probability that a major conflict would occur, blissfully ignoring the risks that led to World War I until late in the summer of 1914.
Back then, markets were poor at correctly pricing low-probability, high-impact tail risks.
They still are.
Gouging the Gauchos
NEW YORK – Like individuals, corporations, and other private firms that rely on bankruptcy procedures to reduce an excessive debt burden, countries sometimes need orderly debt restructuring or reduction.
But the ongoing legal saga of Argentina’s fight with holdout creditors shows that the international system for orderly sovereign-debt restructuring may be broken.
Individuals, firms, or governments may end up with too much debt because of bad luck, bad decisions, or a combination of the two.
If you get a mortgage but then lose your job, you have bad luck.
If your debt becomes unsustainable because you borrowed too much to take long vacations or buy expensive appliances, your bad behavior is to blame.
The same applies to corporate firms: some have bad luck and their business plans fail, while others borrow too much to pay their mediocre managers excessively.
Bad luck and bad behavior (policies) can also lead to unsustainable debt burdens for governments.
If a country’s terms of trade (the price of its exports) deteriorate and a large recession persists for a long time, its government’s revenue base may shrink and its debt burden may become excessive.
But an unsustainable debt burden may also result from borrowing to spend too much, failure to collect sufficient taxes, and other policies that undermine the economy’s growth potential.
When the debt burden of an individual, firm, or government is too high, legal systems need to provide orderly ways to reduce it to a more sustainable level (closer to the debtor’s potential income).
If it is too easy to default and reduce one’s debt burden, the result is moral hazard, because debtors gain an incentive to indulge in bad behavior.
But if it is too difficult to restructure and reduce debts when bad luck leads to unsustainable debts, the result is bad for both the debtor and its creditors, who are better off when a reduced debt ratio is serviced than when a debtor defaults.
Finding the right balance is not easy.
Formal legal bankruptcy regimes for individuals and firms have evolved over time to accomplish this.
Because a formal bankruptcy regime for governments does not exist (though Anne Krueger, the International Monetary Fund’s then-deputy managing director, proposed one more than a decade ago), countries have had to rely on a market-based approach to resolve excessive debt problems.
Following this approach, the country offers to exchange old bonds for new bonds with a lower face value and/or lower interest payments and longer maturities.
If most investors accept this offer, the restructuring occurs successfully.
But this implies a key problem: Whereas a bankruptcy court can force holdout creditors to accept the exchange offer as long as a significant majority of creditors have already done so (a so-called “cram down”), the market-based approach allows some creditors to continue to hold out and sue to be paid in full.
That is why, over the last decade, governments have augmented the market-based approach with a contractual approach that resolves the holdout problem by introducing collective-action clauses (CACs) that can also cram down on holdouts the terms accepted by a majority of creditors.
These clauses became standard in sovereign bonds but were missing in those issued by Argentina before 2001, when the crisis hit.
Though 93% of Argentina’s creditors accepted new terms for their bonds in 2005 and 2010 in two exchange offers, a small group of holdouts sued Argentina in the United States, and, with the US Supreme Court recently ruling on the issue, have now won the right to be paid in full.
The US court decision is dangerous for two reasons.
First, the court ruled for the first time that a country cannot continue to pay those creditors who accepted a big reduction (or “haircut”) on their claims until the holdouts are paid in full.
So, why would any future creditor who benefits from an orderly restructuring vote for it if its new claims can be blocked by even a single holdout creditor?
Second, if the holdouts are paid in full, the majority of creditors who accepted a haircut can request to be paid in full, too.
If that happens, the country’s debt burden will surge again, become unsustainable, and force the government – in this case Argentina, which is servicing most of its debt – to default again on all creditors.
The inclusion of CACs in new bond contracts may help other countries avoid the holdout problem in the future.
But even CACs may not fully help, because they are designed in a way that still allows a small minority of creditors to hold out and thus prevent an orderly restructuring.
Either super-CACs need to be designed and introduced (though it will take years to include them in all new bond contracts) or the international community may want to reconsider whether the 2002 IMF proposal for a formal bankruptcy court for sovereign borrowers should be resurrected.
Holdouts must not be permitted to block orderly restructurings that benefit debtors and creditors.
The Great Backlash
NEW YORK – In the immediate aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis, policymakers’ success in preventing the Great Recession from turning into Great Depression II held in check demands for protectionist and inward-looking measures.
But now the backlash against globalization – and the freer movement of goods, services, capital, labor, and technology that came with it – has arrived.
This new nationalism takes different economic forms: trade barriers, asset protection, reaction against foreign direct investment, policies favoring domestic workers and firms, anti-immigration measures, state capitalism, and resource nationalism.
In the political realm, populist, anti-globalization, anti-immigration, and in some cases outright racist and anti-Semitic parties are on the rise.
These forces loathe the alphabet soup of supra-national governance institutions – the EU, the UN, the WTO, and the IMF, among others – that globalization requires.
Even the Internet, the epitome of globalization for the past two decades, is at risk of being balkanized as more authoritarian countries – including China, Iran, Turkey, and Russia – seek to restrict access to social media and crack down on free expression.
The main causes of these trends are clear.
Anemic economic recovery has provided an opening for populist parties, promoting protectionist policies, to blame foreign trade and foreign workers for the prolonged malaise.
Add to this the rise in income and wealth inequality in most countries, and it is no wonder that the perception of a winner-take-all economy that benefits only elites and distorts the political system has become widespread.
Nowadays, both advanced economies (like the United States, where unlimited financing of elected officials by financially powerful business interests is simply legalized corruption) and emerging markets (where oligarchs often dominate the economy and the political system) seem to be run for the few.
For the many, by contrast, there has been only secular stagnation, with depressed employment and stagnating wages.
The resulting economic insecurity for the working and middle classes is most acute in Europe and the eurozone, where in many countries populist parties – mainly on the far right – outperformed mainstream forces in last weekend’s European Parliament election.
As in the 1930’s, when the Great Depression gave rise to authoritarian governments in Italy, Germany, and Spain, a similar trend now may be underway.
If income and job growth do not pick up soon, populist parties may come closer to power at the national level in Europe, with anti-EU sentiments stalling the process of European economic and political integration.
Worse, the eurozone may again be at risk: some countries (the United Kingdom) may exit the EU; others (the UK, Spain, and Belgium) eventually may break up.
Even in the US, the economic insecurity of a vast white underclass that feels threatened by immigration and global trade can be seen in the rising influence of the extreme right and Tea Party factions of the Republican Party.
These groups are characterized by economic nativism, anti-immigration and protectionist leanings, religious fanaticism, and geopolitical isolationism.
A variant of this dynamic can be seen in Russia and many parts of Eastern Europe and Central Asia, where the fall of the Berlin Wall did not usher in democracy, economic liberalization, and rapid output growth.
Instead, nationalist and authoritarian regimes have been in power for most of the past quarter-century, pursuing state-capitalist growth models that ensure only mediocre economic performance.
In this context, Russian President Vladimir Putin’s destabilization of Ukraine cannot be separated from his dream of leading a “Eurasian Union” – a thinly disguised effort to recreate the former Soviet Union.
In Asia, too, nationalism is resurgent.
New leaders in China, Japan, South Korea, and now India are political nationalists in regions where territorial disputes remain serious and long-held historical grievances fester.
These leaders – as well as those in Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia, who are moving in a similar nationalist direction – must address major structural-reform challenges if they are to revive falling economic growth and, in the case of emerging markets, avoid a middle-income trap.
Economic failure could fuel further nationalist, xenophobic tendencies – and even trigger military conflict.
In the 1930’s, the failure to prevent the Great Depression empowered authoritarian regimes in Europe and Asia, eventually leading to World War II.
This time, the damage caused by the Great Recession is subjecting most advanced economies to secular stagnation and creating major structural growth challenges for emerging markets.
This is ideal terrain for economic and political nationalism to take root and flourish.
Today’s backlash against trade and globalization should be viewed in the context of what, as we know from experience, could come next.
Russia’s Eurasian Vision
NEW YORK – The escalating conflict in Ukraine between the Western-backed government and Russian-backed separatists has focused attention on a fundamental question: What are the Kremlin’s long-term objectives?
Though Russian President Vladimir Putin’s immediate goal may have been limited to regaining control of Crimea and retaining some influence in Ukrainian affairs, his longer-term ambition is much bolder.
That ambition is not difficult to discern.
Putin once famously observed that the Soviet Union’s collapse was the greatest catastrophe of the twentieth century.
Thus, his long-term objective has been to rebuild it in some form, perhaps as a supra-national union of member states like the European Union.
This goal is not surprising: declining or not, Russia has always seen itself as a great power that should be surrounded by buffer states.
Under the Czars, Imperial Russia extended its reach over time.
Under the Bolsheviks, Russia built the Soviet Union and a sphere of influence that encompassed most of Central and Eastern Europe.
And now, under Putin’s similarly autocratic regime, Russia plans to create, over time, a vast Eurasian Union.
While the EAU is still only a customs union, the European Union’s experience suggests that a successful free-trade area leads over time to broader economic, monetary, and eventually political integration.
Russia’s goal is not to create another North American Free Trade Agreement; it is to create another EU, with the Kremlin holding all of the real levers of power.
The plan has been clear: Start with a customs union – initially Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan – and add most of the other former Soviet republics.
Indeed, now Armenia and Kyrgyzstan are in play.
Once a broad customs union is established, trade, financial, and investment links within it grow to the point that its members stabilize their exchange rates vis-à-vis one another.
Then, perhaps a couple of decades after the customs union is formed, its members consider creating a true monetary union with a common currency (the Eurasian ruble?) that can be used as a unit of account, means of payment, and store of value.
As the eurozone experience proves, sustaining a monetary union requires banking, fiscal, and full economic union.
And, once members give up their sovereignty over fiscal, banking, and economic affairs, they may eventually need a partial political union to ensure democratic legitimacy.
Realizing such a plan may require overcoming serious challenges and the commitment of large financial resources over a period of many decades.
But the first step is a customs union, and, in the case of the Eurasian Union, it had to include Ukraine, Russia’s largest neighbor to the west.
That is why Putin put so much pressure on former President Viktor Yanukovych to abandon an association agreement with the EU.
It is also why Putin reacted to the ouster of Yanukovych’s government by taking over Crimea and destabilizing eastern Ukraine.
Recent events have further weakened market-oriented, Western-leaning factions in Russia and strengthened the state-capitalist, nationalist factions, who are now pushing for faster establishment of the EAU.
In particular, the tension with Europe and the United States over Ukraine will shift Russia’s energy and raw-material exports – and the related pipelines – toward Asia and China.
Likewise, Russia and its BRICS partners (Brazil, India, China, and South Africa) are creating a development bank that is to serve as an alternative to the Western-controlled International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Revelations of electronic surveillance by the US may lead Russia – and other illiberal states – to restrict Internet access and create their own nationally controlled data networks.
There is even talk of Russia and China creating an alternative international payment system to replace the SWIFT system, which the US and Europe can use to impose financial sanctions against Russia.
Creating a full EAU – one that is gradually less tied to the West by trade, financial, economic, payments, communications, and political links – may be a pipe dream.
Russia’s lack of reform and adverse demographic trends imply low potential growth and insufficient financial resources to create the fiscal and transfer union that is needed to bring other countries in.
But Putin is ambitious, and – like other autocrats in Central Asian nations – he may remain in power for decades to come.
And, like it or not, even a Russia that lacks the dynamism needed to succeed in manufacturing and the industries of the future will remain a commodity-producing superpower.
Revisionist powers like Russia, China, and Iran appear ready to confront the global economic and political order that the US and the West built after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
But now one of these revisionists powers – Russia – is pushing ahead aggressively to recreate a near-empire and a sphere of influence.
Unfortunately, the sanctions that the US and Europe are imposing on Russia, though necessary, may merely reinforce the conviction among Putin and his nationalist Slavophile advisers that Russia’s future lies not in the West, but in a separate integration project in the East.
US President Barack Obama says that this is not the beginning of a new Cold War; current trends may soon suggest otherwise.
Bubbles in the Broth
NEW YORK – As below-trend GDP growth and high unemployment continue to afflict most advanced economies, their central banks have resorted to increasingly unconventional monetary policy.
An alphabet soup of measures has been served up: ZIRP (zero-interest-rate policy); QE (quantitative easing, or purchases of government bonds to reduce long-term rates when short-term policy rates are zero); CE (credit easing, or purchases of private assets aimed at lowering the private sector’s cost of capital); and FG (forward guidance, or the commitment to maintain QE or ZIRP until, say, the unemployment rate reaches a certain target).
Some have gone as far as proposing NIPR (negative-interest-rate policy).
And yet, through it all, growth rates have remained stubbornly low and unemployment rates unacceptably high, partly because the increase in money supply following QE has not led to credit creation to finance private consumption or investment.
Instead, banks have hoarded the increase in the monetary base in the form of idle excess reserves.
There is a credit crunch, as banks with insufficient capital do not want to lend to risky borrowers, while slow growth and high levels of household debt have also depressed credit demand.
As a result, all of this excess liquidity is flowing to the financial sector rather than the real economy.
Near-zero policy rates encourage “carry trades” – debt-financed investment in higher-yielding risky assets such as longer-term government and private bonds, equities, commodities and currencies of countries with high interest rates.
The result has been frothy financial markets that could eventually turn bubbly.
Indeed, the US stock market and many others have rebounded more than 100% since the lows of 2009; issuance of high-yield “junk bonds” is back to its 2007 level; and interest rates on such bonds are falling.
Moreover, low interest rates are leading to high and rising home prices – possibly real-estate bubbles – in advanced economies and emerging markets alike, including Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, Germany, France, Hong Kong, Singapore, Brazil, China, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
The collapse from 2007 to 2009 of equity, credit, and housing bubbles in the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain, Ireland, Iceland, and Dubai led to severe financial crises and economic damage.
So, are we at risk of another cycle of financial boom and bust?
Some policymakers – like Janet Yellen, who is likely to be confirmed as the next Chair of the US Federal Reserve – argue that we should not worry too much.
Central banks, they argue, now have two goals: restoring robust growth and low unemployment with low inflation, and maintaining financial stability without bubbles.
Moreover, they have two instruments to achieve these goals: the policy interest rate, which will be kept low for long and raised only gradually to boost growth; and macro-prudential regulation and supervision of the financial system (macro-pru for short), which will be used to control credit and prevent bubbles.
But some critics, like Fed Governor Jeremy Stein, argue that macro-pru policies to control credit and leverage – such as limits on loan-to-value ratios for mortgages, bigger capital buffers for banks that extend risky loans, and tighter underwriting standards – may not work.
Not only are they untested, but restricting leverage in some parts of the banking system would merely cause the liquidity from zero rates to flow to other parts of it, while trying to restrict leverage entirely would simply drive the liquidity into the less-regulated shadow banking system.
According to Stein, only monetary policy (higher policy interest rates) “gets in all of the cracks” of the financial system and prevents asset bubbles.
The trouble is that if macro-pru does not work, the interest rate would have to serve two opposing goals: economic recovery and financial stability.
If policymakers go slow on raising rates to encourage faster economic recovery, they risk causing the mother of all asset bubbles, eventually leading to a bust, another massive financial crisis, and a rapid slide into recession.
But if they try to prick bubbles early on with higher interest rates, they will crash bond markets and kill the recovery, causing much economic and financial damage.
So, unless macro-pru works as planned, policymakers are damned if they do and damned if they don’t.
For now, policymakers in countries with frothy credit, equity, and housing markets have avoided raising policy rates, given slow economic growth.
But it is still too early to tell whether the macro-pru policies on which they are relying will ensure financial stability.
If not, policymakers will eventually face an ugly tradeoff: kill the recovery to avoid risky bubbles, or go for growth at the risk of fueling the next financial crisis.
For now, with asset prices continuing to rise, many economies may have had as much soup as they can stand.
The Changing Face of Global Risk
NEW YORK – The world’s economic, financial, and geopolitical risks are shifting.
Some risks now have a lower probability – even if they are not fully extinguished.
Others are becoming more likely and important.
A year or two ago, six main risks stood at center stage:
· A eurozone breakup (including a Greek exit and loss of access to capital markets for Italy and/or Spain).
· A fiscal crisis in the United States (owing to further political fights over the debt ceiling and another government shutdown).
· A public-debt crisis in Japan (as the combination of recession, deflation, and high deficits drove up the debt/GDP ratio).
· Deflation in many advanced economies.
· War between Israel and Iran over alleged Iranian nuclear proliferation.
· A wider breakdown of regional order in the Middle East.
These risks have now been reduced.
Thanks to European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s “whatever it takes” speech, new financial facilities to stabilize distressed sovereign debtors, and the beginning of a banking union, the eurozone is no longer on the verge of collapse.
In the US, President Barack Obama and Congressional Republicans have for now agreed on a truce to avoid the threat of another government shutdown over the need to raise the debt ceiling.
In Japan, the first two “arrows” of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic strategy – monetary easing and fiscal expansion – have boosted growth and stopped deflation.
Now the third arrow of “Abenomics” – structural reforms – together with the start of long-term fiscal consolidation, could lead to debt stabilization (though the economic impact of the coming consumption-tax hike is uncertain).
Similarly, the risk of deflation worldwide has been contained via exotic and unconventional monetary policies: near-zero interest rates, quantitative easing, credit easing, and forward guidance.
And the risk of a war between Israel and Iran has been reduced by the interim agreement on Iran’s nuclear program concluded last November.
The falling fear premium has led to a drop in oil prices, even if many doubt Iran’s sincerity and worry that it is merely trying to buy time while still enriching uranium.
Though many Middle East countries remain highly unstable, none of them is systemically important in financial terms, and no conflict so far has seriously shocked global oil and gas supplies.
But, of course, exacerbation of some of these crises and conflicts could lead to renewed concerns about energy security.
More important, as the risks of recent years have receded, six other risks have been growing.
For starters, there is the risk of a hard landing in China.
The rebalancing of growth away from fixed investment and toward private consumption is occurring too slowly, because every time annual GDP growth slows toward 7%, the authorities panic and double down on another round of credit-fueled capital investment.
This then leads to more bad assets and non-performing loans, more excessive investment in real estate, infrastructure, and industrial capacity, and more public and private debt.
By next year, there may be no road left down which to kick the can.
There is also the risk of policy mistakes by the US Federal Reserve as it exits monetary easing.
Last year, the Fed’s mere announcement that it would gradually wind down its monthly purchases of long-term financial assets triggered a “taper” tantrum in global financial markets and emerging markets.
This year, tapering is priced in, but uncertainty about the timing and speed of the Fed’s efforts to normalize policy interest rates is creating volatility.
Some investors and governments now worry that the Fed may raise rates too soon and too fast, causing economic and financial shockwaves.
Third, the Fed may actually exit zero rates too late and too slowly (its current plan would normalize rates to 4% only by 2018), thus causing another asset-price boom – and an eventual bust.
Indeed, unconventional monetary policies in the US and other advanced economies have already led to massive asset-price reflation, which in due course could cause bubbles in real estate, credit, and equity markets.
Fourth, the crises in some fragile emerging markets may worsen.
Emerging markets are facing headwinds (owing to a fall in commodity prices and the risks associated with China’s structural transformation and the Fed’s monetary-policy shift) at a time when their own macroeconomic policies are still too loose and the lack of structural reforms has undermined potential growth.
Moreover many of these emerging markets face political and electoral risks.
Fifth, there is a serious risk that the current conflict in Ukraine will lead to Cold War II – and possibly even a hot war if Russia invades the east of the country.
The economic consequences of such an outcome – owing to its impact on energy supplies and investment flows, in addition to the destruction of lives and physical capital – would be immense.
Finally, there is a similar risk that Asia’s terrestrial and maritime territorial disagreements (starting with the disputes between China and Japan) could escalate into outright military conflict.
Such geopolitical risks – were they to materialize – would have a systemic economic and financial impact.
So far, financial markets have been sanguine about these new rising risks.
Volatility has increased only modestly, while asset prices have held up.
Noise about these risks has occasionally (but only briefly) shaken investors’ confidence, and modest market corrections have tended to reverse themselves.
Investors may be right that these risks will not materialize in their more severe form, or that loose monetary policies in advanced economies and continued recovery will contain such risks.
But investors may be deluding themselves that the probability of these risks is low – and thus may be unpleasantly surprised when one or more of them materializes.
Indeed, as was the case with the global financial crisis, investors seem unable to estimate, price, and hedge such tail risks properly.
Only time will tell whether their current nonchalance constitutes another failure to assess and prepare for extreme events.
Now For An Arab Economic Revolution
BEIRUT – Revolution across the Arab world has forced the region’s peoples and governments to grapple with the need for change.
Years of sclerosis have given way to a frantic push for reforms to match the aspirations and discontent of millions.
But reform momentum is tugging in two, quite opposite, directions.
One push is for governments to provide for their people; the other calls for governments to stop restricting their people’s freedom, particularly their economic liberty. The first type of reform will likely only exacerbate the Arab world’s grave problems; the second offers hope for positive and sustainable change.
In several Arab countries, most notably Saudi Arabia, rulers have sought to quell popular discontent by providing a combination of cash, subsidies, guaranteed jobs, and free goods and services.
Such largesse betrays a fundamental misunderstanding of the causes of today’s discontent, because it assumes that these causes are purely material.
But any examination of the protesters’ slogans and demands clearly indicates otherwise.
The protests are much more about political and economic freedom than about material needs, reflecting a keen awareness that such needs are merely a symptom and consequence of the absence of political and economic freedom.
The dominant “handout approach” is not sustainable, and, if continued, would likely exacerbate the Arab world’s current economic malaise.
Economic wealth cannot be created by government decree; it comes from productive jobs that create goods and services that people value.
Governments that hand out benefits are not making their citizens richer by generating new wealth; they are simply redistributing existing wealth.
This also applies to government-created and guaranteed jobs: if a job is indeed productive, its output would be rewarded by other members of society who benefit from it, without the need for government subsidies and guarantees. The fact that government guarantees a job implies that its output is not wanted.
Such jobs are a liability for society, not an asset.
As citizens start relying on redistribution, productive work is discouraged, and real wealth creation suffers.
Economic rot sets in as the ranks of dependent citizens grow, productive citizens dwindle in number, and society eventually runs out of other people’s money.