Both candidates have placed great importance on global warming.
Republican John McCain believes that it presents “a test of foresight, of political courage, and of the unselfish concern that one generation owes to the next,” while Democrat Barack Obama calls it “one of the greatest moral challenges of our generation.”
It remains far from clear, however, whether the shift in rhetoric and policy will move the planet any closer to embracing the best response.
Both McCain and Obama could leave future generations lumbered with the costs of major cuts in carbon emissions – without major cuts in temperatures.
Both politicians are keen to tap into voters’ concerns about global warming.
McCain launched a television commercial declaring that he had “stood up to President George Bush” on global warming.
If elected, Obama plans to count on former vice president and passionate campaigner Al Gore to help “lead the fight” against warming.
Each would introduce aggressive targets for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
Obama’s plan would reduce emissions by 80% below 1990 levels by 2050, while McCain aims to ensure that emissions are 60% lower by then.
Both would achieve these ambitious cuts by the same method: a cap-and-trade system that imposes limits on industry emissions and forces businesses to buy rights to any additional emissions.
A cap-and-trade system can seem like a neat market solution.
In fact, it is worse than a straightforward carbon tax.
With a tax, the costs are obvious.
With a cap-and-trade system, the costs – in terms of jobs, household consumption, and economic growth – are hidden, shifted around, and not easy to estimate, though models indicate they will run into trillions of dollars.
Not everybody would lose.
Some big businesses in privileged positions would make a fortune from exploiting this rather rigged market.
And politicians would have an opportunity to control the number and distribution of emission permits and the flow of billions of dollars in subsidies and sweeteners.
This is a very expensive, unwieldy way to achieve a very small reduction in temperatures.
The Warner-Lieberman bill on climate change – a piece of legislation which was recently abandoned in the US Senate but is seen as a precursor of future policy – would have postponed the temperature increase in 2050 by about two years.
Recently, the Copenhagen Consensus project gathered eight of the world’s top economists – including five Nobel laureates – to examine research on the best ways to tackle 10 global challenges: air pollution, conflict, disease, global warming, hunger and malnutrition, lack of education, gender inequity, lack of water and sanitation, terrorism, and trade barriers.
Their goal was to create a prioritized list showing how money could best be spent combating these problems.
The panel concluded that the least-effective use of resources would come from simply cutting CO2 emissions. 
A lead author of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change – the group that shared last year’s Nobel Peace Prize with Gore – told the experts that spending $800 billion over 100 years solely on mitigating emissions would reduce inevitable temperature increases by just 0.4 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of this century.
Even accounting for the key environmental damage from warming, we would lose money, with avoided damages of just $685 billion for our $800 billion investment.
The expert panel concluded that investing in research and development into low-carbon energy would be a much sounder, more effective option – an effort that both McCain and Obama support.
But this, not carbon emissions, should be the core of their climate change policy.
Currently, low-carbon energy solutions are prohibitively expensive.
The typical cost of cutting a ton of CO2 is now about $20, but the damage from a ton of carbon in the atmosphere is about $2.
So we need to reduce by roughly ten-fold the cost of cutting emissions.
We can achieve this by spending dramatically more researching and developing low-carbon energy.
The US could provide leadership by committing to spending 0.05% of its GDP exploring non-carbon-emitting energy technologies – wind, wave, or solar power – or capturing CO2 emissions from power plants.
It would then have the moral authority to demand that other nations do the same.  By focusing more on research and development, and less in carbon cuts, both candidates could embrace a solution that encourages the best of the American innovative spirit and leaves the best possible legacy to future generations: a high-income, low-carbon energy world.
The Meaning of Brexit
NEW YORK – The Brexit vote was a triple protest: against surging immigration, City of London bankers, and European Union institutions, in that order.
It will have major consequences.
Donald Trump’s campaign for the US presidency will receive a huge boost, as will other anti-immigrant populist politicians.
Moreover, leaving the EU will wound the British economy, and could well push Scotland to leave the United Kingdom – to say nothing of Brexit’s ramifications for the future of European integration.
Brexit is thus a watershed event that signals the need for a new kind of globalization, one that could be far superior to the status quo that was rejected at the British polls.
At its core, Brexit reflects a pervasive phenomenon in the high-income world: rising support for populist parties campaigning for a clampdown on immigration.
Roughly half the population in Europe and the United States, generally working-class voters, believes that immigration is out of control, posing a threat to public order and cultural norms.
In the middle of the Brexit campaign in May, it was reported that the UK had net immigration of 333,000 persons in 2015, more than triple the government’s previously announced target of 100,000.
That news came on top of the Syrian refugee crisis, terrorist attacks by Syrian migrants and disaffected children of earlier immigrants, and highly publicized reports of assaults on women and girls by migrants in Germany and elsewhere.
In the US, Trump backers similarly rail against the country’s estimated 11 million undocumented residents, mainly Hispanic, who overwhelmingly live peaceful and productive lives, but without proper visas or work permits.
For many Trump supporters, the crucial fact about the recent attack in Orlando is that the perpetrator was the son of Muslim immigrants from Afghanistan and acted in the name of anti-American sentiment (though committing mass murder with semi-automatic weapons is, alas, all too American).
Warnings that Brexit would lower income levels were either dismissed outright, wrongly, as mere fearmongering, or weighed against the Leavers’ greater interest in border control.
A major factor, however, was implicit class warfare.
Working-class “Leave” voters reasoned that most or all of the income losses would in any event be borne by the rich, and especially the despised bankers of the City of London.
Americans disdain Wall Street and its greedy and often criminal behavior at least as much as the British working class disdains the City of London.
This, too, suggests a campaign advantage for Trump over his opponent in November, Hillary Clinton, whose candidacy is heavily financed by Wall Street.
Clinton should take note and distance herself from Wall Street.
In the UK, these two powerful political currents – rejection of immigration and class warfare – were joined by the widespread sentiment that EU institutions are dysfunctional.
They surely are.
One need only cite the last six years of mismanagement of the Greek crisis by self-serving, shortsighted European politicians.
The continuing eurozone turmoil was, understandably, enough to put off millions of UK voters.
The short-run consequences of Brexit are already clear: the pound has plummeted to a 31-year low.
In the near term, the City of London will face major uncertainties, job losses, and a collapse of bonuses.
Property values in London will cool.
The possible longer-run knock-on effects in Europe – including likely Scottish independence; possible Catalonian independence; a breakdown of free movement of people in the EU; a surge in anti-immigrant politics (including the possible election of Trump and France’s Marine Le Pen) – are enormous.
Other countries might hold referendums of their own, and some may choose to leave.
In Europe, the call to punish Britain pour encourager les autres – to warn those contemplating the same – is already rising.
This is European politics at its stupidest (also very much on display vis-à-vis Greece).
The remaining EU should, instead, reflect on its obvious failings and fix them.
Punishing Britain – by, say, denying it access to Europe’s single market – would only lead to the continued unraveling of the EU.
So what should be done?
I would suggest several measures, both to reduce the risks of catastrophic feedback loops in the short term and to maximize the benefits of reform in the long term.
First, stop the refugee surge by ending the Syrian war immediately.
This can be accomplished by ending the CIA-Saudi alliance to overthrow Bashar al-Assad, thereby enabling Assad (with Russian and Iranian backing) to defeat the Islamic State and stabilize Syria (with a similar approach in neighboring Iraq).
America’s addiction to regime change (in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria) is the deep cause of Europe’s refugee crisis.
End the addiction, and the recent refugees could return home.
Second, stop NATO’s expansion to Ukraine and Georgia.
The new Cold War with Russia is another US-contrived blunder with plenty of European naiveté attached.
Closing the door on NATO expansion would make it possible to ease tensions and normalize relations with Russia, stabilize Ukraine, and restore focus on the European economy and the European project.
Third, don’t punish Britain.
Instead, police national and EU borders to stop illegal migrants.
This is not xenophobia, racism, or fanaticism.
It is common sense that countries with the world’s most generous social-welfare provisions (Western Europe) must say no to millions (indeed hundreds of millions) of would-be migrants.
The same is true for the US.
Fourth, restore a sense of fairness and opportunity for the disaffected working class and those whose livelihoods have been undermined by financial crises and the outsourcing of jobs.
This means following the social-democratic ethos of pursuing ample social spending for health, education, training, apprenticeships, and family support, financed by taxing the rich and closing tax havens, which are gutting public revenues and exacerbating economic injustice.
It also means finally giving Greece debt relief, thereby ending the long-running eurozone crisis.
Fifth, focus resources, including additional aid, on economic development, rather than war, in low-income countries.
Uncontrolled migration from today’s poor and conflict-ridden regions will become overwhelming, regardless of migration policies, if climate change, extreme poverty, and lack of skills and education undermine the development potential of Africa, Central America and the Caribbean, the Middle East, and Central Asia.
All of this underscores the need to shift from a strategy of war to one of sustainable development, especially by the US and Europe.
Walls and fences won’t stop millions of migrants fleeing violence, extreme poverty, hunger, disease, droughts, floods, and other ills.
Only global cooperation can do that.
The Islamic State’s Perversion of Hijra
LONDON – In recent decades, the Arabic word jihad – once used to describe the duty of all Muslims to act according to their faith – has become overwhelmingly associated with the waging of violent war against non-believers.
With the rise of the Islamic State, another term has been refashioned for inclusion in the lexicon of extremist violence: hijra.
As with jihad, this is no mere semantic hijacking. The real-world implications are all too alarming.
By militarizing the concept of hijra, which traditionally referred to Muslims’ peaceful migration to lands where they would be free from persecution, they have created a powerful tool for radicalizing and recruiting Muslims far and wide, including in the United States and Europe.
Hijra’s association with Islam has its origins in the Prophet Mohammed’s escape from Mecca to Medina in 622, to avoid assassination and preserve his community.
He and his followers knew that as long as they remained in Mecca, they would be despised by non-Muslims; their very lives were in danger.
And so, in an act of hijra – or migration – the prophet left the city of his birth.
Islam would have a stable base, because Muslims in Medina would be free to worship according to the dictates of their faith.
Mohammed’s hijra is not narrated in the Koran, but the sacred book is structured around the event, divided into revelations he received in Mecca and those he received in Medina.
The year of Mohammed’s hijra also became the first year of the Islamic calendar.
And, as the faith spread, the word came to describe not only Mohammed’s departure for Medina, but also a general obligation by all Muslims to migrate to lands under Muslim rule when it will serve their faith.
Over the course of Islamic history, hijra has come to represent more than physical movement; it is widely viewed as an injunction to create a better world in lands under Muslim rule.
For millions of Muslims, it has been a guide to the universal predicament faced by all believers: how to be pious in an impious world.
At its most meaningful, hijra bridges the gap between how believers wish they lived and how they actually do live.
In early modernity, however, with the systematic expulsion of Muslims from Spain in 1492, and later from lands seized by other colonial empires, hijra acquired a more violent meaning that anticipated its later association with jihad.
Following these expulsions – most notably by the Spanish and Russian Empires – the concept came to signify not only the pressure to migrate, as during Mohammed’s lifetime, but also an ultimatum from the state: leave or you will be slaughtered.
Centuries after these violent expulsions by European powers, hijra today signifies much more than physical relocation.
For many modern Muslims, hijra represents the perpetual movement between memory and forgetting.
It is what Muslims do when – like Palestinians and Chechens– they have been dispossessed by more powerful states.
It is how they create homes amid the homelessness of exile and displacement that is part of their modern condition.
It is the turn to narrative to keep the past – and oneself – alive in the present.
Wherever and whenever in Islamic history there are stories of despair and loss, hijra emerges as a path to courage and spiritual victory.
It is both a beginning – an origin story – and a denouement to trauma.
Most recently, however, under the Islamic State, hijra has acquired a connotation that alienates it from its prior meanings.
The Islamic State can only understand hijra as physical migration for the purpose of jihad.
For the Islamic State’s crude and contrived medievalism, the past is of only instrumental value, to be refashioned in the service of violent conquest and savage repression.
Far from being an ethical mode of remembering – a source of cultural continuity and consolation – hijra has been turned into a call to arms by this new self-proclaimed Caliphate, which the vast majority of Muslims today do not recognize as part of their religion.
Before hijra became militarized, it was used to hold the present accountable to the past.
In this richer, if more elusive, sense, hijra far exceeds – indeed, confounds – the Islamic State’s remit.
The word’s original evocation of the early Islamic community of believers who had to migrate not to wage war, but rather to live in peace, are nuances that the group’s ideologues – whose appeals to the force of the new require a purified version of the past – would very much like us to forget.
America’s Lethal Fear of Science
NEW YORK – A rare, deadly, and highly contagious disease is spreading across the United States, having infected more than 100 people since the beginning of the year, with thousands more at risk.
This is not the doomsday Ebola scenario that so many were envisioning when the first case in the US was diagnosed five months ago.
The resurgence is of the measles – a disease that the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention declared eradicated in 2000, thanks to a highly effective and safe vaccine.
What went wrong?
Since 2000, measles cases in the US have been attributed largely to travelers bringing the disease into the country.
In recent years, however, measles has become increasingly common, with the number of cases climbing above 150 in 2013, and then jumping to 644 last year – the most cases recorded in a single year since the late 1990s.
This year already appears likely to top that record.
The upsurge in cases can be explained largely by the increase in the number of unvaccinated children.
Americans are learning the hard way that scientifically baseless skepticism about the safety of vaccines is extremely dangerous.
Measles may have a lower mortality rate than Ebola, but its potential to inflict suffering and death – especially on young children – remains considerable.
Indeed, before vaccination made measles a rarity, the disease was widely feared, killing thousands of children every year.
The tragic irony of vaccination in America is that it has become a victim of its own success.
As the number of people who have witnessed firsthand the effects of measles and other childhood diseases – such as mumps, rubella, polio, and whooping cough – has declined, so has society’s commitment to keeping them away.
Even after panicked claims that vaccines cause visible conditions like autism were proved to be nonsense, they remain more compelling than the threat of a disease that people have never seen or do not remember.
Of course, vaccinations can have some side effects, such as a rash, fatigue, headache, or a fever.
But claims that significant, permanent damage resulting from vaccines is widespread are entirely unfounded.
Andrew Wakefield first claimed that there was a relationship between the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine and autism in 1998.
But it soon came to light that he had falsified his evidence, and his “research” was retracted.
Wakefield was later banned from practicing medicine in his home country, the United Kingdom, for “serious professional misconduct.”
But the damage had been done.
Despite Wakefield’s ostracism from the medical community and the exposure of his deceptions – not to mention numerous scientific studies that did not find any link whatsoever between vaccines and autism – he has retained a devoted following in the US.
Making matters worse, irresponsible and ignorant celebrities have seized upon his lies, using their access to the media to spread conspiracy theories and propaganda against vaccinations.
As a result, vaccination rates continue to decline – and in some communities, especially in California and Oregon, they have plummeted.
From 1996 to 2015, there was a six-fold increase in the rate of vaccine exemptions for students entering elementary school in California.
This has contributed to the spread not only of measles, but also of whooping cough and mumps.
Parents argue that vaccination, like all other decisions about how to raise and care for their children, should be their choice.
But, when it comes to vaccination, one family’s poor judgment can mean sickness or even death for another’s.
When enough members of a community are vaccinated, a sort of “immunity buffer” is created, adding an extra layer of protection for vaccinated individuals, while shielding those who are not eligible for particular vaccines, such as infants or people with compromised immune systems – individuals for whom disease-mortality rates are highest.
This phenomenon is called “herd immunity,” and it has been vital to vaccines’ effectiveness.
This is not the first time that the American public has allowed fear to dictate public policy.
Just a few months ago, Americans were terrified that Ebola could take hold in their country.
Rather than providing responsible leadership, politicians like New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky stoked the panic in an effort to win support in advance of last November’s midterm elections.
Experts’ attempts to impress upon Americans how difficult Ebola is to transmit, and how unlikely an Ebola epidemic in the US was, fell largely on deaf ears.
Today, Americans are again refusing to heed experts’ advice – only, this time, they really are facing a serious threat.
Worse, politicians like Christie and Paul have tacitly (or not so tacitly) supported parents who choose not to vaccinate their children, regardless of the scientific consensus that such parents are contributing to a genuine public health crisis.
Paul – who is, ironically, a physician – went so far as to mention the many children he knew who suffered “profound mental disorders” after having had vaccinations, indulging the anti-vaccination advocates who might support him politically, while stopping short of making a false scientific claim.
(By his logic, vaccines make people taller, too; after all, nearly every child I have known has grown taller after being vaccinated.)
The scientific method is perhaps the greatest arbiter of truth humanity has ever devised.
We must trust in it to help make sense of an uncertain world, and to help us determine how best to nourish and protect our children and ourselves.
When parents are allowed – or, worse, encouraged – to choose fear over science, we all pay the price.
Measuring the Value of Free
LONDON – Reliable economic statistics are a vital public good.
They are essential to effective policymaking, business planning, and the electorate’s ability to hold decision-makers to account.
And yet the methods we use to measure our economies are becoming increasingly out of date.
The statistical conventions on which we base our estimates were adopted a half-century ago, at a time when the economy was producing relatively similar physical goods.
Today’s economy is radically different and changing rapidly – the result of technological innovation, the rising value of intangible, knowledge-based assets, and the internationalization of economic activity.
In light of these challenges, UK Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne asked me ten months ago to assess the United Kingdom’s current and future statistical needs.
While my research focused on the UK, the challenges of producing relevant, high-quality economic statistics are the same in many countries.
Recent technological advances have radically altered the way people conduct their lives, both at work and at play.
The advances in computing power underpinning the digital revolution have led not only to rapid quality improvements and product innovation, but also to new, connectivity-driven ways of exchanging and providing services.
One particular challenge for economic measurement stems from the fact that an increasing share of consumption comprises digital products delivered at a zero price or funded through alternative means, such as advertising.
While free virtual goods clearly have value to consumers, they are entirely excluded from GDP, in accordance with internationally accepted statistical standards.
As a result, our measurements may not be capturing a growing share of economic activity.
Consider the music industry.
Downloads and streaming services have now largely replaced CDs, the dominant medium in the 1990s.
And yet the money has not followed; the industry’s revenues and margins have both plummeted.
As a result, its contribution to GDP (as we currently measure it) may be falling, even as the quantity and quality of services are increasing.
Two methods can give us a rough estimate how much digital economic activity we are failing to capture in our measurements.
We can use average wages to estimate the value of the time people spend online using free digital products, or we can adjust telecommunication services output to account for the rapid growth in Internet traffic.
Both approaches suggest that accounting for these types of activities could add between one-third and two-thirds of a percentage point to the average annual growth rate of the UK economy over the past decade.
The digital revolution is also disrupting traditional business models.
The reduced search and matching costs offered by a range of online platforms are unlocking the market for skills (known as the “gig economy”) and the market for underutilized assets (known as the “sharing economy”).
This, too, causes conceptual and practical measurement challenges for established GDP calculus.
The traditional statistical distinction between productive firms and consuming households leaves little room to account for households as value creators.
Measuring GDP, it turns out, is like trying to hit a moving target.
The digital revolution is likely to be followed by yet another wave of disruptive technology, including advances in materials science, artificial intelligence, and genetic engineering.
As the economy evolves, so must the frame of reference for the statistics we use to measure it.
Consequently, internationally agreed statistical standards will almost always be somewhat out of date or incomplete, as they are bound to lag behind changes in the economy.
National statistical offices should explore measurement issues that go beyond the prevailing standards, rather than use compliance as an excuse for their failure to innovate.
One solution would be to establish a continuing program of research into the measurement implications of emerging economic trends, conducting one-off studies at first to gauge their potential quantitative importance.
This could then guide the development of experimental statistics capturing the new phenomena.
New techniques of collecting and analyzing big data, such as web scraping, text-mining, and machine learning, provide an opportunity for statisticians.
Governments already hold some administrative data, but their use for statistical purposes often requires legislative changes.
Unlocking this trove of information would extend statistical samples to near-census size, increase their timeliness and accuracy, and reduce the respondent costs to businesses and households.
Ensuring that data accurately reflect a changing economy is one of the hardest tasks faced by national statistical institutes worldwide.
Success requires not only understanding the limitations of traditional measurements, but also developing a curious and self-critical workforce that can collaborate with partners in academia, industry, the public sector, and other national statistical institutes to develop more appropriate methods.
The UK is by no means alone in facing these challenges.
But we need to act quickly.
Otherwise, the speed of economic change will render our statistics irrelevant to modern life.
Memutarbalikkan Brain Drain di Bidang Kesehatan
GRENADA – Mengingat kelangkaan dokter merupakan fenomena di seluruh dunia, kebutuhan atas dokter pendatang di Amerika Serikat dan Inggris semakin mendorong sumber daya kesehatan di negara-negara berkembang dan berpendapatan menengah menuju titik nadir.
Di Amerika Serikat saja, kekurangan dokter diperkirakan bertambah menjadi 95.000 pada tahun 2025, setara dengan 43% jumlah dokter saat ini.
Ketika suplai dokter menipis, Amerika Serikat dan Inggris beralih ke negara-negara seperti Filipina demi menutup kesenjangan.
Akan tetapi ini menjadikan Filipina menghadapi isu kekurangan tenaga medis yang cukup berat.
Situasi di Afrika pun sama buruknya.
Di Kenya, lebih dari 50% dokter kini praktik di luar negeri, menyisakan hanya 20 dokter per 100.000 penduduk.
Sebaliknya, Inggris memiliki 270 dokter per 100.000 penduduk.
Memang, tidak salah jika seorang dokter menghabiskan waktunya bekerja dan menjalani pendidikan di luar negeri; sebaliknya, praktik di sistem pelayanan kesehatan yang berbeda-beda itu penting untuk memupuk dokter yang berpengalaman dan berwawasan luas.
Masalah utamanya disini adalah tenaga kesehatan dan mahasiswa berbondong-bondong pergi menuju Amerika Serikat dan Inggris, kemudian tidak pernah kembali mengabdi pada komunitas tempat mereka berasal.
Selain itu, negara pemasok umumnya membiayai pendidikan kedokteran secara langsung atau tidak langsung, tanpa memperoleh manfaat apa pun.
Untuk memutarbalikkan tren tersebut, kita harus membolehkan mahasiswa kedokteran berlatih di rumah sakit atau fasilitas kesehatan kelas dunia, namun tetap mendorong mereka kembali praktik di negara asalnya.
Ini tidak mudah, sebab praktik dokter di negara maju jauh lebih menguntungkan daripada di negara berkembang, dan mayoritas dokter lebih senang bekerja di negara tempat mereka mendapat pendidikan atau pelatihan.
Setiap upaya menghentikan perpindahan tenaga kesehatan sekali jalan harus mengatasi faktor-faktor tersebut.
Pertama, fokus pada lokasi pendidikan atau pelatihan medis.
Mahasiswa bisa menyelesaikan pendidikan pra klinik, dan sebagian pendidikan klinik atau koas, di negara asalnya, kemudian diberi opsi menyelesaikan masa pendidikan klinik sementara di Amerika Serikat atau Inggris.
Program residensi (residency) adalah tahap terakhir dari proses pendidikan kedokteran dan biasanya menentukan lokasi praktik yang disukai dokter.
Ketika dokter dari negara berkembang menyelesaikan residensinya di Amerika Serikat atau Inggris, jarang sekali diantara mereka yang kembali ke negaranya.
Bahkan, seringkali para dokter diberi insentif besar untuk tetap tinggal: status visa permanen dan izin praktik yang sah.
Dengan demikian, negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah harus menyediakan lebih banyak program residensi, dan negara-negara seperti Amerika Serikat dan Inggris, yang sedikit-banyak mengakibatkan ketimpangan suplai dokter saat ini, harus memberi bantuan dana dan know-how.
Kita juga perlu mengatasi isu insentif keuangan yang memikat banyak dokter asing, salah satunya bisa dengan mewajibkan dokter yang beremigrasi (yang pendidikan kedokterannya didanai oleh pemerintah negara asalnya) untuk membayar biaya sebelum diizinkan praktik di negara lain.
Dengan demikian, para dokter akan bertanggung jawab atas nilai pendidikan mereka yang disubsidi, sebelum merencanakan kepergiannya.
Persyaratan tersebut bisa diberlakukan melalui mekanisme beasiswa yang dirancang baik sehingga mencerminkan pesan ini: “kembalikan dulu uangnya jika anda tidak mau pulang” (“pay it back if you don’t come back”).
Melalui sistem ini, jumlah mahasiswa yang mendapat subsidi pemerintah dan berniat kerja di luar negeri secara permanen akan berkurang, dan jumlah dana yang tersedia untuk mahasiswa yang hendak praktik di dalam negeri akan bertambah, atau bisa juga digunakan untuk investasi pada infrastruktur layanan kesehatan.
Trinidad berhasil menerapkan strategi tersebut – para dokter yang melakukan pendidikan di luar negeri wajib kembali ke negaranya selama lima tahun sebagai pengganti beasiswa pemerintah yang mereka terima – dan Amerika Serikat mempunyai program serupa untuk mendorong mahasiswa kedokteran agar praktik di daerah tertentu di negaranya.
Di St. George University, universitas tempat saya menjabat Rektor dan CEO, terdapat program CityDoctors Scholarship, yang mana mahasiswa dari New York City yang menerima beasiswa penuh kuliah di fakultas kedokteran harus kembali praktik di rumah sakit umum di New York City selama lima tahun setelah menyelesaikan pendidikan.
Jika melanggar, mereka wajib membayar kembali beasiswa tersebut layaknya melunasi pinjaman.
Program pendidikan kedokteran di negara-negara berkembang juga perlu mempertimbangkan cara mengarahkan dokter masa depan demi pemenuhan kebutuhan dalam negeri.
Mahasiswa kedokteran umumnya berasal dari keluarga yang berkecukupan, berarti mayoritas berasal dari kota-kota besar.
Perlu lebih banyak mahasiswa direkrut dari pedesaan – kelangkaan terbesar umumnya dirasakan di desa – dan lalu dididik di lokasi yang paling membutuhkan jasa mereka nantinya.
Dengan memperluas basis tenaga kesehatan sesuai pertimbangan geografis dan sosial-ekonomi dan mengidentifikasi bibit-bibit baru yang kompeten, kita bisa meningkatkan kemungkinan mahasiswa ingin kembali praktik di komunitasnya.
Kita semua bisa memetik manfaat dari pendidikan kedokteran mengglobal yang berkelanjutan, yang menjamin kebutuhan layanan kesehatan di semua negara bisa terpenuhi.
Bagi negara-negara berkembang, tidak ada jalan lain selain terus maju.
Fiscal Discipline and Educational Quality
ANKARA – The world is moving into a post-industrial age in which manufacturing is becoming ever more complex and competition has become global.
To succeed, countries increasingly need a highly skilled and educated workforce.
Therefore, raising the level of skills conferred by secondary schools has become an urgent priority for developing and developed countries alike.
For me, the issue of education is no mere academic matter.
I was born into a family of nine children.
My parents were illiterate, and none of my sisters attended school beyond the primary level.
However, in my family’s next generation, all of my nieces and nephews have a high-school diploma and most have attended university.
Improving the education system of a country with more than 16 million primary and secondary school students – more than the combined population of 20 European Union member states – poses considerable fiscal challenges.
So the first step is to create a sound macroeconomic basis for reform.
These fiscal improvements have freed up funds for sizable investments in education, without adding to public debt.
From 2002 to 2014, Turkey doubled the proportion of education spending in the total budget to 18% without hurting the country’s fiscal position.
Since 2003, this extra money has allowed the government to hire some 410,000 more teachers, add 205,000 classrooms, and distribute 1.8 billion free textbooks.
Pupil-teacher ratios have also fallen.
In the 2002-03 school year, there were 28 students per teacher in primary education and 18 in secondary schools; by 2012-13, this had fallen to 20 and 16, respectively.
And in 2012, Turkey raised the minimum period of compulsory education to 12 years.
This is an important reform, given that the average schooling of people over 25 is only 6.5 years in Turkey, compared to an OECD average of more than 11.
Moreover, the government has improved educational opportunities.
As part of the FATIH project to help underprivileged students, Turkey has allocated 1.4 billion lira ($665 million) in 2014 to equip its schools with broadband Internet and the latest information technology.
Other initiatives, such as “Baba Beni Okula Gönder” (Daddy, Please Send Me to School) and “Haydi Kızlar Okula” (Girls, Let’s Go to School), have improved enrollment gender ratios, from 91.1 girls for every 100 boys in 2002, to 101.8 girls for every 100 boys in 2012.
This is likely to improve female labor-force participation in Turkey, which is around 30% on average, but 72% for those with a university diploma.
Given Turkey’s geographic size (twice that of Germany but with a similar-size population), it has been a challenge to ensure that all pupils, regardless of their location or socioeconomic background, receive a good education.
But one of Turkey’s most remarkable successes since 2003 has been to break the intolerable link between a child’s household circumstances and his or her chances to succeed in school.
Consider that in 2003, the test scores of 28% of Turkish students could be explained by their socioeconomic standing – in other words, the poorer the pupil, the lower his or her PISA scores.
This was in line with the OECD average.
But the OECD’s 2012 report found that only 15% of lower test scores among Turkish students could be explained by their socioeconomic standing, a better outcome than the OECD average.
Turkey is also narrowing the gap with OECD countries in terms of educational quality.
In 2006, Turkey scored 76 points lower than the OECD average in science exams and 74 points lower in math.
Closing Africa’s Agricultural Gender Gap
SEATTLE – Africa’s GDP is now growing faster than any other continent’s. When many people think about the engines driving that growth, they imagine commodities like oil, gold, and cocoa, or maybe industries like banking and telecommunications.
I think of a woman named Joyce Sandir.
Joyce is a farmer who grows bananas, vegetables, and maize on a small plot of land in rural Tanzania.
When I met her in 2012, she had just harvested her first crop of maize grown from a seed specifically adapted for Tanzania’s climate.
Even during a bad crop year that caused many of Joyce’s vegetables to wither and die, her maize crop flourished.
Without it, her family might have risked going hungry.
Instead, the maize harvest ensured that Joyce’s family had enough to eat – and even enough extra income for Joyce to pay her children’s school fees.
As Joyce’s story demonstrates, agriculture is crucial to Africa’s future.
Farmers make up 70% of Africa’s workforce.
They are the foundation of its economy, and the key to triggering its broader growth.
Research shows that increasing agricultural productivity is the most effective way to reduce poverty in sub-Saharan Africa.
In fact, agriculture offers the continent its best opportunity to turn a vicious cycle of poverty into a virtuous cycle of development.
That is why leaders and policymakers from across the continent have declared 2014 Africa’s Year of Agriculture and Food Security.
Joyce’s story is relevant for another reason, too.
She is important to Africa’s future not only because she is a farmer, but also because she is a woman.
At the Gates Foundation, I spend a lot of my time understanding the many ways that women and girls drive development forward: by investing in their children’s nutrition, basic health, and education – and also by providing farm labor.
What I am now learning is that if Africa hopes to spark an agricultural transformation, countries will first need to remove one of the main barriers holding the sector back: a pervasive gender gap.
This gap is not about the number of women farmers.
In fact, roughly half of Africa’s farmers are women.
The gap is one of productivity.
Across the continent, farms controlled by women tend to produce less per hectare than farms controlled by men.
The world has had evidence of this gender gap since at least 2011, but only limited data about its scope, shape, and causes.
To help us better understand the problem, the World Bank and the ONE Campaign recently conducted an unprecedented analysis of the challenges facing women farmers.
Their report highlights one stark fact from the start: The gender gap is real, and in some cases it is extreme.
When we compare male and female farmers with similar land sizes across similar settings, the productivity gap can be as high as 66%, as it is in Niger.
Previously, experts believed that women’s farms produced less because women have less access to inputs like fertilizer, water, and even information.
But we now know that the story is much more complicated. With the new data in hand, we can see that, surprisingly, the productivity gap persists even when women have equal access to inputs.
The precise reasons vary from country to country – but many of them stem from entrenched cultural norms that prevent women from reaching their full potential.
For example, the report found that women face obstacles mobilizing the labor they need to help their farms flourish.
Women usually have more childcare and household responsibilities than men, which make it difficult for them to devote as much time to farm work, or even to supervise hired labor.
The problem is compounded by the fact that women are also likely to have less income to hire laborers in the first place.
Fortunately, the new data do not just map the complexity and depth of the problem; they also point to concrete opportunities to develop gender-responsive policies that will help unlock the promise of all of Africa’s farmers.
In some places, that may mean teaching agricultural extension workers how to make their messages more relevant to female audiences, or encouraging them to visit when women are most likely to be at home.
In other places, it may mean increasing women’s access to markets, or introducing labor-saving tools to help them get the highest yield from their land.
It may also require establishing community childcare centers, so that women farmers have the option to spend more time farming.
In every case, it will require African policymakers to start recognizing women farmers as the essential economic partners that they are.
This June, leaders from all over Africa will meet in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, to set the agenda for agricultural policy in the next decade.
If Africa’s agricultural sector is to achieve its promise – and if Africa’s economic growth is to continue – policymakers should take into account the needs of farmers like Joyce.
Hers is a success story that can – and must – be replicated across the continent.
Meltdowns and Fallouts
BRUSSELS – The metaphors used during the financial crisis of 2008-2009 – earthquake, tsunami, meltdown, black swan, and fallout – are back with a vengeance, but now they are being recycled literally.
In fact, the financial crisis and the nuclear crisis at the Fukushima nuclear-power plant in Japan share at least four similarities:
·        The “black swan” metaphor suggests that these events reflect difficulty in correctly assessing risks in complex systems.
·        Regulators proved unable to forecast and prevent the crisis.
·        The “fallout” is potentially cross-border in nature.
·        The costs incurred by the imprudent companies will be partly socialized.
The 9.0-magnitude earthquake that struck Japan is, of course, a highly exceptional event – an event so rare that its probability cannot be well assessed with models based on limited historic data.
Events with very low probability but high impact – so-called “tail risks” – have also been at the heart of the financial crisis.
One cause of the financial crisis was financial institutions’ appetite for selecting (and in some cases, creating) products with above-average returns in normal times but excessive losses in exceptional cases. Old nuclear-power plants in seismic zones have a similar payoff structure.
Moreover, both the financial and nuclear risk models seem to not have correctly appreciated the correlations between different risks.
While financial institutions tried to mitigate risks by bundling subprime mortgages, Fukushima’s cooling system was able to cope with either a blackout and an earthquake or a tsunami.
But, in both cases, the failure probabilities were correlated, and their joint occurrence led to catastrophe.
Both nuclear and financial “meltdowns” tend to leave behind “fallout.”
In the Japanese case, only wind and the lack of a land border prevented a major impact on neighboring countries.
In continental Europe, many reactors are within 100 miles (161 kilometers) of another country’s territory. So a nuclear accident in Europe would likely have cross-border consequences.
But, like financial regulation, nuclear regulation in the EU, even with its Euratom treaty, is still essentially national.
And, given the deep disparities in nuclear power’s importance for European economies, consensus on regulatory harmonization is hard to reach.
France, for example, will remain dependent on its nuclear-generating capacity, which will continue to account for the largest share of its electricity.
Italy, on the other hand, might wish for a zero-nuclear risk environment, as it does not produce electricity from nuclear power but is surrounded (within about 100 miles) by one Slovene, one Swiss, and six French nuclear-power plants.
French reluctance to subject its nuclear plants to European regulation determined by its nuclear-skeptical neighbors is comparable to British efforts to prevent major European harmonization of financial-market rules, owing to the importance of its financial sector.
Another similarity between Japan’s current crisis and the recent financial crisis is that the false risk assessment was largely due to the asymmetric distribution of social welfare and individual cost implied by more effective risk mitigation.
Both Lehman Brothers and Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) were able to increase their profits as long as the risk they were willing to accept did not materialize.
Their management certainly benefited as long as everything went well.
When crisis hit, however, the cost of the meltdown exceeded the companies’ equity and thus had to be socialized.
So there is a structural failure in coping with complex private activities that risk leading to large societal damage.
In fact, this is well understood – and is the reason why we have regulators for most such systems.
But, prior to both Japan’s nuclear crisis and the financial crisis, regulators were unable to prevent the risk.
America’s SEC did not require more capital or halt risky practices at the big investment banks.
Japan’s nuclear regulator did not enforce stricter security rules.
There are several reasons for this regulatory failure, including the inability to acquire and process all relevant data, the political difficulty of enforcing strict judgments, and the difficulty of modeling tail risks.
Consequently, relying on low failure probabilities, national policies, the caution of private actors, and monitoring by regulators seems to be insufficient to prevent catastrophe.
So what should be done?
As in finance, ensuring that the originator of a risk pays the cost seems to be the most sensible approach.
If each nuclear-power plant was obliged to insure against the risk that it imposes on society (within and outside the country of its location), it would face the true economic cost of its activities.
In this ideal world, insurance for individual plants would be linked to factors that can and cannot be influenced, such as location in a densely populated area and the local population’s risk-averseness.
Furthermore, risk assessment should be linked to individual plants’ risk factors, such as location in a seismic zone, secondary containment, safety redundancies, etc.
Plants in densely populated areas with lower safety standards, for example, would face higher insurance costs, which could lead to a self-selected phase-out of the riskiest plants.
Implementation of such a scheme is unlikely, however.
First, it is virtually impossible to assess individual plants’ risk profiles correctly.
Second, such a scheme would impose large costs on only a few companies in a few countries.
Their governments would fight hard to protect these companies from being required to pay for the societal risks that they represent.
This likely outcome mirrors the initiative for a European or global banking fund to insure against the next financial crisis.
In both cases, however, perfect insurance could nonetheless serve as a valid benchmark to guide the choice of policies to implement.
Moving towards this benchmark could be aided by two measures: first, a phase-out of nuclear power plants not according to their age, but to their risk profile, however schematically this is calculated; and, second, introduction of mandatory cross-national insurance for nuclear accidents.
Under such a scheme, the Soviet Union in 1986, for example, would have been required to pay for the costs that the Chernobyl accident imposed on European farmers and health-care systems.
Implementing these improvements will be difficult, to be sure.
As with the financial sector, however, crisis can be the mother of reform.
Melting on Top of the World
POTSDAM – In 1845, Captain Sir John Franklin of the British Royal Navy led 128 men on two iron-plated steam ships, Erebus and Terror, into the Arctic, where they eventually disappeared.
The voyage was the culmination of four centuries of failed attempts to navigate the Northwest Passage – a direct route from Europe to Asia across the Arctic Ocean – and remains one of the greatest tragedies in the history of polar exploration.
Today, a far greater Arctic tragedy is unfolding: the Arctic sea-ice cap is melting.
Last month, an unprecedented new low was reached after decades of decline.
Indeed, the ice cap’s area has decreased by half since the 1980’s, when summer sea-ice still extended over roughly seven million square kilometers, as opposed to less than four million today.
It is now likely smaller than it has been for at least a millennium and a half.
In 2007, the Northwest Passage was ice-free for the first time in living memory.
Boats of all sizes – including cruise ships – have sailed through easily in summers since then.
Walt Meier of the United States’ National Snow and Ice Data Center describes today’s ice cap as “crushed ice.” And it is getting thinner.
In the last three decades, its volume has shrunk by roughly three-quarters.
As the University of Laval’s Louis Fortier puts it, “we are three-quarters of the way to ice-free summers in the Arctic Ocean.”
In addition to the sea-ice loss, satellite data show that Greenland’s three-kilometer-thick continental ice sheet is also melting at a record rate.
In July, 97% of the sheet’s surface was affected.
The meltwater runoff in western Greenland was so strong that it swept away an important road bridge across the Watson River.
This ice loss, caused largely by human-induced global warming, has far-reaching environmental, geopolitical, and economic consequences.
For starters, Greenland’s meltwater is flowing into the ocean, raising global sea levels.
As temperatures have increased, the sea level’s rise has accelerated from one centimeter per decade in the early twentieth century to more than three centimeters in each of the last two decades – an overall increase of nearly 20 centimeters since 1900.
While the numbers may seem small, the rise significantly increases the likelihood of severe flooding along vulnerable coasts worldwide.
Greenland’s meltwater accounts for one-fifth of the global sea-level rise over the last decade.
If its ice sheet melted completely, sea levels would rise by seven meters – meaning that we cannot afford to lose even a small fraction of the ice sheet.
Meanwhile, satellite data show that Antarctica’s ice sheet, which is ten times larger than Greenland’s, is losing ice as well.
The vanishing Arctic sea ice also affects the atmosphere.
Less ice reflects less sunlight, and more open ocean absorbs more heat, which is then released into the atmosphere, affecting wind and pressure patterns throughout the northern hemisphere.
In a recent study, Jennifer Francis and Stephen Vavrus showed that the northern hemisphere polar jet stream, an air current that flows over the middle to northern latitudes of North America, Europe, and Asia, has begun to show larger and more persistent meanders.
This increases the likelihood of extreme weather events, like Russia’s heat wave and Pakistan’s floods in 2010, which affected millions of people.
Further exacerbating the problem, the disappearance of Arctic sea-ice has triggered a rush to secure newly accessible resources, particularly fossil fuels, which are a primary cause of global warming.
(It has even revived efforts to find the wreckage of Franklin’s lost ships.)
The recent Global Energy Assessment, released by the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, shows that combating global warming while providing affordable energy worldwide is technologically and economically feasible.
But the energy transformation must begin now.
The longer powerful interests deny humanity’s contribution to global warming, the more difficult it will be to arrest and reverse its effects.
One hopes that the satellite footage of the Arctic meltdown will help to inspire serious action.
Melting Pot or Economic Meltdown
Worried about an invasion of migrant workers from the new member states of Central and Eastern Europe, the old EU members have erected high barriers in order to prevent the flow.
Despite the open market rhetoric of the EU, for most citizens of the new member states free labor mobility will not be a reality for the next seven years at least.
This is a politically understandable but flawed policy.
One of the key achievements of the European Union is mobility of goods and inputs.
Without this, what kind of a union would the EU be?
Otherwise, what, precisely, do the new countries get out of membership other than the nagging intrusions of the Brussels bureaucracy?
Given the high hopes that preceded ascension to the EU, and the stingy attitude of the Union to its new members, it should not surprise anyone if an anti-European reaction soon starts to brew in these countries.
So the cure is as bad as the disease: discrimination against the new members creates political problems of its own for the Union.
The real question is whether there is a disease at all.
Should Western Europe really be worried about an enormous flow of new immigrants?
In fact, estimates of potential migration flows from East to West are relatively small.
According to An agenda for a growing Europe , a report published by Oxford University Press in 2004 for the European Commission, 250,000 to 450,000 workers will go West during the first one to two years, followed by around 100,000 to 200,000 annually thereafter.
Over the first decade, the cumulative number of migrants might amount to between 1.5 and four million, that is, 2.4% to 5% of the total population in the new member states - and a tiny fraction of the total population in the current Union.
Aging populations and lower fertility rates in the new member states might result in even smaller flows.
There is another, less obvious, reason why the EU's policy on migration is flawed.
As Mircea Geoana, Romania's bright young Minister of Foreign Affairs, recently put it: "If the EU waits another seven or ten years before it opens up, the workers it will receive from my country will be the least qualified, peasants and individuals with low human capital: by then, the doctors, the architects and the engineers will all have migrated to the United States."
Indeed, this is precisely what happened with the Russians: the most qualified have already gone to the US.
Europe has been unable to attract much more than a few disreputable oligarchs, who migrated to the French Riviera, and a handful of lively street singers.
Western Europe is increasingly inhabited by aging populations that have lost the incentive and enthusiasm to work hard, take risks, and be ambitious.
Without an inflow of new blood and new ideas, the old Continent's economic future looks bleak.
Just look at the US: where would America be if it had introduced barriers to entry to various waves of new immigrants and remained confined to Anglo Saxon settlers?
To be sure, managing a melting pot is not easy, and many of America's social problems are related to difficult race relations.
But New York and Los Angeles, the two most ethnically diverse cities in the US, are also America's leaders in business and in the arts.
Nothing comes easy in this world: if the Union cannot manage a multicultural society in Europe, then it ought to prepare itself for permanent stagnation.
So long as the Union's borders remain closed, there is also a risk that foreign investment will fly over Western Europe and land in Central and Eastern Europe, where people are willing to work longer hours, market regulations are less intrusive, and human capital is relatively high, because Communist schools were good at technical training.
These countries have opened their markets to foreign investors - and foreign investors are responding eagerly.
Given Western Europe's growing need for labor in the years ahead, the question is not whether to have immigration, but only where that immigration is going to come from.
Will it be the legal immigration of easily assimilated people from Central and Eastern Europe, or illegal immigration from the Maghreb?
Memoirs of an Anti-Semite
Romania's most vicious anti-Semitic and ultra-nationalist politician, Corneliu Vadim Tudor, is trying hard to persuade people that he has changed his ways.
For most journalists and political pundits in Romania, this self-proclaimed Damascene conversion looks like just another political farce from someone with unrivaled histrionic gifts.
If Tudor were a mere political clown, the question of whether or not he still hates Jews would not matter.
But Tudor is a political power to be reckoned with.
As parliamentary and presidential elections loom, everyone wants to figure out just what he is up to.
Tudor was ex-dictator Nicolae Ceausescu's court poet.
He supported the Securitate (Romania's communist-era secret police) and praised Ceausescu's patriotism.
When communism collapsed, he blamed every shortcoming in the reform process on "foreigners" - meaning the West, Romania's ethnic Hungarian minority, and especially the Jews.
Indeed, he developed a cult for Marshall Ion Antonescu, Romania's dictator between 1940-1944 and Hitler's ally, who was responsible of ordering the massacre of about 200,000 Jews.
The violence of Tudor's rhetoric, directed against everybody who opposed him, rose to heights not seen since the Fascist era.
In 1990, Tudor set up a weekly magazine through which he incited vicious and reactionary campaigns.
Soon after he founded the extreme nationalist Greater Romania Party (PRM), as well as a so-called "national treason list," on which almost every notable political and cultural figure had his or her place.
He threatened (or promised) that criminals would be herded into stadiums and machine-gunned should he come to power.
Although Tudor faced innumerable lawsuits for libel, he could not be silenced.
In the 2000 general election, as the ruling center-right coalition imploded, the PRM received about 20% of the popular vote, becoming the second-largest party in parliament.
Tudor subsequently finished second in the presidential election.
Then, suddenly, a few months ago, Tudor announced that he had undergone a religious experience and had changed his mind about the Jews.
He admitted that he had been anti-Semitic, but he claimed that God had opened his eyes and that he now loved Jews as much as he used to hate them.
Indeed, he began apologizing for his earlier anti-Semitic hate speech.
The man who once said that he could "well imagine world culture without Jews" now claimed to realize how quintessential the Jews are for world culture.
He announced that he had hired Eyal Arad, a well-known Israeli spin-doctor, to run his presidential campaign.
"The Jews" were not his enemies any more, he said; they were even working for him.
But Tudor didn't stop with prolix apologies.
He soon sponsored the unveiling of a bust of the assassinated Israeli premier Yitzak Rabin at Brasov in Transylvania.
For the occasion, Tudor wore a yarmulke and spoke about his "philo-Semitism" for more than two hours . Other PRM representatives, provided with yarmulkes by Tudor, shuffled their feet awkwardly.
A chorus sang Romanian and Jewish songs and everybody expressed the vow that Vadim would be the "next and the first Christian President" of Romania, the yarmulke notwithstanding!
Next, Tudor headed a PRM delegation to lay a wreath at Auschwitz, where the one-time Holocaust denier declared that Jews had been exterminated in Romania.
What lies behind this political opportunism?
Tudor knows that his electoral success in 2000 belongs to the past.
At the local elections held in June, the PRM did poorly.
The really big battle this November will be joined by the Social Democrats (PDSR) and by the centrist alliance Democratic Alliance.
Tudor has no chance of becoming "the first Christian President of Romania."
His only chance of gaining even a share of power is to join in a future coalition, and for this he has to look semi-respectable.
In fact, Tudor's strategy may work, because the ex-communist PDSR, led by President Ion Iliescu and Prime Minister Adrian Nastase, will probably not oppose such an alliance if it is necessary to give them a majority after November's general election.
They are desperate to cling to power, no matter what, and so are unlikely to question Tudor's democratic pedigree.
After all, they governed together with the PRM from1992 to 1996.
Yet, there is a hitch: Romania is due to join the EU in 2007, and with the PRM in the government but branded as an extremist, anti-Semitic party, the integration process could be derailed.
No EU government will want to invite into the club an administration that contains Romania's far uglier version of Le Pen and Haider.
This is why Tudor desperately needs a patina of democratic respectability.
Tudor seems to hope that by putting on a yarmulke and repenting his anti-Semitism, he will deceive a few naive Western politicians.
But no one should be fooled.
Despite his political zigzags, Tudor has been extremely consistent.
He has always thought and written that "the Jews" brought capitalism, communism, spiritualism, alcoholism, decadent Hollywood movies, and pornography to Romania.
But saying that publicly won't work anymore, not because Romanians do not think this way (many certainly do), but because the political class from left to right wants to be part of Europe and won't associate with anyone who puts that desire at risk.
So Tudor's embrace of the Jews is a conversion of convenience.
If Paris was worth a mass to the French kings of old, Bucharest is worth a yarmulke to Tudor.
Defeating Meningitis in Africa
SEATTLE – Africa’s progress in fighting meningitis A is one of the best-kept secrets in global health.
Thanks to the development and deployment of a low-cost vaccine, the lives of hundreds of thousands of children have been saved, and communities that might otherwise have been devastated by the illness are thriving.
Meningococcal A meningitis is a bacterial infection of the thin lining surrounding the brain and spinal cord, and it can be deadly.
For more than a century, epidemics have swept across 26 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, killing and disabling tens of thousands of primarily young people every year.
The disease is highly feared on the continent; it can kill within hours or leave its victims with severe brain damage.
Outbreaks usually occur at the beginning of the calendar year, when dry winds from the Sahara Desert begin blowing southward.
The 1996-1997 epidemic resulted in more than 250,000 cases and 25,000 deaths in Sub-Saharan Africa, many of them children.
Of those who survived, one in four were left with permanent disabilities, including paralysis, blindness, hearing loss, seizures, and brain damage.
The impact of meningitis A on families and communities is devastating.
In order to pay for treatment, many families are forced to sell the assets they need to sustain their livelihoods: livestock, seed stock, and tools.
Furthermore, the disabilities caused by the infection can leave survivors less able to earn income or care for themselves and their families.
Whole communities can be plunged into deeper levels of poverty as health-care workers struggle to contain outbreaks.
The suffering caused by the disease served as an impetus for action.
Sixteen years ago, African health ministers, the international health NGO PATH, the World Health Organization (WHO), the Serum Institute of India, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and dozens of other partners formed the Meningitis Vaccine Project (MVP).
The mission was simple: to develop an affordable vaccine to fight meningitis A in Africa.
The project was successful.
In less than ten years, the MenAfriVac vaccine was launched and has produced an immediate and dramatic break in the cycle of meningitis A epidemics.
I was in Burkina Faso for the vaccine’s introduction in December 2010.
I was worried whether anyone would show up.
But when I met the minister of health the day before the launch and asked him what his biggest concern was, he gave me a surprising answer: “Crowd control.”
He was right.
Huge crowds formed at every immunization site, standing in line in the hot sun, eager to receive protection against the deadly disease.
It was, quite literally, a state event, with the president in attendance.
The first vaccination campaign reached virtually everyone in the country aged 1-29.
In the five years since then, more than 235 million people have been immunized across Sub-Saharan Africa.
By 2020, the vaccine is expected to protect more than 400 million people – preventing one million cases of meningitis A, 150,000 deaths from the disease, and 250,000 cases of severe disability among survivors.
The MVP stands as a powerful example of what is possible when African leaders and experts from across the spectrum of global health work together.
Strong, temporary partnerships, with a focused goal, can have truly catalytic effects.
But the work is far from over.
Last year, the WHO approved MenAfriVac for use in regular vaccine schedules, making it possible for millions more to be protected.
The stakes are high.
Universal access to immunization is a cornerstone of health, development, and economic growth.
Recognizing this, several African countries are already making plans to roll out meningitis – and other – vaccines into routine immunization systems this year.
The task before African leaders is to ensure a smooth and full transition from mass vaccination campaigns to routine immunization.
Last week, government officials assembled in Ethiopia for the first-ever Ministerial Conference on Immunization in Africa, where they re-committed to ensuring that everyone on the continent has access to the vaccines they need.
This will require further investment in immunization, improved data collection and analytics, new tools and approaches, and most importantly, strong partnerships.
We must build on the legacy of the MVP and work toward a world in which every child receives the life-saving vaccines they need to survive and thrive.
Mengele in America
LONDON – It’s 1946. On one side of the Atlantic, American lawyers are prosecuting Nazi doctors at Nuremberg for crimes against humanity – so-called “research” carried out on concentration camp prisoners.
On the other side of the Atlantic, in Guatemala, the United States Public Health Service (PHS) is deliberately infecting prisoners and mental patients with syphilis in another “experiment” aimed at replacing the ineffective drugs used by soldiers during the war that had just ended.
It sounds too perverse to be true.
Yet a special commission appointed by President Barack Obama has just confirmed that the Guatemalan experiments really did take place.
Obama has also issued an apology to the people of Guatemala.
But why did it take so long to get to this point?
Sixty-three years after the Guatemalan experiments, an American historian, Susan Reverby, was rummaging through archived medical papers from the 1940’s.
Reverby was completing a final task in her two decades of studying the PHS’s detestable Tuskegee experiments, in which hundreds of African-American men with late-stage syphilis were observed but not treated, even after penicillin was developed.