But the popularity of the handout option raises an important and instructive question: just how did the ruling classes in these countries amass fortunes so large that people are clamoring for them to be redistributed?
Government officials and their cronies did not necessarily engage in straightforward theft or pillaging. Through innocuous-sounding government “supervision” and “regulation” – and under the guidance of the major international financial institutions – ruling elites managed to run entire sectors of the economy as personal fiefdoms.
While this pattern of official behavior is reprehensible, the real disaster is that it destroyed Arabs’ economic productivity and initiative.
This economic totalitarianism has been legitimated by government charity.
Arab elites have been engaged in a false embrace of economic reforms for decades, with countless ministerial shuffles, five-year plans, and elaborate World Bank and International Monetary Fund programs. But all these reforms involve government handouts or government-created jobs and opportunities; rarely do they involve removing the government’s grip over people’s lives.
By framing the debate on reform as being about the type of handouts, governments evade tackling the real problem: their control of economic activity.
State handouts can be reliably financed only by controlling the economy’s productive sectors.  But in the Arab world, as everywhere else, this leads to theft, corruption, uncompetitive monopolies, a stifling of enterprise, and, eventually and inevitably, to decline and decay.
The toppled Tunisian and Egyptian regimes spent decades providing handouts while denying citizens economic freedom.
As Arabs confront far-reaching change, they must not be distracted into fruitless debates about the right types of government support for citizens.
What is needed is a root and branch transformation of the way that economic activity is carried out in all Arab nations.
Arab countries need to become places where people can create their own productive jobs, pursue their own opportunities, provide for themselves, and determine their own future.
This freedom obviates the need for the charity of those in power, and more importantly, takes away from them the excuse for maintaining their iron grip over the economic lives of their citizens.
Now is Our Time
New York – Every September, the world’s leaders gather at the United Nations to reaffirm our founding Charter – our faith in fundamental principles of peace, justice, human rights, and equal opportunity for all.
We assess the state of the world, engage key issues of the day, and lay out our vision for the way ahead.
But this year is different.
The 64th opening of the General Assembly asks us to rise to an exceptional moment.
We are facing many crises – food, energy, recession, and pandemic flu – occurring all at once.
If ever there were a time to act in a spirit of renewed multilateralism, a time to put the “united” back into the United Nations, it is now.
And that is what we are doing, as action on three issues of historic consequence demonstrates.
First, world leaders are uniting to address the greatest challenge we face as a human family – the threat of catastrophic climate change.
Last week, 101 leaders from 163 countries met to chart the next steps toward December’s all-important UN climate change conference in Copenhagen.
They recognized the need for an agreement that all nations can embrace – in line with their capabilities, consistent with what science requires, and grounded in “green jobs” and “green growth,” the lifeline of a twenty-first century global economy.
We at the UN have prepared carefully for this moment.
For two and a half years, ever since I became Secretary-General, we have worked to put climate change at the top of the global agenda.
Today, we have entered a new phase.
Last week’s summit sharply defined the issue and focused attention in capitals the world over.
To be sure, the issues are complex and difficult, especially those of financing adaptation and mitigation efforts in poorer countries.
Yet leaders left New York committed to clear and firm instructions for their negotiators: seal a deal in Copenhagen.
Japan issued a challenge, agreeing to cut CO2 emissions by 25% by 2020 if other nations follow.
China’s President Hu Jintao spoke about all that his country is already doing to reduce energy intensity and invest in “green” alternatives.
He emphasized that China is prepared to do more under an international agreement, as did US President Barack Obama.
Negotiators will gather for another round of UN talks on September 28 in Bangkok, and we are considering a smaller meeting of major emitting and most vulnerable nations in November.
We need a breakthrough in this make-or-break year.
We saw another turning point on a second issue of existential importance: nuclear disarmament.
Finally, the assumption that such weapons are needed to keep the peace is crumbling.
At a special summit called by the President Obama, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution that opens a new chapter in the UN’s efforts to address nuclear proliferation and disarmament.
That resolution improves prospects for expanding the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty next May, and offers hope for bringing the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty into force.
It also sets establishes the contours of a legal framework for action against misuse of civilian nuclear technology for military purposes and reflects an emerging consensus, seen in meeting after meeting, that the time has come to increase pressure on countries that fail to respect these principles.
The world is united on a third front, as well.
Though some may speak of “turning the corner to recovery,” we see a new crisis emerging.
According to our recent report, “Voices of the Vulnerable,” the near-poor are becoming the new poor.
An estimated 100 million people could fall below the poverty line this year.
Markets may be bouncing back, but jobs and incomes are not.
That is why, earlier this year, the UN put forward a Global Jobs Pact for balanced and sustainable growth.
It is also why we are creating a new Global Impact Vulnerability Alert System, giving us real-time data and analysis on socio-economic conditions around the world.
We need to know precisely who is being hurt by the financial crisis, and where, so that we can best respond.
That is also why, next year at this time, we will convene a special summit on the Millennium Development Goals.
We have only five years to meet the targets for health, education, and human security that we set for 2015.
At the various G-20 summits over the past year, including the latest in Pittsburg, the UN has stood firm to speak and act for all those being left behind.
Rhetoric has always been abundant at the General Assembly, action sometimes less so.
Yet listening to the world’s leaders speak, last week, I was struck by their passion, commitment, and collective determination to turn a page from a past of countries divided by narrow interests to nations united in the cause of a global common good.
From confronting climate change to creating a world without nuclear weapons to building a more equitable and sustainable global economy, I saw a sprit of renewed multilateralism, with the UN at the fore.
No country can deal with any of these challenges by itself.
But as nations united, the United Nations can.
No, You Can’t
COPENHAGEN – Several thousand officials from 194 countries just gathered in Cancún, Mexico, for yet another global climate summit.
Dissatisfied with the pace of climate diplomacy, many individuals are now wondering what they can do about climate change on their own.
For years now, climate activists from Al Gore to Leonardo DiCaprio have argued that individual actions like driving more economical cars and using more efficient light bulbs are a crucial element in the effort to address global warming.
The United Nations’ climate panel and the International Energy Agency both echo this sentiment, insisting that higher energy efficiency could reduce energy consumption by up to 30% – making improved efficiency an effective remedy for climate change.
But is this really true?
Here’s something to think about.
Back in the early 1970’s, the average American expended roughly 70 million British thermal units per year to heat, cool, and power his or her home.
Since then, of course, we have made great strides in energy efficiency.
As The Washington Post recently reported, dishwashers now use 45% less power than they did two decades ago, and refrigerators 51% less.
So how much energy do Americans use in their homes today?
On a per capita basis, the figure is roughly what it was 40 years ago: 70 million BTUs.
This surprising lack of change is the result of something economists call the “rebound effect.”
It’s a phenomenon familiar to urban planners, who long ago discovered that building more roads doesn’t ease traffic jams – it merely encourages more people to get in their cars and drive.
The underlying principle is a decidedly counterintuitive fact of life.
You might think that learning to use something more efficiently will result in your using less of it, but the opposite is true: the more efficient we get at using something, the more of it we are likely to use.
Efficiency doesn’t reduce consumption; it increases it.
The Breakthrough Institute recently highlighted on its blog some startling – and important – research findings along these lines, published in August in The Journal of Physics by energy economist Harry Saunders and four colleagues from the US Department of Energy’s Sandia National Laboratories.
As Saunders noted in a summary on the blog, he and his colleagues, drawing on “300 years of evidence,” found that, “as lighting becomes more energy efficient, and thus cheaper, we use ever-more of it.”
For this reason, the proportion of resources that we expend on lighting has remained virtually unchanged for the past three centuries, at about 0.72% of gross domestic product.
As Saunders and his colleagues observe in their journal article, “This was the case in the UK in 1700, is the case in the undeveloped world not on grid electricity in modern times, and is the case for the developed world in modern times using the most advanced lighting technologies.”
The conclusion that Saunders and his co-authors draw from this is both surprising and hard to dispute: rather than shrinking our electricity use, the introduction of ever more efficient lighting technologies is much more likely to lead to “massive…growth in the consumption of light.”
It’s difficult to overstate what these findings mean for climate policy.
In a nutshell, they tell us that, while increasing energy efficiency is undoubtedly a good thing, it is most assuredly not a remedy for global warming.
Or, as Saunders puts it, “energy efficiency may be a net positive in increasing economic productivity and growth, but should not be relied upon as a way to reduce energy consumption and thus greenhouse gas emissions.”
This is not an argument that should encourage anyone to go out and buy a Hummer.
But we shouldn’t fool ourselves into thinking that swapping our current car for a Prius, or replacing our incandescent lights with energy-efficient fluorescent bulbs, will strike a meaningful blow against climate change.
The real fix to this problem will come when governments focus on research and development aimed at boosting the proportion of green energy sources in overall consumption.
It may be reassuring to believe there are cheap and easy things we can do as individuals to stop global warming, or that the answer is to continue chasing a chimerical global agreement on carbon cuts, as in Cancún.
But the real action that we can take is to press our politicians to put smarter ideas on the table.
Defending Diplomacy in Court
DUBLIN – The recent revelations by the former US intelligence contractor Edward Snowden suggest, among other things, that surveillance devices were placed by the US National Security Agency in the European Union’s mission in Washington, DC.
Many Europeans, including me, find it difficult to understand why the debate about Snowden in the United States has devoted so little attention to discovering whether his allegations are true, and, if they are, what that means for international law, US diplomacy, and America’s national security.
The US must respond to the allegations –&#160;first leveled in a report published by the German magazine Der Spiegel – and give a proper accounting of its actions.
If it does not, the EU should take America to court.
The 1961 Vienna Convention, ratified by the US, codifies the international law of diplomacy and diplomatic missions.
The US itself relied on the Convention in the case against Iran that it brought in 1980 before the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague, a year after Iranian students and others, with the revolutionary regime’s evident blessing, breached America’s embassy in Tehran and abducted its diplomats.
According to Article 22 of the Convention, “the premises of [a diplomatic] mission shall be inviolable,” and a “receiving state may not enter them, except with the consent of the head of the mission.”
Indeed, “[t]he receiving state is under a special duty to take all appropriate steps to protect the premises of the mission against any intrusion.”
Likewise, Article 24 stipulates that the “archives and documents of the mission shall be inviolable,” and Article 27 extends similar protection to the mission’s correspondence.
In other words, a host state that enters a foreign mission without consent (none was given in my time as EU Ambassador in Washington, DC, from 2004 to 2009), or hacks into its computer system, would be acting in blatant violation of the Convention.
Reacting to Snowden’s allegations, US figures, like former CIA and NSA Director Michael Hayden, made no reference at all to America’s obligations under international law, to its interest in protecting diplomacy, or even to the unfairness and bad faith involved in spying on partners with whom one is supposedly negotiating in a transparent way.
Nor did Hayden suggest any national-security concern that might justify spying on the EU (there is none).
Instead, he sought to dismiss the entire issue by hinting vaguely about intelligence-gathering by some EU member states.
But what is alleged to have happened was not a case of the US reciprocally countering supposed illegal activities by other states. It was hostile and illegal activity by the US directed against the EU itself.
The EU has neither the capacity nor the authority to conduct any reciprocal surveillance of US missions in Europe, and it does not do so.
Hayden knows that perfectly well.
So far, the US authorities have focused on bringing Snowden home to face espionage charges.
But it is in America’s national interest to ensure that the Vienna Convention is respected – without question and as a matter of routine – in order to ensure the safety and inviolability of its own missions abroad.
Fundamental values are also at stake for the EU, whose members, ironically, have in some cases actively supported the US in its quest to extradite Snowden, despite being victims of America’s alleged breaches of international law.
The founding idea of the EU was that relations between states should be governed by rules, not raw power.
Indeed, the EU continues to exist precisely because its members respect treaties.
Take away respect for international law, and the EU would cease to exist – almost overnight.
There is no other force holding it together.
For these reasons, and in light of the Vienna Convention’s specific terms, I believe that the EU cannot just move on and hope that the media furor over Snowden’s allegations will die down.
It must uphold international law.
One way for the EU to proceed would be to submit the dispute to independent arbitration, so that it does not adversely affect day-to-day relations with the US, which are crucial to economic recovery on both sides of the Atlantic.
This approach has been adopted to address other issues – for example, bilateral trade disputes, with cases submitted to the World Trade Organization so that they do not interfere with other business between the EU and the US.
The EU – or member states acting on its behalf – should thus consider following the example set by the US itself in 1980.
This assumes that it can obtain sufficient documentary evidence of the allegations from, say, Snowden or Der Spiegel.
Pursuing a legal route would depoliticize the issue in the short term, and allow time for tensions to ease.
If EU member states believe that taking America to court is too confrontational, they have the lesser option of asking the United Nations to seek an advisory opinion from the ICJ on the compatibility of the NSA’s alleged activities with the Vienna Convention.
In any event, the matter cannot rest where it is.
Surveillance technology has advanced a great deal since 1961, when the Convention was concluded.
A new judgment from the ICJ in this case would be helpful.
It would re-establish and modernize the norms of behavior that both the US and Europe would want all countries – notably, emerging powers like China – to respect in the future.
US President Barack Obama understands – probably better than any previous US president – the significance of international law, which is why he wants to bring countries like China fully within its strictures.
For that reason, he should welcome a robust reaffirmation of the principles of the Vienna Convention.
Relearning to Love the Bomb
WASHINGTON, DC – The shocking thing about nuclear weapons is that they seem to have lost their power to shock.
While the nuclear deal that was just reached with Iran in Lausanne might suggest otherwise and is very good news, that effort should not obscure the bad news elsewhere.
The momentum toward a nuclear-weapon-free world driven by US President Barack Obama’s landmark 2009 speech in Prague, having faltered for the last few years, has now gone into sharp reverse.
When Russia annexed Crimea last year, President Vladimir Putin announced his readiness to put Russian nuclear forces on alert, and even signaled plans to “surprise the West with our new developments in offensive nuclear weapons.”
The world barely stirred.
Meanwhile, China and India are steadily increasing the size of their nuclear arsenals, and Pakistan is doing so even faster, even spelling out plans to combine battlefield nukes with conventional weapons.
Again, the world shrugs.
For its part, the United States plans to spend $355 billion upgrading and modernizing its vast nuclear arsenal over the next ten years.
Far from moving toward disarmament, the intention seems to be to maintain and enhance every component of America’s current land, sea, and airborne nuclear capability.
There was more amusement than alarm at a conference of 800 nuclear specialists in Washington, DC, in March, when a senior Air Force general, eerily channeling George C. Scott in “Dr. Strangelove,” offered a nostrils-bared defense of “an ability to allow no adversary to have sanctuary anywhere in the world.”
Spooked by Russia’s incursions into Ukraine, North Korea’s erratic intransigence, and China’s new foreign-policy assertiveness, US allies and partners in East Asia and Europe have rushed back to unthinking embrace of Cold War assumptions about the deterrent utility of nuclear weapons and their central importance in security policy.
As my colleagues and I put it in our book-length report Nuclear Weapons: The State of Play 2015, launched in Geneva, Vienna, and Washington in March: “On the evidence of the size of their weapons arsenals, fissile material stocks, force modernization plans, stated doctrine and known deployment practices, all nine nuclear-armed states foresee indefinite retention of nuclear weapons and a continuing role for them in their security policies.”
All of this has serious implications for the five-year review conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), scheduled to begin in New York in late April.
The NPT has been the single most crucial factor in limiting the world’s nuclear-armed states to the current nine, rather than the 20-30 widely feared a generation ago.
But its credibility now hangs by a thread.
The NPT, after all, is based on a bargain: states that do not possess nuclear weapons promise not to acquire them, in exchange for a pledge by those that do to move seriously toward eliminating their arsenals.
And recent developments have once again jeopardized that bargain, with many states again asking why, if the US, Russia, and others need nuclear weapons, they do not.
Given such sentiments, it will prove almost impossible at the review conference to build a consensus in favor of further necessary strengthening of the non-proliferation regime, with improved safeguards, export controls, security disciplines, and sanctions against withdrawal from the treaty.
The irrationality of such resistance is not likely to weaken it.
Not all the news is bleak.
Aside from the Iran negotiations, other arms control cooperation is continuing, including between the US and Russia over the New START treaty to reduce strategic deployments, and over chemical weapons in Syria.
Despite lack of any visible progress toward ridding the Middle East of weapons of mass destruction, the signs are encouraging that Egypt and others in the region want to keep trying, and will not use the issue of a WMD-free zone to blow up the review conference, as had been feared.
Most encouraging of all, a major new international movement is gathering pace to focus policy attention on the horrific humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and to create the conditions for a treaty to ban them once and for all.
Since 2012, major conferences have been hosted by Norway, Mexico, and Austria, and more than 155 states have pledged support for appropriate action, with only the nuclear-armed states and their allies and partners dragging their feet.
The nuclear-armed states will not sign on any time soon to any treaty that bans the use of their weapons under all circumstances.
They will resist even more strongly the outright elimination of their weapons, given that the world is probably still decades away from devising sufficient verification and enforcement measures.
Deadlines have been indispensable for achieving sustainable-development and carbon-reduction goals: saving the world from the threat of nuclear annihilation is hardly a less urgent and important objective.
How Iran Is Winning
TEL AVIV – In 2003, the United States – which, along with its NATO allies, had already occupied Afghanistan – toppled Saddam Hussein’s government in Iraq and overran his army.
Iran’s leaders, alarmed that they were being encircled, lost no time in offering the West a grand bargain covering all contentious issues, from nuclear-weapons development – they halted their military nuclear program – to regional security, including the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and their backing of Hezbollah and Hamas.
The recent framework agreement on Iran’s nuclear program has had the opposite effect.
Though the deal does slow Iran’s development of nuclear weapons, it does not restrain – or even address – the regime’s hegemonic ambitions in the region, for which it has already spent billions of dollars and suffered crippling sanctions.
As a result, the framework agreement is creating strategic chaos in an already dysfunctional region.
A future in which regional powers like Turkey, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia (which has worked closely with Pakistan on the nuclear front) possess threshold nuclear capabilities is becoming more likely that ever.
These are glorious days for Iran.
After more than a decade of diplomatic isolation and economic sanctions, its status as a threshold nuclear state has been internationally legitimized.
Moreover, it has managed to compel the US to abandon its dream of regime change, and to coexist – and even engage – with an Islamic theocracy that it finds repugnant.
The regional balance of power is already tilting in Iran’s favor.
In Lebanon, Palestine, and Syria, Iranian proxies have prevailed over Saudi-backed groups.
And the Iran-backed Houthis remain in control of Yemen, despite Saudi airstrikes.
Iran’s leaders can thank George W. Bush.
Far from producing the outcome that they feared in 2003, Bush’s wars in the Middle East left Iran as the most influential actor in Iraq.
As Saudi officials have observed, Iranian militias fighting the Islamic State in predominantly Sunni regions north and west of Baghdad hope to reinforce their country’s control over Iraq.
The perceived threat posed by the Islamic State has also caused the US to drop ousting Syria’s Bashar al-Assad, Iran’s main regional ally, from its agenda.
Indeed, the US has ended up indirectly allied with Hezbollah, a key Iranian proxy, which is fighting alongside Assad’s troops against foreign jihadi forces.
Meanwhile, America’s relationship with its traditional Arab allies – the region’s conservative Sunni regimes – is faltering, owing largely to US President Barack Obama’s failure to respond effectively in the aftermath of the Arab Spring uprisings.
Obama’s offers of security guarantees and “nuclear umbrellas” have not been able to restore their trust.
(Such security guarantees are, after all, implicit.)
For Iran’s enemies, the message of the framework agreement is clear: protect your own vital interests, rather than waiting for the US.
And that is precisely what countries like Egypt and Saudi Arabia are doing, having established a joint Arab military force to fight Iranian influence in the region, as well as discreet security links with Israel, another self-declared victim of the framework agreement.
Turkey is also engaging in strategic recalculations.
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who called Iran his “second home” during a visit to Tehran last year, recently accused the Islamic Republic of “seeking to dominate the region.”
As a result, Turkey now finds itself collaborating with Saudi Arabia in backing the Al Nusra Front, the Syrian arm of Al Qaeda, which captured Idlib in the first major military setback for Assad in recent months.
Still, Turkey’s recent behavior – from Erdoğan’s shocking call for an end to the Sykes-Picot system to its de facto collusion with the Islamic State’s siege of the Kurdish town of Kobani, just over the border in Syria – has discouraged the region’s major Sunni powers from pursuing closer ties.
But no regional leader is as frantic – or as dangerous – as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu.
In his vulgar use of Holocaust metaphors to portray the Iranian threat, he sounds more like the principal of a Jewish ghetto about to be annihilated by an agitated mob than the prime minister of the most powerful country in the Middle East.
Netanyahu’s lack of self-awareness is perhaps best exemplified in his interactions with Obama.
He expects the US to offer Israel security assistance to face the challenge that Iran poses, even as he barges clumsily into Obama’s political backyard and forges alliances with his domestic opponents.
In fact, Netanyahu has fundamentally misunderstood the Iran challenge: It is not an existential threat, but part of a broader struggle for regional mastery.
Rather than engaging in an unrealistic campaign to kill the nuclear agreement, Netanyahu should have been focusing on the strategic implications of Iran’s rise.
It is Iran’s geopolitical behavior, not its threshold nuclear status, that matters.
Of course, Netanyahu is intentionally exaggerating the Iranian threat to deflect attention from Israel’s real problems – especially its enduring conflict with Palestine.
But he can hope to obscure the sins of occupation only temporarily.
If the Palestine issue is not resolved soon, there can be no lasting alliances with “moderate” Sunni powers to counter Iran.
In order to bring some semblance of stability to the Middle East, the US must think beyond the framework nuclear agreement with Iran and develop, with all stakeholders, a collective security regime – an initiative that will require the US to regain the trust of its allies in the region.
In reality, the key question has never been when Iran will develop a nuclear weapon, but how to integrate it into a stable regional system before it does.
Bottling the Sun
LONDON – This December, world leaders will gather in Paris for the United Nations Climate Change Conference, where they will attempt – yet again – to hammer out a global agreement to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
Despite the inevitable sense of déjà vu that will arise as negotiators struggle to reach a compromise, they must not give up.
Whatever the political or economic considerations, the fact remains: if global temperatures rise more than 2˚C from pre-industrial levels, the consequences for the planet will be catastrophic.
But the challenge does not end with reducing emissions.
Indeed, even if we make the transition to a cleaner world by 2050, we will need to determine how to meet a booming global population’s insatiable appetite for energy in the longer term – an imperative that renewables alone cannot meet.
That is why we need to invest now in other technologies that can complement renewables, and provide reliable electricity for many centuries to come.
And one of the most promising options is nuclear fusion – the process that powers the sun and all stars.
Brought down to earth, nuclear fusion – a process fueled primarily by lithium and deuterium (an isotope of hydrogen), both of which are plentiful in seawater and in the earth’s crust – could provide a major source of low-carbon energy.
A fusion power station would use only around 450 kilograms of fuel annually, cause no atmospheric pollution, and carry no risk of accidents that could lead to radioactive contamination of the environment.
But, while the fusion process has produced some power (16 million watts of it, to be specific), scientists have yet to create a self-sustaining fusion “burn.”
Indeed, unlike nuclear fission, which went from the laboratory to the power grid within two decades, fusion has proved a tough nut to crack.
The problem is that fusion involves joining two positively charged nuclei – and, as basic science shows, same-sign charges repel each other.
Only at extremely high temperatures – over 100 million degrees Celsius, or almost ten times hotter than the sun – do the nuclei move so rapidly that they overcome their repulsion and fuse.
Scientists have spent the last 60 years trying to figure out the best way to create these conditions.
Today, the frontrunner is a device known as a “tokamak,” a magnetic bottle in which the fuel, held at 100-200 million degrees Celsius, fuses, unlocking huge amounts of energy.
Of course, holding the sun in a bottle is no small challenge, especially when one considers that the systems must be engineered so that they can create electricity for a price consumers are willing to pay.
But in a sunny corner of southern France, a global megaproject is coming together that will, for the first time, test the technology on an industrial scale, creating the first controlled fusion burn.
Everything about the so-called “ITER reactor” is big.
It will be heavier than three Eiffel Towers; the material for its superconducting magnets would stretch around the equator twice; and it has a price tag of more than €15 billion ($16.8 billion), making it one of the largest international science endeavors in history.
The ITER partners – China, the European Union, India, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and the United States – represent half the world’s population.
And, if it is successful, the reactor will produce half a gigawatt of fusion power and open the way for commercial reactors.
But the tokamak is not the only game in town.
Other designs are emerging to join the race for fusion power.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s National Ignition Facility in California is getting impressive results by firing high-powered lasers at capsules of fuel, crushing the particles together to trigger fusion reactions.
Elsewhere, particularly in the US, privately funded fusion ventures are springing up like mushrooms, each with its own concept for what some call the Holy Grail of energy.
As the most advanced design, the tokamak still looks like the safest bet, but the competition from its rivals can only spur further innovation and progress.
Some discourage investment in nuclear fusion, claiming that, given how far from being market-ready the technology is, our financial resources are better allocated to tried and tested energy options.
The critics have a point: given that fusion can be carried out only on a large scale, its investment requirements are considerable.
In the 1970s, American researchers estimated that getting fusion power on the grid would demand investment of $2-3 billion annually in research and development until anywhere from 1990 to 2005 (depending on the amount of effort applied).
They also estimated a minimum level of investment, below which funding would never be sufficient to build a fusion power plant.
Nuclear fusion research budgets have remained below that line for 30 years.
But fusion’s potential is simply too great to give up.
And, in fact, the progress that has been made in recent years – despite the lack of adequate investment – belies the naysayers.
Machines all over the world are reaching fusion temperatures and extending our technological capabilities.
The ITER experiment, when it starts up in the early 2020s, will embody those advances, achieving the long-awaited fusion burn – and place us just one step away from the ultimate goal of getting fusion power on the grid in an affordable manner.
Without nuclear fusion, future generations’ energy options will be severely limited – creating a serious problem for developed and developing countries alike.
Lev Artsimovich, the tokamak’s inventor, said that “fusion will be ready when society needs it.”
One hopes that he is right.
But, rather than depending on fusion researchers to defy the odds, the world should step up investment in the technology.
Our future may depend on it.
Reviving the Non-proliferation Agenda
MADRID – US President Barack Obama’s recent visit to Hiroshima was no typical diplomatic stop.
Not only did it mark the first visit by a sitting US president to that city, which was destroyed by an American nuclear bomb in 1945; it also drew attention to Obama’s record on non-proliferation.
In a 2009 speech in Prague, Obama identified nuclear weapons as “the most immediate and extreme threat to global security,” owing to their potential to fall into the hands of terrorists or other rogue elements, and committed to reducing their role in America’s national security strategy.
In his moving Hiroshima address, Obama again emphasized the need to pursue a world without nuclear weapons.
He described the “moral revolution” that must accompany technological progress, with societies resisting the “logic of fear” that compels them to cling to their nuclear arsenals.
But, though both speeches expressed similar ideas, they were delivered against very different policy backdrops.
Indeed, the Obama administration’s nuclear policy has changed substantially since 2009, when containing nuclear proliferation was among its central foreign-policy concerns.
In 2010, Obama brought world leaders together for the first-ever Nuclear Security Summit, which focused on keeping nuclear material out of the hands of terrorists – a focus that has since proved to be justified.
Though the initial aim of freezing stocks of plutonium and highly enriched uranium was not achieved, the four summits held since then have brought about a reduction in other sources of radioactive material, and safety measures have been improved.
The 2010 summit came just days after another apparent victory for non-proliferation: Obama and then-Russian President Dmitri Medvedev signed the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START), which committed them to halve their stores of strategic nuclear missile launchers.
Just a year earlier, then-US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov announced a “reset” in bilateral relations.
Since then, however, the relationship has deteriorated, taking with it hope for further cooperation.
In fact, Obama’s entire non-proliferation agenda has lost considerable momentum.
Russia chose not to attend the latest Nuclear Security Summit, held in Washington, DC, earlier this year.
And not only has the US not proposed any new international non-proliferation initiatives; at a 2015 conference to review the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it moved to avoid a conference on a nuclear weapons ban for the Middle East, in order to avoid increasing tensions with Israel.
Moreover, the Obama administration has reduced America’s own nuclear arsenal more slowly than any US administration since the end of the Cold War, instead promoting its modernization – an effort that will require an estimated $1 trillion in investment over the next three decades.
Though the program is technically aimed at improving existing weapons’ reliability – and thereby allowing future reductions – critics emphasize that as more small, high-precision nuclear arms are developed, the likelihood that they will be used increases.
Obama has, however, secured one major victory for non-proliferation: helping to close a long-awaited international deal with Iran to prevent it from using its civilian nuclear program to develop weapons.
After years of sclerotic negotiations, domestic developments in Iran – namely, the 2013 election of the more moderate Iranian President Hassan Rouhani – provided a critical diplomatic opening, which Obama seized.
The breakthrough provided clear evidence that while institutions are very important in world affairs, individuals can sometimes be decisive.
The Iran deal was a major achievement, and not just because it should help to mitigate the risks arising from that country.
Because just one nuclear-armed country can make achieving regional stability a near-impossible task, stopping Iran had far-reaching regional implications.
By easing the fears of Iran’s regional rivals, the deal created some space for the potential development of a Middle Eastern security structure.
It even provides a model for future multilateral agreements on thorny security-related topics.
But this triumph should not invite complacency.
Nuclear weapons remain a deep and urgent threat to security and stability worldwide.
Only nuclear weapons can turn a small confrontation into a catastrophe on the scale of the one Obama commemorated in Hiroshima.
Given this, the drive to eliminate nuclear weapons must be revived with all of the vigor of Obama’s first years in office.
That drive should take us, first and foremost, to North Korea, which, despite severely limited means, continues to invest heavily in advancing its nuclear program.
The international community’s best option for influencing North Korea is China, which has long had close relations with – and strong economic influence over – the Hermit Kingdom.
And China’s approach toward North Korea seems to be changing, spurred by the nuclear issue.
Earlier this year, China decided not to use its veto power in the United Nations Security Council to block a tough new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to its latest round of nuclear tests.
Yet a visiting North Korean delegation recently announced that the country was committed to continuing its nuclear program.
Given that there can be no security in East Asia – especially for South Korea and Japan – without a nuclear deal, strong international action is crucial.
Specifically, the international community must escalate its response to North Korea’s increasingly unruly behavior, by compelling the country’s leaders to engage in negotiations with world powers regarding its nuclear program.
For talks to be successful, however, China and the US – which have plenty of disagreements of their own – must work together, and the other members of the UN Security Council must facilitate such cooperation.
Obama’s address in Hiroshima carried huge symbolic significance.
But, with more than 15,000 nuclear weapons still in the world, symbolism is not enough.
It is time to take action to advance non-proliferation.
Pergeseran dari Keselamatan Nuklir menuju Keamanan Nuklir
WASHINGTON, DC/MOSCOW – Empat tahun lalu, bencana tsunami yang dahsyat menghantam pesisir pantai Jepang.
Gelombang setinggi lima puluh kaki menembus tembok air pembangkit listrik tenaga nuklir Fukushima Daiichi, menghentikan aliran listrik darurat dan melumpuhkan sistem pendingin.
Kecelakaan nuklir ini merupakan kejadian terburuk sejak krisis reaktor Chernobyl pada tahun 1986.
Investigator menyimpulkan bahwa salah satu penyebab utama adalah perasaan mudah puas: mereka yang bertanggung jawab atas fasilitas tersebut yakin bahwa sistem keselamatan mereka sangat kuat dan tidak ada pengawasan mandiri yang efektif.
Bencana di Jepang memacu reformasi di bidang keselamatan nuklir.
Namun ketika menyangkut keamanan nuklir, rasa puas diri yang berlebihan tetap menjadi permasalahan besar.
Kita tidak bisa hanya menunggu terjadinya suatu tragedi sebelum akhirnya mengambil tindakan.
Saat ini, terdapat lebih dari 1,5 juta kilogram uranium dan plutonium yang sudah melalui proses pengayaan – bahan utama untuk senjata nuklir – yang tersebar di ratusan fasilitas di 25 negara.
Beberapa diantaranya memiliki tingkat pengamanan yang rendah.
Sementara itu hanya diperlukan satu kemasan kecil (seperti sekantong gula) berisikan bahan nuklir untuk membangun alat dengan potensi membunuh ratusan ribu warga dan menimbulkan kerugian milyaran dolar.
Sejumlah upaya telah dilakukan untuk meningkatkan keamanan di fasilitas nuklir dalam beberapa tahun terakhir, namun pemerintah harus menerapkan tindakan ekstra untuk melindungi warga negaranya dari risiko terorisme nuklir yang menimbulkan malapetaka.
Pembelajaran dari krisis Fukushima dapat menjadi pedoman yang bermanfaat untuk melakukan reformasi.
Sebagai permulaan, pemerintah dan industri harus memperlakukan keamanan nuklir sebagai proses perbaikan yang berkelanjutan dan bekerja untuk mengimbangi dengan ancaman dan tantangan yang ada.
Suatu fasilitas yang dianggap aman 20 tahun yang lalu bisa jadi sekarang ini lebih rentan terhadap serangan cyber yang mampu menerobos sistem keamanan atau mengacaukan upaya untuk melacak bahan nuklir.
Aktor non-negara yang terorganisir dan memiliki pendanaan besar, seperti ISIS, bisa jadi menggunakan taktik, teknologi dan kemampuan baru untuk mencuri bahan nuklir.
Pemerintah harus secara konsisten mengevaluasi teknologi dan ancaman yang ada supaya sistem keamanan yang dirancang untuk melindungi bahan nuklir tersebut akan tetap berada di lini terdepan dibandingkan pihak-pihak yang ingin mencurinya.
Kedua, pemerintah dan industri harus memastikan bahwa budaya keamanan, seperti budaya keselamatan, menjadi bagian integral dalam operasional di setiap fasilitas nuklir.
Jenderal Eugene Habiger, mantan Panglima di United States Strategic Command (Komando Strategis Amerika Serikat) yang merupakan “kaisar keamanan” di Kementerian Energi Amerika Serikat, pernah berkata: “Keamanan yang bagus terbangun dari 20% perlengkapan dan 80% personil.”
Pemerintah dan industri harus bekerja sama untuk menumbuhkan budaya keamanan yang kokoh.
Setiap pekerja di fasilitas nuklir – mulai dari satpam hingga ilmuwan dan staf senior – harus melihat isu keamanan bahan nuklir sebagai bagian penting dalam pekerjaannya.
Ketiga, pemerintah harus secara berkala melakukan tinjauan terhadap sistem keamanan di fasilitas nuklir.
Tidak cukup bagi operator nuklir berkata bahwa status keamanan di fasilitas mereka dinilai “cukup baik”.
Pengawasan yang efektif dapat menghilangkan perasaan mudah puas.
Kejadian di Fukushima melahirkan kebutuhan bagi regulator untuk melakukan stress test secara berkala, mengevaluasi kemampuan fasilitas nuklir terhadap berbagai potensi kejadian yang tidak dapat diperkirakan yang dapat mempengaruhi keselamatan.
Regulator harus melakukan evaluasi serupa yang dirancang khusus untuk menilai kemampuan fasilitas untuk mampu bertahan dari ancaman-ancaman keamanan, termasuk pencurian yang dilakukan oleh pihak yang tahu banyak tentang kondisi internal di fasilitas tersebut.
Terakhir, pemimpin dunia harus berupaya membentuk bentuk-bentuk kerjasama internasional yang lebih erat mengenai keamanan nuklir.
Sebagaimana terjadi di Chernobyl dan Fukushima, kerentanan keselamatan nuklir di satu negara dapat memiliki konsekuensi besar pada seluruh dunia.
Hal yang sama juga berlaku untuk risiko-risiko keamanan nuklir.
Kita memiliki tanggung jawab politis – dan moral – untuk memastikan bahwa teroris tidak dapat memiliki akses terhadap bahan yang paling berbahaya di dunia ini.
Semua negara harus belajar dari contoh program Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction, yaitu program kolaborasi yang berhasil tentang keamanan nuklir antara Amerika Serikat, Rusia dan bekas negara-negara Uni Soviet.
Negara yang memiliki bahan nuklir harus bertukar informasi mengenai cara-cara terbaik untuk menunjang keamanan, meningkatkan pertukaran intelijen tentang tantangan-tantangan umum dalam keamanan nuklir, dan menjajaki peluang dilakukannya tinjauan sejawat.
Teman dan kolega kami Sam Nunn, co-chairman Nuclear Threat Initiative, seringkali mengingatkan bahwa kita sekarang tengah berpacu dengan kerjasama atau malapetaka.
Penting sekali bagi kita untuk belajar dari Fukushima dan terapkan pembelajaran tersebut ke dalam strategi kita untuk memberantas terorisme nuklir.
Ini merupakan satu-satunya perlombaan yang mana kita tidak boleh kalah sedikit pun.
Nuclear Steps Undermine Peace
By abandoning many of the nuclear arms agreements negotiated in the last 50 years, the United States has been sending mixed signals to North Korea, Iran, and other nations with the technical knowledge to create nuclear weapons.
Currently proposed agreements with India compound this quagmire and further undermine the global pact for peace represented by the nuclear nonproliferation regime.
At the same time, no significant steps are being taken to reduce the worldwide arsenal of almost 30,000 nuclear weapons now possessed by the US, Russia, China, France, Israel, Britain, India, Pakistan, and perhaps North Korea.
A global holocaust is just as possible now, through mistakes or misjudgments, as it was during the depths of the Cold War.
The key restraining commitment among the five original nuclear powers and more than 180 other nations is the 1970 Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Its key objective is “to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology...and to further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament.”
In the last five-year review conference at the United Nations in 2005, only Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea were not participating – the first three have nuclear arsenals that are advanced, and the fourth’s is embryonic.
The American government has not set a good example, having already abandoned the Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty, binding limitations on testing nuclear weapons and developing new ones, and a long-standing policy of foregoing threats of “first use” of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states.
These recent decisions have encouraged China, Russia, and other NPT signatories to respond with similar actions.
Knowing since 1974 of India’s nuclear ambitions, I and other American presidents imposed a consistent policy: no sales of nuclear technology or uncontrolled fuel to India or any other country that refused to sign the NPT.
Today, these restraints are in the process of being abandoned.
I have no doubt that India’s political leaders are just as responsible in handling their country’s arsenal as leaders of the five original nuclear powers.
But there is a significant difference: the original five have signed the NPT, and have stopped producing fissile material for weapons.
India’s leaders should make the same pledges, and should also join other nuclear powers in signing the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Instead, they have rejected these steps and insist on unrestricted access to international assistance in producing enough fissile material for as many as 50 weapons a year, far exceeding what is believed to be India’s current capacity.
If India��s demand is acceptable, why should other technologically advanced NPT signatories, such as Brazil, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Japan – to say nothing of less responsible nations – continue to restrain themselves?
Having received at least tentative approval from the US for its policy, India still faces two further obstacles: an acceptable agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and an exemption from the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), a 45-nation body that – until now – has barred nuclear trade with any nation that refuses to accept international nuclear standards.
The non-nuclear NSG members are Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and Ukraine.
The role of these nations and the IAEA is not to prevent India’s development of nuclear power or even nuclear weapons, but rather to assure that it proceeds as almost all other responsible nations on earth do, by signing the Non-Proliferation Treaty and accepting other reasonable restraints.
Nuclear powers must show leadership, by restraining themselves and by curtailing further departures from the NPT's international restraints.
One-by-one, the choices they make today will create a legacy -- deadly or peaceful -- for the future.
Nuclear Vigilantes
LOS ANGELES – Forty years ago this month, more than 50 nations gathered in the East Room of the White House to sign the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
In his memoirs, US President Lyndon B. Johnson called it “the most significant step we had yet taken to reduce the possibility of nuclear war.” 
Today, with the benefit of time, we can evaluate whether the accord truly marks the “historic turning point” President Johnson hoped for.
The evidence suggests that while the pact’s dikes have largely held, serious leaks have developed, prompting nuclear vigilantes to apply force when they have concluded that diplomacy would fail to halt the Bomb’s spread.
Whether this behavior is a harbinger for the future remains unclear, but it raises a continuing specter given the failure of the NPT to include an effective enforcement mechanism.
One fact is not in doubt: the NPT is the legal linchpin for the nuclear nonproliferation regime now signed and ratified by all but three nations – India, Pakistan, and Israel – and one drop-out, North Korea.
The Treaty’s principles remain bold: the pact’s five acknowledged nuclear weapons states – the US, Britain, France, Russia, and China – promise to eliminate their nuclear arsenals, and the remaining parties commit not to acquire nuclear weapons in exchange for the right to develop civil nuclear power, with international assistance, subject to binding safeguards.
While the NPT is not entirely responsible for the absence of dozens of nuclear-armed states that many people once feared would emerge, it generated a standard of behavior that continues to guide most countries.
Still, the accord never fulfilled its disarmament objective.
The five nuclear powers continue to hang on to their weapons, giving mere lip service to their elimination.
More disturbing for international calm, a handful of non-nuclear signatories have secretly flouted the agreement.
Eventually exposed, their perfidy demonstrated the NPT’s imperfect ability to deter, catch, and reverse nuclear cheats.
Six cases mark the most egregious cheating.
Twice, Iraq bucked safeguards – first when it built the Osirak reactor and failed to provide inspectors full transparency and convincing assurance it would not use the plant to produce plutonium for weapons, and, second, when it nearly completed its secret enrichment program prior to the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
North Korea proved more successful, becoming the eighth country to detonate a nuclear weapon.  At least two other NPT parties – Libya and Syria – engaged in significant nuclear subterfuge but failed.
And then there is Iran.
Equally disturbing has been the failure of International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards to catch such violations.
In only one case, North Korea, did the IAEA succeed.
In Iran, a dissident group, not the IAEA, blew the whistle.
Lack of confidence in Treaty enforcement inspired three instances of military vigilantism: Israel’s strike on Osirak in 1981, its attack on Syria’s suspect site in 2007, and Washington’s 2003 invasion of Iraq. Mixed results followed.
Osirak’s destruction inspired Saddam to try again.
The US became mired in Iraq. And, for the moment, Israel’s Syrian strike appears to have eliminated a potential threat.
For the Jewish state, military strikes have suggested another lesson.
A nuclear vigilante could apply force with impunity.
No retaliation followed.
In other instances when countries contemplated the same thing, they were not as sanguine.
Hence, the Soviet Union, the US, Egypt, and India decided that it is better to live with a nuclear-armed China, North Korea, Israel, and Pakistan, respectively, than risk war.
The United Nations Security Council, which remains the NPT’s enforcer, could better address proliferation breakouts and the compulsion of some to take matters into their own hands were it to grant itself predetermined authority to promptly stop cheaters by any and all means.
The result would make the prospective treaty violator think twice.
But political divisions among the Council’s permanent members make achieving this goal unlikely.
This leaves only two options to buttress the NPT’s objectives.
First, there is ad hoc diplomacy, which succeeded in eliminating Libya’s nuclear program and closing North Korea’s nuclear weapons production reactor.
But diplomacy takes time – a lot of time – and there is no guarantee that it will succeed.
For states that believe that time will merely enhance a lethal adversary’s ability to get the Bomb – Israel’s concern about Iran today – only vigilantism remains.
Rebooting Nuclear Security
VIENNA – In these days of economic woe, potential pandemic disease, and widespread civil unrest, it may come as a surprise that so many people around the world still view nuclear conflict as the greatest threat facing humanity.
They do so with good reason.
Consider the potential effects of a 50-megaton nuclear explosion, similar to the Tsar Bomba, detonated in October 1961, which shattered windows 900 kilometers (560 miles) away and sent a mushroom cloud rising above the stratosphere.
Global agreements such as the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), along with the general sense of goodwill immediately following the Cold War, may have led to the perception that such a weapon would never be used in combat.
But there is an increasing realization that we cannot breathe easy just yet.
In considering the risks, the emphasis has shifted over the last decade from preventing additional states from acquiring nuclear weapons to preventing terrorist groups and other non-state actors from acquiring them (or critical components).
The stakes are high and the threat is real.
The danger of nuclear terrorism constitutes one of the gravest threats to our collective security.
Even a small amount of nuclear material could kill and injure hundreds of thousands of innocent people.
Terrorist networks could acquire the materials to assemble a nuclear weapon, wreaking havoc on global peace and stability, with the possibility of extraordinary loss of life and economic damage.
This has been the main focus of the biennial Nuclear Security Summit, which began in 2010 with 47 countries and three international organizations.
But the NSS has so far restricted its scope to protecting nuclear infrastructure and material from active misuse.
We should be wary about defining nuclear security so narrowly.
We do not have the luxury of approaching the linked issues of arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation separately.
In today’s highly complex, interconnected world, we must consider all nuclear threats in a holistic way.
A good starting point is to consider how the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is contributing to nuclear security.
By banning all nuclear explosions, the CTBT hampers both first-time development of nuclear weapons and substantial improvements to them.
In the last 15 years, only one country – North Korea – has tested a nuclear weapon.
And, by doing so, it has cemented its status as a rogue state.
It is clear that the NPT and the CTBT have reinforced nuclear security.
Only a handful of countries have developed nuclear weapons outside of the NPT, and the CTBT has reduced the number of nuclear tests from an average of 500 per decade to a mere trickle.
Yet the failure of eight countries to ratify the CTBT has prevented it from entering into force, and its contribution to global security has so far not been included on the NSS agenda.
Given the existence of a technologically advanced verification regime that can detect even small underground nuclear tests – what US Secretary of State John Kerry recently called “one of the great accomplishments of the modern world” – this is especially disappointing.
The international community’s failure to bring the CTBT into force is one of the reasons why the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists’ iconic Doomsday Clock remains poised at five minutes to midnight – the closest it has been to midnight since the height of the Cold War.
But, while there clearly is cause for concern, there is no reason to lose hope.
With the next Nuclear Security Summit to take place in the United States in 2016, a window of opportunity will be opened by next year’s NPT Review Conference, which will allow the world to address the issue of nuclear security in a long-term, inclusive manner.
What is most needed in the run-up to the 2016 NSS is a process that advances global action to address the nuclear threat comprehensively, including by ensuring that the CTBT enters into force.
We owe it to ourselves and to future generations to use all opportunities to create the conditions for increased trust and mutual understanding that are needed to free the world of the nuclear threat.
Broadening our understanding of that threat, and devising a comprehensive approach to nuclear security does not mean diluting efforts or losing focus.
On the contrary, it means taking care not to exclude any significant advocate or useful tool in reducing the risk of the unthinkable becoming reality.
Nuclear Weapons in Civil War Zones
LOS ANGELES – The recent failed military coup in Turkey has produced instability, paranoia, and a crackdown on the regime’s perceived opponents, including many journalists.
Luckily, it did not end with rebel forces seizing some of the dozens of US nuclear weapons stored at Turkey’s Incirlik Air Base, from which rebel aircraft departed.
But what about next time?
The world’s nine nuclear powers claim that there is little to worry about.
They argue that the combination of physical protection and, in most cases, electronic safeguards (permissive action links, or PALs) means that their arsenals would remain secure, even if countries where they are stored or deployed were engulfed by violence.
Robert Peurifoy, a former senior weapons engineer at Sandia National Laboratories, disagrees.
He recently told the Los Angeles Times that such safeguards – earlier versions of which he helped to design – may only delay terrorists in using seized nuclear weapons.
“Either you keep custody or you should expect a mushroom cloud.”
Peurifoy’s statements have rightly raised concerns about the security of nuclear weapons stockpiled in insecure regions.
Consider Pakistan, which has the world’s fastest-growing nuclear arsenal and suffers relentless jihadi terrorism and separatist violence.
Attacks have already been carried out on Pakistani military installations reportedly housing nuclear components.
The country’s new mobile “battlefield nuclear weapons” – easier to purloin – augment current fears.
North Korea, with its volatile and mercurial regime, is another source of concern.
Suspicious of the military, Kim Jong-un’s government has repeatedly purged senior officers, which has surely stoked opposition that someday could spark serious civil strife.
Adding nuclear weapons to that mix would be highly dangerous.
While other nuclear powers appear stable, countries like China and Russia, which rely increasingly on authoritarianism, could face their own risks, should political cohesion fray.
Of course, there are plenty of examples of security enduring strife.
The 1961 revolt of the generals in French Algeria, which placed a nuclear test device in the Sahara at risk, produced no dangerous incidents.
In China, the government effectively protected nuclear weapons sites threatened by Revolutionary Guards during the Cultural Revolution.
And neither the attempted coup against Mikhail Gorbachev nor the Soviet collapse resulted in a loss of control over the country’s nuclear arsenal.
But it is a leap to presume that these precedents mean that nuclear weapons will remain safe, especially in unstable countries like Pakistan and North Korea.
Nuclear bombs or materials risk being controlled by rebels, terrorist groups, or even failing and desperate governments.
And, in those cases, the international community has few options for mitigating the threat.
External powers can, for example, launch a targeted attack, like the one that Israel carried out on suspected reactors under construction in Iraq and Syria.
Those strikes would not have succeeded had Israel not been able to identify the targets accurately.
Indeed, though the existence of Iraq’s Osirak plant was public knowledge, uncovering Syria’s Al Kibar plant was an intelligence coup.
Carrying out such a strike on North Korean or Pakistani nuclear sites in a time of crisis would require a similar breakthrough – one that may be even more difficult to achieve, given extensive concealment efforts.
Stealthy movement of bombs or materials amid the unrest would further complicate targeting.
Another option – invasion and occupation – avoids the challenge of identifying nuclear sites.
The defeat of Nazi Germany permitted the Allies to find and destroy the country’s nascent nuclear program.
The 2003 invasion of Iraq granted the US unfettered access to all possible sites where weapons of mass destruction could be stored.
But the costs were huge.
Likewise, invasion and occupation of either North Korea or Pakistan would require massive armies risking a bitter conventional war and possible use of the weapons against the invaders.
A third option is nuclear containment, which relies on several measures.
First, in order to prevent nuclear migration, all land, sea, and air routes out of the country in question would have to be controlled, and homeland security near and far would have to be strengthened.
While the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) is already in place to stop the smuggling of nuclear contraband worldwide, the International Atomic Energy Agency reports continued trafficking of small amounts of nuclear material.
An increase in monitoring may reduce, but still not eliminate the problem.
Containment also requires nuclear custodians be persuaded to risk their lives to defend nuclear sites against terrorists or rebels.
And it demands that states neighboring the country in question put ballistic missile defenses on alert.
While India, South Korea, and Japan continue to modernize such systems, no missile defense is perfect.
In a time of crisis, when the facts on the ground change fast and fear clouds thinking, mitigating the nuclear threat is no easy feat.
While concerned governments do have confidential contingency planning in place, such planning has a mixed record when it comes to responding to recent international upsets in the Middle East.
And simply hoping that things will go according to plan, and nuclear command and control will stick, remains a gamble.
The time has come to discuss new ideas, with the United States – still the global leader in combating proliferation – taking the lead.
A public discussion with input from the executive branch, Congress, think tanks, investigative journalists, and scholars should lay a foundation for policy.
We cannot allow ourselves to stand on the precipice of catastrophe without a well-considered and broadly supported plan in place.
The lesson from Turkey is not that the bombs of Incirlik – not to mention other nuclear weapons in unstable regions – are safe.
Rather, it is that our most deadly weapons could be compromised in an instant.
It ought to be a wake-up call for all of us.
Obama Across the Pacific
MANILA – Unlike his predecessor, US President Barack Obama is popular from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
He has reached out to the Muslim world and pledged to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict without delay.
The nations of Asia have a particular affection for him, owing to the years he spent as a child in Indonesia.
If Obama improves America’s global standing with support from political heavyweights such as Vice President Joe Biden, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Defense Secretary Bob Gates, National Security Adviser James Jones (a former NATO Supreme Commander), and Secretary of Veterans Affairs Eric Shinseki (a former United States Army Chief), he should be able to ask more from America’s allies, particularly for NATO to send more troops to Afghanistan.
He will also be able to push Israel to reinvigorate the derailed Middle East peace process.
Although his national security team consists of people who largely supported the war in Iraq, Obama has made it clear that his agenda includes withdrawing troops from that country.
International goodwill will probably be the key to his success, if not in re-establishing American hegemony, then at least in making America the “indispensable nation” once more.
Although Obama is likely to give priority in his diplomacy to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, he cannot take the Asia-Pacific region’s stability for granted.
The sources of uncertainty are many: tension between South and North Korea; anxiety over nuclear proliferation posed by cooperation between North Korea and Iran; managing the rise of China and India; and continued Islamist extremism on the Indian sub-continent, particularly Pakistan, as well as in Southeast Asia, where Al-Qaeda has established a second front through Indonesia’s Jemaah Islamiyah .
Vast changes in America’s presence across the Asia-Pacific region are underway and are likely to continue.
So far, none of these changes have unsettled the region.
Substantial redeployments of US military forces and assets, triggered by the need for additional troops in Afghanistan and ongoing problems over the US-Japan status-of-forces agreement, are already taking place.
Media reports indicate, for example, that nearly 25,000 US marines, soldiers, family members, and civilian employees are to descend on the tiny island of Guam in the next five years to ease the overconcentration of US forces on the Japanese island of Okinawa without pulling back too far from the flashpoints of Taiwan and North Korea.
But the future of security in the Pacific should not be left to US decision-makers alone.
Regional leaders must now develop their own strategy to transform Asia’s many challenges into opportunities, with Obama playing the role of “good neighbor” who expects other peoples to help themselves and put their own houses in order before turning to the US for assistance.
The Philippines is in an advantageous position to take advantage of the many diplomatic opportunities that will be generated by Obama’s potential activism in the Pacific.
To be sure, the country’s “America” card – the result of the two countries’ longstanding strategic relationship (I myself was educated at West Point and fought alongside US troops in the Korean War) – must be played carefully and not be taken for granted.
But it offers the potential for a relationship of the sort that arises only between countries with deep and many-layered ties.
By strategizing “out of the box” and finding ways to link Obama’s Asian agenda with that of their own nations, Philippines President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo and other Asian leaders will be able to truly make the Pacific the central focus of the Obama administration’s diplomacy.
Obama and Asia’s Two Futures
TOKYO – Despite the relentless shift of global economic might to Asia, and China’s rise as a great power – the central historical events of our time, which will drive world affairs for the foreseeable future – America’s focus has been elsewhere.
The terrorist attacks of 2001, followed by the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, the Great Contraction of 2008, the Arab Spring, and Europe’s sovereign debt crisis, all diverted the United States from helping to create a lasting structure of peace to accommodate today’s resurgent Asia.
In November, US President Barack Obama can begin to redress this imbalance when he hosts the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in his native state of Hawaii.
The meeting’s timing is fortunate, because a number of critical Asian issues are coming to a boil.
The South China Sea, for example, is now churning with competing claims to its islands, atolls, and sea bed, including China’s bold assertion that all of it is Chinese sovereign territory.
At this year’s ASEAN summit in Bali, it was agreed that these territorial disputes be settled through bilateral negotiations.
But the scope of Chinese claims doomed that agreement from the start; indeed, China now insists that the sea constitutes a core national interest, on a level with Taiwan and Tibet, for which it is prepared to fight.
China’s willingness to throw its weight around amplifies the grave imbalance in size, and leverage, between it and the other countries bordering the South China Sea.
This has made bilateral negotiations to settle these disputes unviable.
Vietnam and the Philippines have been bullied in this way recently, with both pushing back rather than submit to Chinese imposed terms.
The presidential elections scheduled for next year in two of Asia’s strongest democracies – South Korea and Taiwan – are also likely to cause diplomatic temperatures to rise in the months ahead. The risk stems not from the conduct of the South Koreans or the Taiwanese, but from the democratic choices that they make, which may offend two of Asia’s last dictatorships.
In South Korea, the remarkable Park Guen-hye’s bid to become her country’s first woman president may provide an excuse – as if any were needed – for North Korean mischief-making.
The regime in Pyongyang is seeking to ensure that power passes to a third generation of Kims, represented by the pudgy and well-fed “Dear Young General,” Kim Jong-un, and appears to believe that provocations such as its bombardment of a South Korean island earlier this year are the way to secure the succession.
Taiwan, too, may elect a woman president, Tsai Ing-wen, the leader of the opposition Democratic Peoples’ Party, next year.
That outcome would stoke Chinese ire, not because of Tsai’s gender, but owing to her politics.
The DPP has long been the Taiwanese party keenest on securing independence for the country.
A third Asian issue with combustible potential is Burma, where another unique woman, the Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi, is at the heart of events.
The elections earlier this year, which many at first assumed were a sham, now appear to have produced changes to which Asia’s countries will need to collectively and individually respond.
The government not only freed Suu Kyi after two decades of house arrest, but has even begun a dialogue with her – talks for which the meticulous opposition leader has expressed real hope.
Indeed, President Thein Sein’s government has begun to release thousands of political prisoners, including the monk who led the massive street protests of 2007.
Sein’s government has also listened to Burmese public disquiet at China’s massive influence in the country, and has canceled a huge $3.6 billion dam that Chinese firms were building.
China, it is plain to see, is at the root of most of the disputes troubling Asia.
Two main issues must be managed – one philosophical, the other structural – in seeking to ameliorate the problems caused by China’s unconstrained rise.
Only by resolving the structural issue will Asia succeed in overcoming the philosophical problem.
The philosophical problem concerns China’s renewed conception of itself as the “Middle Kingdom,” a state with no sovereign equal.
Throughout its history, China has sought to treat its neighbors as vassals – a mindset currently reflected in the way that it has approached negotiations with Vietnam and the Philippines over the South China Sea.
China’s free-floating rise, unanchored in any regional structure or settlement, makes this mindset particularly worrying.
At the Hawaii summit, Obama must orchestrate the first steps toward constructing an effective multilateral framework within which the complications posed by China’s rise can be addressed.
The absence of such a structure of peace has been obscured, to some extent, by America’s dominant role in Asia since the Pacific War.
But China’s rise and America’s other global and domestic concerns have left many Asians wondering just how enduring those commitments will be in the future.
Nevertheless, China’s recent strategic assertiveness has led many Asian democracies to seek to deepen their ties with the US, as South Korea has done with a bilateral free-trade agreement. The US is reciprocating by pledging not to cut Asia-related defense spending, despite the big reduction in overall US defense spending that lies ahead.
What Asia most needs today is a well-conceived regional system, embedded in binding multilateral institutions.
A “Trans-Pacific Partnership” between Australia, Brunei, Chile, Malaysia, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the US, and Vietnam to govern supply-chain management, intellectual-property protection, investment, rules on state-owned firms, and other trade issues – likely to be announced in Hawaii – is a good start in the economic sphere. But much more is needed.
Ultimately, the best way for peace to prevail in the region is for the US and China to share responsibility for a regional order with Asia’s other powers, particularly India, Indonesia, Japan, and South Korea.
Asia’s choice is clear: either the region embraces a multilateral structure of peace, or it will find itself constrained by a system of strategic military alliances.