Outside the courtroom and in the community, most of the Khmers I talked to were, like my aunt, quick to categorize Duch as something other than human.
Duch must have thought much the same thing about his victims when he ordered them to their deaths.
When we start to see each other as less than human, we respond with inhuman acts.
It is this narrow, black-and-white view of humanity that has perpetuated a cycle of violence in Cambodia, where raging mobs beat to death robbery suspects and young mistresses suffer acid attacks by jealous wives.
To say that Duch is a monster who does not deserve rights ignores the gray area between good and evil, between man and monster, where anything is possible.
This trial is about that gray area, about that place in us all where morality decays and evil takes root and grows, the way mold prevails given the right conditions.
Each of us carries this potential for rot.
There is no dispute that Duch violated the rights of thousands of Khmers.
But if the basic premise of these trials is to uphold human rights, then we are obliged to extend that same principle to Duch.
What does it say to the country and the world if a court convened to mete out justice flouts the law?
Isn’t lawlessness the plague we are finally trying to eradicate in Cambodia?
The judges have offered no indication when they will make a decision.
And no one would blame them for taking their time to consider their options.
This is, after all, the court’s first test of fairness before the trials of Duch and four of Pol Pot’s other henchmen begin next year.
We all want justice, but that justice should not come at the cost of our humanity.
The Federal Reserve and the Currency Wars
NEW YORK – The United States Federal Reserve’s recent decision to launch a third round of “quantitative easing” has revived accusations by Brazil’s finance minister, Guido Mantega, that the US has unleashed a “currency war.”
In emerging-market countries that are already struggling with the impact of rapid currency appreciation on their competitiveness, expansionary measures announced in recent weeks by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have heightened the sense of alarm at the Fed’s decision.
My sense is that both sides are right.
The Fed was right to adopt new expansionary monetary measures in the face of a weak US recovery.
Furthermore, tying it to improvements in the labor market was a particularly important step – one that other central banks, especially the ECB, should follow.
Of course, monetary expansion should be accompanied by a less contractionary fiscal stance in industrial countries.
But the advanced economies’ room for fiscal maneuver is more limited than it was in 2007-2008, and America’s political gridlock has deepened, all but ruling out further stimulus through budgetary channels.
Although the effectiveness of a new round of quantitative easing will be limited, as Mantega argues, the Fed had no choice but to act.
But Mantega is also right.
Given the role of the US dollar as the dominant global currency, the Fed’s expansionary monetary policy generates significant externalities for the rest of the world – effects that the Fed is certainly not taking into account.
The basic problem is that there are essential imperfections in an international monetary system that is based on the use of a national currency as the world’s main reserve currency.
This problem was highlighted as far back as the 1960’s by the Belgian economist Robert Triffin, and, more recently, by the late Italian economist Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa.
“The stability requirements of the system as a whole,” Padoa-Schioppa argued, “are inconsistent with the pursuit of economic and monetary policy forged solely on the basis of domestic rationales.”
In particular, expansionary monetary policies in the US (indeed, in all advanced countries) are generating high risks for emerging economies.
Because interest rates must remain very low in developed countries at least for the next several years, there are now strong incentives to export capital to higher-yielding emerging economies.
But such capital inflows threaten exchange-rate overvaluation, rising current-account deficits, and asset-price bubbles, all of which have in the past led to crises in these economies.
In short, the medium-term benefits that emerging economies could receive from faster growth in the US are now being swamped by short-term risks generated by the “capital tsunami,” as Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff has called it.
The basic problem is the lack of a broader agenda that would make the Fed’s position consistent with that of Mantega and other emerging-country officials.
That agenda must include two issues of global monetary reform that remain unaddressed: coordinated global regulation of capital flows in the short term, and a long-term shift toward a new international monetary system based on a true global reserve currency (possibly based on the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Rights).
The US could benefit from such policies, as capital-account regulation would force investors to find opportunities at home, while a true global reserve currency would free the US from concerns – and harsh rebukes – about the implications of its monetary policy on the global economy.
At the same time, emerging markets would gain the full benefits of expansionary monetary policy in the US, to the extent that it boosts demand for their exports.
IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde has called for coordinated action to sustain the global recovery.
Moreover, in October, the IMF is set to release official “rules of the road” for the use of capital-account regulations.
The IMF/World Bank meetings in Tokyo on October 12-13 thus might be the ideal opportunity to begin broadening the international monetary agenda – by giving the green light to coordinated regulation of cross-border capital flows, and launching a discussion about the future of the international monetary system.
Manufacturing Scientific Uncertainty
For decades, the tobacco industry manufactured more than just cigarettes.
While aggressively marketing tobacco products, they also waged a successful public relations campaign designed to create uncertainty about the destructive and lethal characteristics of their products.
Though discovery of these efforts has come too late for many tobacco smokers, documents unearthed in lawsuits have revealed concerted efforts to avoid the imposition of government regulation by attacking public health science and scientists. 
There are few scientific challenges more complex than understanding the causes of disease in humans.
Scientists cannot feed toxic chemicals to people, for example, to see what doses cause cancer.
Instead, scientists must harness the “natural experiments” in which exposures have already occurred.
To be sure, in the laboratory, scientists use animals in controlled experimental conditions to investigate the workings of toxic agents.
But, like epidemiological evidence, laboratory studies have many uncertainties, and scientists must extrapolate from study-specific evidence to make judgments about causation and recommend protective measures.
Absolute certainty is rarely an option. 
Nevertheless, much scientific “uncertainty” about the causes of disease is not real, but manufactured.
Years ago, a tobacco executive unwisely committed to paper the perfect slogan for his industry’s disinformation campaign: “Doubt is our product.”
For 50 years, tobacco companies employed a stable of scientists to assert (sometimes under oath) that they did not believe there was conclusive evidence that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer.
Less well known, but following the same pattern, are efforts being mounted to question studies documenting the adverse health effects of exposure to lead, mercury, vinyl chloride, chromium, beryllium, benzene, and a long list of pesticides and other toxic chemicals.
Polluters and manufacturers of dangerous products hire experts in what they call “product defense” to dissect every study whose findings they oppose, highlighting flaws and inconsistencies.
In many cases, they won’t deny that a relationship exists between the exposure and the disease, but are quick to proclaim that “the evidence is inconclusive.”
These industries have learned that by focusing the debate on uncertainties in the science (and the need for more research), it is possible to avoid a debate on public policy.
This can delay for years the expenditures required to protect people’s health and the environment.
Nowadays, the most well known (and probably best financed) campaign to manufacture scientific doubt is being waged by the fossil fuel industry in an effort to impugn scientists’ work on issues related to climate change.
When confronted by an overwhelming worldwide scientific consensus on the contribution of human activity to global warming over the past century, the industry and its political allies follow the tobacco road.
Evidence of this surfaced when Frank Luntz, a leading Republican political consultant, sent a strategy memo to his clients in 2002.
Luntz asserted that “
 The scientific debate remains open.
 Voters believe that there is 
 no 
 consensus about global warming in the scientific community.
Should the public come to believe that the scientific issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly.”
In parallel to their attempts to delay or prevent regulation through assertions of scientific uncertainty, polluters and manufacturers of hazardous products have promoted the “junk science” movement, which attempts to influence public opinion by ridiculing scientists whose research threatens powerful interests, irrespective of the quality of that scientist’s research.
“Junk science” advocates allege that many scientific studies (and even scientific methods) used in the regulatory and legal arenas are fundamentally flawed, contradictory, or incomplete.
Every first-year public health student is taught how John Snow stopped a cholera epidemic in London.
The manufacturing of scientific uncertainty endangers the public’s health, as well as programs to protect public health and to compensate victims.
It is time to return to first principles: use the best science available, but do not demand certainty where it does not exist.
Many Laws, Little Justice in China
The image on the computer screen is shocking: a man, lying on a hospital bed, his head bandaged, with long trickles of blood running from the top of his scalp.
The man, now sitting next to me, explains with a bit of understatement, “Of course I must continue to have faith in the Chinese legal system, although I must admit that this incident has somewhat dampened my optimism.”
The “incident” occurred last December, as he and another attorney traveled to prepare the re-trial of a blind, self-taught legal activist.
That activist had been framed by local authorities after he had denounced abuses by the local family planning authorities.
As the two lawyers were traveling on a bus, a gang of men, some of them wielding metal pipes, boarded it and brutally assaulted them.
The injuries proved minor, but the incident embodies the paradox of China’s legal system: over the past two decades, China has enacted hundreds of laws and elevated “ruling the country according to law” to ideological and constitutional prominence.
Legal awareness in society has soared to unprecedented levels.
Last week, China finally enshrined private property by passing the long-awaited property rights law, in what the government called “significant progress in promoting rule of law in the country.”
Yet access to justice remains tightly constrained, courts are still controlled by the Communist Party of China (CPC), and lawyers involved in litigation against local state agencies remain highly vulnerable to retaliation by state and non-state actors.
Reprisals range from suspension of lawyers’ licenses by the judicial bureaus to physical intimidation or assault by criminal elements.
After their attackers left, the two lawyers made repeated calls to the police to report the incident, but police did nothing beyond take the call.
Formal complaints to the justice ministry and the national bar association weren’t even acknowledged, let alone answered.
Ever since Deng Xiaoping ushered in the “reform and opening” era in 1978, the Chinese leadership has seen the legal system as an instrument to carry out state policies.
But as China’s society progressively emancipated itself from direct state control – with the notable exception of sectors viewed by the CPC as crucial to maintaining its monopoly on power – citizens increasingly appealed to the law for protection against arbitrary administrative interference and to limit the bureaucracy’s discretionary powers.
In turn, the government encouraged the idea that ordinary citizens had legal rights as a way to ensure social stability, check petty corruption, and channel social grievances through a party-controlled mechanism.
The new property rights law undoubtedly offers stronger protection to Chinese citizens, in particular homeowners, by equalizing the legal status of private and state property.
Greater predictability and clarity in the property system is likely to bring economic benefits, reassure international investors, and signal the leadership’s determination to pursue further economic reforms.
Perhaps more importantly, the law indirectly consolidates, at least in theory, the concept of a private sphere in Chinese society: a physical and legal area protected from arbitrary state intervention that could potentially serve as a basis for demanding greater political participation.
What the new law will not do, however, is address the most serious property rights disputes: land seizures and forced evictions for urban redevelopment.
Most of these protests stem from acts by local officials that were already clearly illegal under existing Chinese law.
The real problem is to make officials respect legality.
With little oversight from the central government, and no independent judiciary or a free press to hold them accountable, local authorities in rural areas are often a law unto themselves.
According to China’s Ministry of Land Resources, there were more than 90,000 cases of illegal land transfers last year, yet there were precious few prosecutions.
Local courts, whose judges are appointed and paid by the local government, often simply refuse to file cases that challenge official decisions.
In the few cases where a court rules in favor of the plaintiffs, the judgments often remain un-enforced.
When lawyers and legal activists try to help villagers or evicted residents to fight through the legal system, they often become victims of retaliation.
Because people cannot get justice through the courts, unrest has skyrocketed nationwide in recent years: official statistics record more than 200 protests a day, four times the number a decade ago.
The central authorities have recognized the link between abuses, unrest, and the need to develop legal services for preventing the escalation of disputes.
Wen Jiabao, China’s Premier, acknowledged last year that protests in the countryside were caused by “some localities [that] are unlawfully occupying farmers’ land” and promised “effective legal services and legal aid so as to provide effective help to people who have difficulty filing lawsuits.”
But reality doesn’t match official rhetoric.
In the past year, three prominent lawyers and rights activists were arrested.
Administrative restrictions on lawyers were tightened to discourage class action or multiple plaintiff suits – typically cases against arbitrary or corrupt government actions – and to facilitate local authorities’ intervention and control over cases.
And the media were prohibited from reporting cases involving land disputes and forced evictions.
The new property law won’t be the breakthrough for rights protection that the government claims it is until it is matched by increased access to justice for ordinary citizens.
The government is fortunate to have my lawyer friend’s faith in the legal system, but now it must earn ordinary citizens’ trust by enacting reforms.
Removing constraints on lawyers and ensuring that they are not attacked with impunity would be a good place to start.
Mao’s China at 60
LONDON – Every country is shaped by its history, but countries fabricate and rewrite their histories, too.
The story of how we became who we are needs to accommodate our sense of tribal solidarity and accomplishment.
Our triumphs and virtues are exaggerated; our villains externalized; our failings covered up.
All this makes the study of history potentially insurrectionary, but hugely valuable.
Good historians encourage us to be honest about ourselves. They destroy our self-delusions.
This is especially true of our flawed heroes, as we see today with the Chinese Communist Party’s treatment of Mao Zedong.
Sixty years ago this October, Mao stood on the rostrum of Tiananmen, the Gate of Heavenly Peace in Beijing, and declared the founding of the People’s Republic.
That moment marked the end of years of war and terrible hardship; the revolution had been won through blood, sacrifice, heroism, the mistakes of enemies, and the manipulative assistance of Stalin, who purported to be a friend.
The decades of rapacious war lords, greedy imperialists, and Japanese invaders were over; China could stand up – though much misery still lay ahead as Mao’s tyranny put down its roots.
Verdicts on Mao differ wildly.
For hard-line Communists, he was a hero three times over – historical, patriotic, and world-class.
For the brave and charismatic dissident Wei Jingsheng, Mao “cast virtually the whole of China into a state of violence, duplicity, and poverty.”
The Communist Party’s official verdict, undoubtedly the product of fierce ideological disputes, is that he was a great Marxist and revolutionary, whose “gross mistakes” during the Cultural Revolution were outweighed by his contribution to China.
“His merits,” it argues, “are primary and his errors secondary.”
China’s Communist Party will not tolerate any questioning of this assessment.
Mao’s establishment of authority over China, his injection of patriotic pride into a land that had been appallingly sundered and humiliated by external and internal forces for a century and a half, and his romantic legend as a global revolutionary leader – all contribute to the moral and political legitimacy for which China’s leaders search.
What they cannot gain through democratic elections they acquire through the history of the revolution and today’s economic triumphs.
But the dark side of Mao cannot be totally expunged.
Too many people remember what happened.
It is an intimate part of their family stories.
There was the Great Leap Forward, which led to mass starvation and perhaps as many as 38 million deaths.
Then the madness of the Cultural Revolution, when millions suffered terribly, many died, and many more behaved disgracefully as Mao sought to destroy those who had rescued China from his earlier follies.
Jung Chang’s famous biography of Mao, published in 2005, recounts those awful events in the sort of bleak detail that makes Communist propagandists nervous – and some academic Sinologists critical that Mao’s achievements go too little recognized.
Mao is certainly a more interesting figure than were many tyrants – a poet, an intellectual, a student of history as well as a serial philanderer, who, according to his doctor, Li Zhisui, liked to swim in water, not bathe in it.
I know of no better, more fascinating “warts and all” portrait of any political leader than Li’s book, The Private Life of Chairman Mao .
I remember being told a story about China that gives credence to the Communist leadership’s generous verdict on Mao.
The mother of a Chinese journalist (now living outside the country) had been one of those who returned after 1949 to her homeland with her husband and family from a comfortable life at an American university.
They regarded returning as their patriotic duty.
The family sacrificed everything.
They were hit by round after round of Mao’s tyrannical campaigns against “Rightists,” beginning with the silencing of critics after the Hundred Flowers Movement in 1956.
The family lived in penury. The father died from ill-treatment during the Cultural Revolution.
But the mother never complained.
She believed that her family’s sacrifices were justified by the liberation and rise of China.
Towards the end of her life, this mood changed.
She saw in the 1990’s the beginning of China’s economic ascent – the early years of spectacular growth.
She witnessed the return of the greed and corruption that she believed had destroyed the Kuomintang in the 1930’s and 1940’s.
Why, she asked herself, had her family suffered so much if it was only to prepare the way for this?
Yet it is China’s economic renaissance – some of whose effects so disturbed this patriotic old woman – which has been the most remarkable event in recent world history.
The economic turnaround began under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping, who had survived Mao’s purges to follow in his footsteps and become the architect of China’s rise as a world power.
The hundreds of millions of Chinese who have been lifted out of poverty as a result of Deng’s reforms will in time regard him as a greater hero than Mao.
But, whatever Mao’s terrible failings, during his years of absolute power there was a sense of common purpose and solidarity that went with shared hardship.
Maoism was a curious and unique mixture of class warfare and socialist leveling, all enunciated by a man who believed that individuals – or at least Mao himself – could shape history rather than be formed by its tides and currents.
This creed has clearly not survived its creator.
Pragmatism with a Leninist face is the order of the day.
The glories of getting rich have overwhelmed the deprivations of patriotic self-sacrifice.
Mao made China proud. Deng made it prosperous.
What happens next?
For all our sakes, I hope that the future does not derail China’s economic progress, though it will be a surprise if it does not challenge its arthritic and adamantine political system.
Sanctions Blowback
BERLIN – With the crisis in Ukraine intensifying, the United States and the European Union are locked in a battle of wills – and sanctions – with Russia.
Indeed, in retaliation for the intensification of Western financial sanctions, Russia has announced a ban on food and agricultural imports from the US and the EU.
But the real threat to the West lies in the potential impact of a financial crisis sparked by its own sanctions against Russia.
Consider Russia’s 1998 financial crisis.
In August of that year, then-President Boris Yeltsin declared, “There will be no devaluation – that is firm and definite.”
Three days later, the ruble was devalued, and Russian financial markets went into a tailspin.
With capital pouring out of the country, the Russian government was forced to restructure its debt, and the economy entered a deep recession.
Though Russia was relatively insignificant financially, its crisis had far-reaching consequences.
Among the worst affected was Argentina; the Russian crisis exacerbated a decline in investors’ confidence in emerging markets that culminated in Argentina’s sovereign default less than four years later.
Even the US and Europe were not immune, with the collapse of the major hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) fueling anxiety about the viability of many other financial institutions.
Today’s financial dramas bear a striking resemblance to this experience.
Argentina has technically defaulted; American and European financial institutions and markets are jittery; and Russia is promising that the sanctions it faces will have no impact on its economy.
The most obvious similarity is Russian President Vladimir Putin’s assertions that his country can weather any and all Western sanctions.
That may be wishful thinking.
In fact, barring most major Russian banks from operating freely in Western capital markets could affect the entire Russian economy, not just the banks themselves.
And the central bank’s decision to raise interest rates to buttress the ruble may lead to much tighter credit conditions for companies and households, pushing the Russian economy into recession this year and next.
The problem with financial sanctions is that no one knows precisely how they will unfold – especially in an economy as large as Russia’s.
If they prove to be more effective than intended, they will pose a serious threat to global financial stability.
The restrictions on Russian banks operating in Europe and the US appear modest.
The banks can still access money markets, cover their short-term financing needs, and count on the central bank for support.
But investors’ risk appetite could easily shift, spurring them to withdraw large amounts of capital.
Though Russia’s public debt is modest, its foreign-exchange reserves large, and its economy much stronger than in 1998, once the herd is running, it is impossible to stop it.
Europe’s banks have extended almost €200 billion ($268 billion) in loans to Russian institutions and firms, and hold a significant share of Russia’s euro-denominated assets, making them especially vulnerable.
Moreover, the eurozone’s current stress tests may well reveal significant capital holes in major European banks in the coming months.
Having just emerged from a deep recession, financial disruptions could easily cause Europe to slide back into recession, particularly given the eurozone economy’s close links to Russia via trade and energy.
Compounding the problem, no one truly understands the precise connections among Russian and European institutions and markets.
The collapse of LTCM in 1998 was completely unexpected.
Is Europe today prepared to deal with a similar failure of an important financial institution?
The financial sanctions on Russia are not targeted, temporary, or fully credible.
If they affect Russia’s entire economy, hitting ordinary citizens the hardest, popular support for Putin’s regime may solidify further.
Of course, an economic slowdown could erode Putin’s popular support, which is based on the gains in living standards made under his leadership.
In that case, Putin’s response could be even more damaging.
Another problem is that implementing sanctions that cannot be reversed quickly removes the incentive for Russia to return to the negotiating table, especially because the threat of an escalation of financial sanctions lacks credibility, given the risk to European and US financial stability.
Once these sanctions begin to bite, no one can say who will be hurt – or how badly.
And, as Russia’s experience in 1998, and Argentina’s after 2002, demonstrated, the process of restoring confidence among market participants is a long and painful one.
These concerns do not mean that the US and the EU should not impose sanctions on Russia for its illegal annexation of Crimea and continuing efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine.
But sanctions that hit the real side of the Russian economy – such as energy, natural resources, and the military – could provide a better solution.
Though such sanctions may not work as quickly, they would be targeted, temporary, and credible, enabling the US and Europe to control – and adjust – the impact on the Russian leadership and economy.
In any case, US and European leaders must recognize that all sanctions will have costs – many of them unexpected – for both sides.
If they are not willing to risk global financial stability in an unpredictable game of chicken with Putin, perhaps it would be wise to re-think the composition of the sanctions that they impose.
Poland’s Eurozone Tests
WARSAW – The European Union’s new member states from Central and Eastern Europe are required to join the eurozone as part of their accession agreements.
But deciding when to adopt the euro is a matter of heated debate.
At stake is not just an economic calculation, but also a judgment about the outlook of the single currency itself.
For many, the benefits of membership have diminished since the financial crisis, and prospective members, such as Poland, can derive maximum advantage from joining only if they are clear about the economic conditions that must first prevail in their own countries.
The formal criteria for entry are contained in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty, which sets targets for government debt, budget deficits, inflation, interest rates, and exchange rates.
But merely hitting these targets (or, worse, just approaching them) at any given point in time has proved to be an inadequate foundation for membership.
Indeed, the malleability of the Maastricht criteria has caused many of the eurozone’s problems.
As long as eurozone debts continue to rise and member economies diverge rather than converge, prospective members should also be stress-tested to see if they can withstand external shocks and sustain the membership criteria over the long term.
Before Poland decides to share a currency with its main trading partners, it should consider three vital economic conditions: its international competitiveness, the flexibility of its labor market, and the health of its public finances.
Poland’s export markets are growing steadily.
But this is not because the country trades mainly with other dynamic emerging economies, or because there is huge global demand for uniquely Polish products.
Rather, Poland simply combines low costs (including wages) and high-quality production.
For this reason, Poland is sometimes called the “China of Europe.”
But competitiveness based on cost, rather than brand value or innovation, makes the Polish economy vulnerable.
Poland lacks the deeply rooted competitiveness of, say, Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Sweden, or Switzerland.
Polish exports are sold under non-Polish names (Italian for shoes, for example, or English for clothing).
Its machinery exports are part of larger multinational networks run by German, Dutch, or other global companies.
And Poland’s cost advantage would disappear if the złoty were to strengthen sharply.
Although Polish companies are working hard to build brands abroad, this can take decades.
In the meantime, the country must be careful about joining the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II) – the narrow band within which applicant currencies must operate for at least two years prior to adopting the euro.
Doing so could cause the złoty to strengthen, as it did to the Slovak koruna, and wipe out Poland’s competitive advantage.
Another important aspect of Poland’s competitiveness is its flexible labor market.
One in four employees is on a fixed-term contract or self-employed.
A quarter of the typical Polish wage comprises variable elements, making it easy to freeze, or even lower, compensation during tougher economic times.
This means that firms can hire workers on short-term contracts when they are unsure of the business outlook; more generally, such flexibility helps the economy withstand external shocks.
But flexible labor markets have disadvantages, too.
Companies tend not to invest in talent or develop new skills, and the quality of existing skills can suffer.
In the longer run, flexible labor markets also increase structural unemployment and fuel the informal economy.
Furthermore, shortages in Poland’s residential rental market restrict workers’ ability to move to where the jobs are.
Arguably, Poland’s labor market is more akin to Spain’s than that of Scandinavia, where generous social protection allows for extensive employee training.
Finally, Poland needs sound public finances – that is, fiscal space for automatic stabilizers during economic crises.
By saving money for hard times, the government can implement countercyclical measures, while ensuring stable finances throughout the economic cycle.
Such a policy was successfully implemented in 2009 and 2010, but the government lacked the funds it needed when economic conditions subsequently deteriorated.
Sound public finances require not only low public debt, but also appropriate budgetary policy, which includes cutting spending (or raising taxes) during boom times, not during downturns, as was recently the case.
Broad-based competitiveness, truly flexible labor markets, and prudent budgeting are not beyond Poland’s reach.
In each case, there are other national examples to emulate: Switzerland’s competitiveness, Denmark’s labor markets, and Estonia’s public finances, for example.
Before Poland joins the eurozone, its economic policy should be directed toward these three criteria of long-term economic success.
The World Economy’s Impossible Demand
WARSAW – The global economy’s glory days are surely over.
Yet policymakers continue to focus on short-term demand management in the hope of resurrecting the heady growth rates enjoyed before the 2008-09 financial crisis.
This is a mistake.
When one analyzes the neo-classical growth factors – labor, capital, and total factor productivity – it is doubtful whether stimulating demand can be sustainable over the longer term, or even serve as an effective short-term policy.
Consider each of those growth factors.
Over the next 15 years, demographic changes will reverse, or at least slow, labor-supply growth everywhere except Africa, the Middle East, and South Central Asia.
Europe, Japan, the United States, and eventually China and East Asia will face labor shortages.
Although large-scale migration from labor-surplus regions to deficit regions would benefit recipient economies, it would almost certainly trigger popular resistance, especially in Europe and East Asia, making it difficult to support.
Increasing the labor-force participation rate, especially among women and the elderly, might ease tight labor markets, but this alone would be insufficient to counter the decline in working-age populations.
The world economy cannot count on higher investment levels either.
The global investment/GDP ratio, especially in advanced economies, has been gradually declining over the past 30 years, and there is no obvious reason why it would pick up again in the medium to long-term.
Until recently, falling investment in the developed world had been offset by rapid increases in investment in emerging markets, mostly in Asia.
But high rates of investment there are also unsustainable.
As in Japan, China’s investment rate (running at almost 50% of GDP since 2009) will decline as its per capita income rises.
The third engine of growth, total factor productivity, will also be unable to maintain the relentless gains witnessed from the late 1990’s to the mid-2000’s.
During this time, the global economy benefited from the confluence of several unique developments: an information and communications revolution; a “peace dividend” resulting from the end of the Cold War; and the implementation of market reforms in many former communist and other developing economies.
Moreover, global growth received a further boost from the completion of the Uruguay Round of free-trade negotiations in 1994 and the overall liberalization of capital flows.
It is difficult to point to any growth impetus of similar magnitude – whether innovation or public policy – in today’s economy.
No new technological revolution appears to be on the horizon.
The World Trade Organization produced only a limited agreement in Bali in December, despite 12 years of negotiations, while numerous bilateral and regional free-trade agreements might even reduce world trade overall.
Worse, in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, sluggish growth and high unemployment in developed countries have fueled demands for more protectionism.
Thus, the financial liberalization of the 1990’s and early 2000’s is also under threat.
The far-reaching macroeconomic and political reforms of the post-Cold War era also seem to have run their course.
The easy gains have already been banked; any further structural change will take longer to agree and be tougher to implement.
Thus, with supply-side factors no longer driving global growth, we must reassess our expectations of what monetary and fiscal policies can achieve.
If actual growth is already close to potential growth, then continuing the current fiscal and monetary stimulus will only create more bubbles, exacerbate sovereign-debt problems, and, by reducing the pool of global savings available to finance private investment, undercut long-term growth prospects.
Instead, policymakers should focus on removing their economies’ structural and institutional bottlenecks.
In advanced markets, these stem largely from a declining and aging population, labor-market rigidities, an unaffordable welfare state, high and distorting taxes, and government indebtedness.
The list of growth obstacles in emerging markets is even longer: corruption and weak rule of law, state capture, organized crime, poor infrastructure, an unskilled workforce, limited access to finance, and too much state ownership.
In addition, markets of all sizes and levels of development continue to suffer from protectionism, restrictions on foreign capital flows, rising economic populism, and profligate or poorly targeted welfare programs.
If these problems can be addressed, both globally and at the national level, we can end the dangerous fiscal and monetary expansionism on which the world economy has come to rely and allow growth to be sustained over the long term – though at lower rates than in recent years.
The Iron Lady as Liberator
KHARKIV, UKRAINE – Prison is always a place of mourning.
But perhaps learning of Margaret Thatcher’s death in this place is grimly appropriate, because it made me remember the imprisoned society of my youth that Thatcher did so much to set free.
For many of us who grew up in the Soviet Union and its satellites in Eastern Europe, Margaret Thatcher will always be a heroine.
Not only did she espouse the cause of freedom – particularly economic freedom – in Britain and the West; by proclaiming Mikhail Gorbachev a man “we can do business with” (at a time when almost every democratic leader was deeply suspicious of his policies of perestroika and glasnost), she became a vital catalyst in unlocking our gulag societies.
Indeed, for everyone in the former communist world who sought to build a free society out of the wreckage of totalitarianism, the “Iron Lady” became a secular icon.
Her qualities of courage and persistence – of being “not for turning” – provided a living example for us of a type of leadership that does not buckle at moments of political peril.
I have certainly taken inspiration from her fidelity to her principles and absolute determination to fight, and fight again, when the cause is just.
One of the true joys of my life in politics was the opportunity to have a quiet lunch with Thatcher in London some years ago, and express my gratitude to her for recognizing our chance for freedom and seizing the diplomatic initiative to help realize it.
Throughout my premiership, I kept a quote of hers in mind: “I am not a consensus politician; I am a conviction politician.”
Her rigorous sense of the true duty of a politician always gave me comfort during a political struggle, for our duty as leaders is not to hold office, but to use our power to improve people’s lives and increase the scope of their freedom.
When Thatcher first expressed her belief in the potential of Gorbachev’s pro-democracy reforms, I was a 24-year-old recent university graduate beginning my career.
There was scant hope that my life would be better than that of my mother and, more dispiriting, even less hope that I would be able to build a better life for my young daughter.
Thatcher’s embrace of the cause of our freedom was electrifying for me.
The great dissident writer Nadezhda Mandelstam had seen for us a future in which we could only “hope against hope”; yet here was a leader who saw for us a future not of squalor and moral compromise, but of freedom and opportunity.
I still shake my head in wonder that she could embrace the abandoned hope of liberation when almost no one else – not even Gorbachev – could even imagine it.
But, of course, Thatcher understood freedom, because it was in her very sinews. She was assuredly not for turning, but she also was not for taking orders or settling for the restricted life that her society seemed to hold in store for her.
In a Britain where social class still typically determined one’s destiny, the grocer’s daughter from the north made her way to Oxford and starred as a student of chemistry.
Then she dared to enter the exclusive male preserve of politics.
When she became the first woman to be British Prime Minister, she fired the ambitions of countless young women around the world (including mine).
We could dream big because of her example.
And, as a woman, Thatcher knew that she brought something unique to the corridors of power.
As she said on taking office in 1979, “Any woman who understands the problems of running a home will be nearer to understanding the problems of running a country.”
That common-sense fusion of family values and fiscal probity set an example for every elected leader who has followed her.
Of course, I well understand that many in Britain felt left behind by the economic and social revolution that Thatcher unleashed.
But the entire point of Thatcherism, as I understood it from afar, was to create conditions in which everyone could work hard and achieve their dreams.
That is what I – and all of Ukraine’s democrats – want for our country: a society of opportunity, under the rule of law and not under the thumb of cronies and oligarchs, in an open Europe.
The record speaks for itself.
Before Thatcher’s premiership, Britain was widely considered the “sick man of Europe” – afflicted by stifling regulation, high unemployment, constant strikes, and chronic budget deficits.
When she stepped down 11 years later (the country’s longest-serving prime minister since Lord Liverpool left office in 1827) Britain was among Europe’s – and the world’s – most dynamic economies.
As a result, we are all Thatcherites now.
Thatcherism’s Bellicose Soul
LONDON – Margaret Thatcher was Britain’s greatest twentieth-century peacetime prime minister.
In the 1980’s, the near-simultaneous crisis of communism in the East and social democracy in the West gave her the opportunity to do great deeds.
But it required a great leader to take advantage of it.
Her relationship with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev opened up the way to ending the Cold War; her privatization policies showed the world how to dismantle state socialism.
The neo-liberal revival of the 1980’s will always be known as the Reagan-Thatcher revolution.
She was also the most divisive British prime minister of modern times, admired and reviled in equal measure, owing as much to the self-righteous way she pursued her policies as to the policies themselves.
She rightly described herself as a “conviction politician.”
A conviction is a settled belief that brooks no argument.
And she did not deign to conciliate, instead dividing the political world into “us” and “them.”
“Where there is error, may we bring truth,” she announced on her entry to No. 10 Downing Street, quoting Saint Francis of Assisi.
“In victory, magnanimity,” Winston Churchill advised.
Thatcher was brave and resolute, but she was not magnanimous.
She won famous victories, but showed no generosity to the defeated, in word or deed.
As a result, she failed to create harmony out of discord.
Her mission was projected from a narrow ideological base.
In instinct and language, she was a follower of Friedrich von Hayek.
For Thatcher, as for Hayek, the great intellectual error of the twentieth century was the belief that the state could improve on the spontaneous efforts of individuals.
What others saw as the state’s role in elevating the condition of the people, she saw as the insidious road to serfdom.
It is easy to see why this message resonated in Eastern Europe.
Translated into British terms, it meant releasing the impulse to wealth creation from the dead hand of socialism, bureaucracy, and trade unions, which in her reading of history had brought about Britain’s decline.
The Good Samaritan, she said, was to be admired because he helped himself before helping the poor.
This insular program of national revival increasingly estranged her from continental Europe’s more dirigiste approach.
In her famous Bruges speech in 1988, she thundered: “We have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain, only to see them re-imposed at a European level, with a European super-state exercising a new dominance from Brussels.”
She left Britain’s relations with the European Union in a mess from which they have never recovered.
Of course, like any shrewd politician, Thatcher knew which battles were unwinnable, or had to be postponed; but she always preferred winning a fight to reaching a compromise.
She won the sobriquet “Iron Lady” for her decisive leadership in the Falklands War; yet most of her battles were fought against sections of her own people – the “enemy within,” like the miners whom she crushed in the strike of 1984-1985, or Ken Livingstone’s Greater London Council, which she abolished in 1986.
She made much of her humble origins as the daughter of a Grantham grocer, and had no time for the Establishment, which she blamed for Britain’s moral and economic decline.
She understood the lower middle class, shared its material aspirations and moral prejudices, and argued for government spending cuts in the language of the housewife managing the weekly accounts.
She rewarded “aspirational” members of the working class by selling off council houses at discounted prices.
Support for the deserving poor was to her like charity wrung from the household budget.
And, while she was Britain’s most successful female politician ever, she regarded feminism as “poison,” and did little to encourage women to follow her.
Thatcher’s answers to the growing industrial disorder of the 1970’s were “monetarism” to liquidate inflation, legal curbs on trade-union power, and privatization of bloated state-owned industries – “selling off the family silver” as former Conservative Prime Minister Harold Macmillan called it.
The aim of all three measures was to restore both state authority and economic dynamism.
With the help of North Sea oil, Thatcher reversed Britain’s relative economic decline.
But her victories came at a huge social cost, with unemployment rising to 12% of the labor force (three million people) in 1984, the highest since the 1930’s.
For those growing up in the industrial north, Thatcherism foreclosed the future.
The new economy based on finance and shopping skipped a generation.
Much as they may have admired her, most Britons were never convinced that the Thatcher way was the only way.
Although she won three consecutive elections, the Conservatives never polled more than 43% of the popular vote, well below the levels achieved by Conservative leaders – Churchill, Anthony Eden, and Macmillan – in the 1950’s.
Her approval rating exceeded 50% in only five of her 137 months in office.
Indeed, in economic and social affairs, the electorate grew steadily less Thatcherite during her years in office.
Her missionary zeal fell on deaf ears.
She owed her power to a divided opposition and a first-past-the-post electoral system.
Thatcher offered her own summary of her political project: “Economics are the method.
The object is to change the soul.”
If that is the metric, then, despite her achievements, Thatcherism was a failure.
The shift toward finance that Thatcher promoted heightened inequality and made the economy more volatile.
Her “right to buy” policy triggered an upward spiral in house prices, which encouraged households to take on more and more debt.
The “Big Bang” of 1986, which de-regulated financial services, made risky behavior in the City the norm.
These reforms sowed the seeds of the financial crisis of 2008.
The “Victorian values” that Thatcher sought to foster fell afoul of the unrestrained celebration of material wealth that her rule brought about.
The moral society, based on decent self-interest, that Thatcher hoped to establish became the greedy society, based on coarse self-regard.
If she experienced any retrospective doubt, she gave no sign of it.
Marginalizing Malaria
SAN FRANCISCO – Last fall, Bill and Melinda Gates sent shock waves through the global health community when they announced the audacious goal of eradicating human malaria from the face of the planet.
Nothing less, they urged, would be enough. 
Heated debate immediately erupted, with some experienced practitioners questioning the feasibility of such a goal.
These skeptics pointed to the first Global Eradication Program, an ambitious effort in the 1950’s to clear malaria from many areas of the world (Africa was excluded).
Despite initial progress, eradication programs crumbled as donors, governments, and populations grew tired and turned their attention elsewhere, allowing malaria to resurge to devastating levels.
No one is suggesting a return to the failed strategies of the first eradication program.
The Gates Foundation has sensibly begun to facilitate consultations with leading scientists on accelerating the development of potent new tools, and is already funding the development of a vaccine, as well as new drugs and diagnostics.
At the same time, the Roll Back Malaria Partnership has recently launched a long-term Global Action Plan to unify the actions of the malaria community and spur additional investment.
All agree that eradication is decades away.
Yet, while total eradication is beyond the horizon, and new tools are needed to get there, there is much that can be achieved in the near term with our current armory.
Recent success in countries such as Ethiopia and Rwanda in expanding access to impregnated bed nets and slashing malaria rates is building confidence that the disease can be dramatically reduced around the world and, in some areas, eliminated entirely.
To realize this opportunity, a sound strategy must rapidly be developed and executed.
In a recent article in the British scientific journal The Lancet , Oliver Sabot and I proposed such a strategy. The approach is simple: a redoubled effort to reduce infections and deaths rapidly in the malaria “heartland” (i.e., equatorial Africa and a handful of other areas around the world) should be accompanied by a campaign to roll back the disease from its current margins.
Malaria has natural limits, determined by latitude, altitude and, in some cases, human intervention.
The countries at the fringe of this zone typically benefit from a range of factors that make complete elimination of malaria possible, including lower transmission of the disease, stronger health systems, and relative national wealth.
Most importantly, these countries are not surrounded by malaria.
As they successfully eliminate malaria, they will provide a new malaria-free anchor that will enable their neighbors, which have been pursuing aggressive control measures in the interim, to embark on their own eradication campaigns.
In this way, malaria will literally be rolled back from its current borders.
This strategy has begun to emerge organically, without prompting from the global community.
In the Pacific, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands, at the far southeastern margin of the malaria endemic zone, have embarked on an eradication campaign with support from the Australian government.
Across the globe, the Southern Africa Development Community has set a goal of eliminating malaria from its four southernmost members – Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland – by 2015.
To do so, they are in active discussions with their northern neighbors, and innovative cross-border collaborations are being developed, building on the model of the highly successful partnership between Mozambique, South Africa, and Swaziland.
Other malaria margins where eradication efforts are underway are China, the Philippines, and Central America.
More than one million people die each year from malaria, most of them are children.
Yet malaria is a preventable and treatable disease.
The task of eliminating malaria, country by country, and eventually reaching global eradication, is underway.
This time, we must not rest until it is completed.
Why Big Oil Should Kill Itself
LONDON – Now that oil prices have settled into a long-term range of $30-50 per barrel (as described here a year ago), energy users everywhere are enjoying an annual income boost worth more than $2 trillion.
The net result will almost certainly accelerate global growth, because the beneficiaries of this enormous income redistribution are mostly lower- and middle-income households that spend all they earn.
Of course, there will be some big losers – mainly governments in oil-producing countries, which will run down reserves and borrow in financial markets for as long as possible, rather than cut public spending.
That, after all, is politicians’ preferred approach, especially when they are fighting wars, defying geopolitical pressures, or confronting popular revolts.
But not all producers will lose equally.
One group really is cutting back sharply: Western oil companies, which have announced investment reductions worth about $200 billion this year.
That has contributed to the weakness of stock markets worldwide; yet, paradoxically, oil companies’ shareholders could end up benefiting handsomely from the new era of cheap oil.
Just one condition must be met.
The managements of leading energy companies must face economic reality and abandon their wasteful obsession with finding new oil.
The 75 biggest oil companies are still investing more than $650 billion annually to find and extract fossil fuels in ever more challenging environments.
This has been one of the greatest misallocations of capital in history – economically feasible only because of artificial monopoly prices.
But the monopoly has fallen on hard times.
Assuming that a combination of shale development, environmental pressure, and advances in clean energy keep the OPEC cartel paralyzed, oil will now trade like any other commodity in a normal competitive market, as it did from 1986 to 2005.
As investors appreciate this new reality, they will focus on a basic principle of economics: “marginal cost pricing.”
In a normal competitive market, prices will be set by the cost of producing an extra barrel from the cheapest oilfields with spare capacity.
This means that all the reserves in Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Russia, and Central Asia would have to be fully developed and exhausted before anyone even bothered exploring under the Arctic ice cap or deep in the Gulf of Mexico or hundreds of miles off the Brazilian coast.
Of course, the real world is never as simple as an economics textbook.
Geopolitical tensions, transport costs, and infrastructure bottlenecks mean that oil-consuming countries are willing to pay a premium for energy security, including the accumulation of strategic supplies on their own territory.
Nonetheless, with OPEC on the ropes, the broad principle applies: ExxonMobil, Shell, and BP can no longer hope to compete with Saudi, Iranian, or Russian companies, which now have exclusive access to reserves that can be extracted with nothing more sophisticated than nineteenth-century “nodding donkeys.”
Iran, for example, claims to produce oil for only $1 a barrel.
Its readily accessible reserves – second only in the Middle East to Saudi Arabia’s –will be rapidly developed once international economic sanctions are lifted.
For Western oil companies,the rational strategy will be to stop oil exploration and seek profits by providing equipment, geological knowhow, and new technologies such as hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) to oil-producing countries.
But their ultimate goal should be to sell their existing oil reserves as quickly as possible and distribute the resulting tsunami of cash to their shareholders until all of their low-cost oilfields run dry.
That is precisely the strategy of self-liquidation that tobacco companies used, to the benefit of their shareholders.
If oil managements refuse to put themselves out of business in the same way, activist shareholders or corporate raiders could do it for them.
If a consortium of private-equity investors raised the $118 billion needed to buy BP at its current share price, it could immediately start to liquidate 10.5 billion barrels of proven reserves worth over $360 billion, even at today’s “depressed” price of $36 a barrel.
There are two reasons why this has not happened – yet.
Oil company managements still believe, with quasi-religious fervor, in perpetually rising demand and prices.
So they prefer to waste money seeking new reserves instead of maximizing shareholders’ cash payouts.
And they contemptuously dismiss the only other plausible strategy: an investment shift from oil exploration to new energy technologies that will eventually replace fossil fuels.
Redirecting just half the $50 billion that oil companies are likely to spend this year on exploring for new reserves would more than double the $10 billion for clean-energy research announced this month by 20 governments at the Paris climate-change conference.
The financial returns from such investment would almost certainly be far higher than from oil exploration.
Yet, as one BP director replied when I asked why his company continued to risk deep-water drilling, instead of investing in alternative energy: “We are a drilling business, and that is our expertise.
Why should we spend our time and money competing in new technology with General Electric or Toshiba?”
As long as OPEC’s output restrictions and expansion of cheap Middle Eastern oilfields sheltered Western oil companies from marginal-cost pricing, such complacency was understandable.
But the Saudis and other OPEC governments now seem to recognize that output restrictions merely cede market share to American frackers and other higher-cost producers, while environmental pressures and advances in clean energy transform much of their oil into a worthless “stranded asset” that can never be used or sold.
Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, has warned that the stranded-asset problem could threaten global financial stability if the “carbon budgets” implied by global and regional climate deals render worthless fossil-fuel reserves that oil companies’ balance sheets currently value at trillions of dollars.
This environmental pressure is now interacting with technological progress, reducing prices for solar energy to near-parity with fossil fuels.
The Dark Side of Physics
PASADENA – Almost a century ago, the first galaxy beyond our own was discovered, and within a decade the theory that the universe is expanding was first proposed.
Since then, astounding technological developments have contributed to revolutionary progress in physics, astronomy, cosmology, and the life sciences.
Today, physics stands at a new threshold.
On July 4, 2012, the international physics community witnessed a monumental discovery in the history of high-energy physics: a Higgs boson.
The long-hypothesized Higgs boson is the necessary component that validates the Standard Model of elementary particles as a “blueprint” for the real universe.
The Higgs boson provides mass for these particles; without it, the physical world, as we understand it, would have no atoms, chemistry, or life.
Finding what was, until then, just a theoretical prediction required one of the largest and most complex scientific undertakings ever attempted: the creation of the particle accelerator, the Large Hadron Collider, near Geneva.
The research carried out at the LHC is now likely to steer our understanding of the universe from the smallest elementary particles to our study of cosmology.
From 2010 to 2012, the LHC produced the highest-energy proton-proton collisions ever; and even higher-energy collisions are anticipated in 2015.
Physicists had long expected the LHC to reveal a new sector of particles and fields associated with “electroweak symmetry breaking” and the dark matter of the universe.
Two major experimental observations underpinned this expectation.
The first was the masses of the W and Z bosons – the messengers of the weak nuclear interactions, responsible, for example, for the shining sun.
The second was a large set of astrophysical observations, pointing to the necessity of a gravitational “scaffolding” in the universe: that is, the dark matter needed to prevent the stars and galaxies from flying apart.
Although the Higgs discovery may help us to understand the source of elementary particles’ mass (including its own), nature has surprised us in two further respects.
First, the measured mass of the Higgs boson renders the full theory “metastable” in the absence of any new physics phenomena.
In other words, the universe might have other, more energetically favorable configurations.
Second, the LHC data seem to disfavor, though not exclude, the most aesthetically and mathematically pleasing new physics phenomenon, “supersymmetry,” which was theorized along with the Higgs boson before its actual discovery and is necessary to address quantum corrections.
The persistence of the dark-matter conundrum, in combination with these considerations, might alter our fundamental ideas and predictions about what might follow the discovery.
New ideas are now being formulated about the Higgs boson itself, opening a direct portal to the dark matter of the universe.
A concerted experimental and theoretical program has taken shape in the fields of particle physics, cosmology, astrophysics, and gravitational physics to discover a dark-matter particle candidate in the next decade or so.
What is at stake are paradigms that have held for the past 76 years, and that have been supported recently by spectacular measurements of the cosmos.
Some in the world of physics might call this a crisis.
However, it is quite common for a theory to lack experimental backing.
All research into the universe and the physical world struggles to achieve a complete understanding.
In that sense, we are in perpetual crisis and at the threshold of discovery.
It might be fairer to describe physics as being at a turning point or a crossroads.
Physics provides the evolving core framework on which other fields of science are built.
And now, with the technological armory and plethora of data currently available, science can go far beyond any previous expectation and extrapolation. Indeed, in coming decades, everything will be susceptible to major revision as new cross-disciplines – and undisciplined threads of study – emerge.
Quantum engineering teams are already springing up in academic and research institutes all around the world.
The merging of computer science and engineering with neuroscience has already produced results that not long ago belonged only to science fiction.
Nature can seem complex, haphazard, and tricky; and it can strike us as simple, symmetrical, and beautiful.
Either way, the quantum universe will continue to surprise us.
Patriotism in the Age of Globalization
LONDON – The new fault line in politics, according to Marine Le Pen, leader of France’s far-right National Front, is between globalists and patriots.
It is an argument similar to those being made by euroskeptics in the United Kingdom and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump in the United States.
It is, however, as false as it is dangerous.
Judging by the results of the second and final round of France’s regional elections on December 13, it is also an argument that French voters, at least, roundly rejected.
They cast 73% of their ballots for the National Front’s rivals, depriving the party of even a single victory.
Le Pen accused the mainstream parties of ganging up on her, describing their cooperation as a denial of democracy.
Her argument is, of course, a classic example of sour grapes; the entire point of a two-round voting system is to force parties and their supporters to seek a consensus and form partnerships.
Unless and until the National Front finds a way to win allies, it will not achieve an electoral breakthrough.
(The same is likely to prove true about Trump.)
That is not to say that Le Pen’s claim – that those who vote for her party are the only true patriots – should be casually dismissed.
She has homed in on a powerful message, one with the potential to attract supporters from other parties.
That’s why it must be rebutted, both in France and elsewhere.
The assumption underlying such nationalist bombast – that a country’s interests are better served by being closed rather than open – is extremely dangerous.
The belief that openness is treason and closure is patriotic is a rejection of the entire post-1945 framework of politics and policy in the developed world.
It is an attempt to turn back the clock to the interwar period, when the focus was on closing off: imposing onerous trade restrictions and persecuting or expelling minority groups.
This was true even in the United States, which enacted the most restrictive immigration laws since the country’s founding.
The postwar years marked a complete change of direction, as countries opened up, allowing freer flows of trade, capital, ideas, and people.
This process became known as globalization only after China and India joined in during the 1980s, but it had started long before.
It was globalization, after all, that created what in France became known as Les Trente Glorieuses – the 30 glorious years of rapidly rising living standards following the end of WWII.
Le Pen and her fellow populists claim that globalization was either an act of foolish generosity that helped the rest of the world at the expense of the nation, or a phenomenon that benefited only the elites and not ordinary people.
For them, patriotism means being harder-headed about protecting the national interest and adopting more democratic policies that help the working masses, not jet-setting fat cats.
The second part of this argument – that the interests of ordinary people have been subordinated to those of the elite – must be heard and responded to.
A democracy in which a majority feels neglected or exploited is not sustainable.
Either the government or the entire system will be overturned.
Elected officials clearly need to find answers to high unemployment and declining living standards.
What mainstream parties need to be make clear, however, is that the answers to those problems do not lie in closing borders or minds.
There is no example, anywhere in history, of a society or an economy that has prospered over the long term by rejecting globalism.
Moreover, though openness may not guarantee prosperity, it has always been a prerequisite for growth.
To be sure, the optimal amount of openness is a matter of debate.
But the bigger, more productive arguments are about how to shape education, labor markets, scientific research, and social-welfare policies in order to help societies adapt to the world around them.
The patriotic choice – the national interest – has always consisted in crafting domestic policies that best take advantage of globalization.
For mainstream parties in France, the Conservatives in the UK, and Trump’s more internationally minded Republican rivals in the US, there is nothing to be gained from copying the arguments of their extremist counterparts.
Doing so would yield crucial ground in the political battle over how best to serve the country and its people.
Mainstream parties must reclaim the mantle of patriotism and redefine the national interest accordingly.
In today’s world, the national interest lies in managing openness – not in throwing it away.
Mario Draghi’s Guns of August
WASHINGTON, DC – August has been a dangerous month in European history, but this year it could be the turning point for the eurozone – and perhaps for the world economy.
On July 26, Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, declared that his institution would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro, and added: “Believe me, it will be enough.”
Draghi’s strong – indeed, unprecedented – statement was widely interpreted as signaling that the ECB would soon revive its bond-purchase program, focusing on Spanish debt in particular.
Stock markets around the world soared.
Jens Weidemann of the Bundesbank immediately expressed reservations, but the next day German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President François Hollande issued a joint statement expressing their determination “to do everything in order to protect the eurozone.”
I recently argued that the ECB, working with the nascent European Stability Mechanism (ESM), was the only institution that could save the eurozone.
It could do so by buying Italian and Spanish bonds in the secondary market with the pre-announced intention of keeping their sovereign interest rates below a certain threshold for a certain time.
It is likely that Draghi’s statement will indeed be followed by ECB purchases of Spanish (and Italian) sovereign bonds.
A man like Draghi would not have issued such a statement without believing that he could follow through on it.