In Mubarak’s Egypt, citizens’ legal equality, while stipulated in the constitution, is not respected or observed, especially with regard to the construction and protection of Coptic churches.
Last November, when Muslim zealots attacked a Coptic church in Alexandria, several Copts were injured.
Six months later, a fanatic targeted three churches during Sunday services, killing a few worshippers and injuring many.
Copts marched in the streets of Alexandria for the next three days, protesting the security authorities’ leniency toward the culprits, the scapegoating of their community, or even an official hand in the attacks to justify an extension of the Emergency Law.
Hosni Mubaraks’ four domestic wars are fuelled by Egypt’s excluded, who are increasingly in rebellion against a regime that has long outlived its legitimate mandate.
The battle with the judges may well prove to be Mubarak’s Achilles’ heel.
Justice is a central value for Egyptians, and its absence is at the core of all protests.
There can be no evidence more compelling than the unprecedented numbers of people who have rallied peacefully in solidarity with the judges.
America’s Labor Market by the Numbers
NEWPORT BEACH – Politicians and economists now join investors in a ritual that typically takes place on the first Friday of each month and has important consequences for global markets: anticipating, internalizing, and reacting to the monthly employment report released by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
Over the last few years, the report has evolved in a significant way – not only providing an assessment of the economy’s past and current state, but, increasingly, containing insights into its future as well.
Think of the BLS’s employment report as a comprehensive monthly check-up for the American labor market.
Among its many interesting statistics, it tells you how many jobs are created and where; how earnings and hours worked are evolving; and the number, age, and education of those seeking employment.
Despite the data’s richness, only two indicators consistently attract widespread attention: net monthly job creation (which amounted to 169,000 in August) and the unemployment rate (7.3% in August, the lowest since December 2008).
Together they point to a gradual and steady improvement in overall labor-market conditions.
This is certainly good news.
It is not long ago that job creation was negative and the unemployment rate stood at 10%.
Consider the statistics on the duration of unemployment.
After all, the longer one is unemployed, the harder it is to find a full-time job at a decent wage.
In August, the BLS classified 4.3 million Americans as long-term unemployed, or 37.9% of the total unemployed – a worrisome figure, given that the global financial crisis was five years ago.
And, remember, this number excludes all the discouraged Americans who are no longer looking for a job.
In fact, the more comprehensive employment/population ratio stands at only 58.6%.
The teenage-unemployment rate is another under-appreciated indicator that is at an alarming level.
At 22.7%, too many American teenagers, lacking steady work experience early in their professional careers, risk going from unemployed to unemployable.
Undoubtedly, the US labor market’s uneven recovery has much to do with the structural and policy gaps exposed by the 2008 global financial crisis and the recession that followed.
The economy is still struggling to provide a sufficient number of jobs for those who were previously employed in leverage-driven activities that are no longer sustainable (let alone desirable).
Moreover, US schools, particularly at the primary and secondary levels, continue to slip down the global scale, constraining Americans’ ability to benefit from globalization.
Meanwhile, existing and newly created jobs provide less of an earnings upside.
And political polarization narrows the scope for effective tactical and structural policy responses.
This combination of factors is particularly burdensome for the most vulnerable segments of the US population – particularly those with limited educational attainment, first-time labor-market entrants, and those who have been out of work for an extended period.
So while net job creation will continue and the unemployment rate will maintain its downward trajectory – both highly welcome – the labor market’s evolution risks fueling rather than countering already-significant income and wealth inequalities, as well as poverty.
Overburdened social support mechanisms would thus come under even greater pressure.
And all of this would amplify rather than attenuate political polarization, placing other urgent policy priorities at even greater risk.
If this interpretation is correct, the heightened attention given to the monthly BLS headline indicators needs to be accompanied by a broader analysis and a different mindset.
After all, the report is much more than a scorecard on America’s performance in confronting a persistent economic, political, and social challenge; it is also an urgent call for a more focused corrective effort involving both government and business.
A better mix of fiscal and monetary policies and sustained measures to enhance productivity and competitiveness remain necessary conditions for addressing America’s labor-market challenges.
But they are not sufficient.
Both the public and private sectors – individually and through scalable and durable partnerships – need to think much more seriously about labor retraining and retooling programs, enhanced labor mobility, vocational training, and internships.
President Barack Obama’s appointment of a “jobs czar” would also help to enhance the credibility, accountability, and coordination required to overcome today’s significant and rising employment challenges.
Yes, the headline numbers will continue to signal overall improvement in the labor market.
The urgent task now is to ensure that lasting progress is not undermined by the worrisome compositional trends that the BLS’s report highlights month after month.
The Dragon and the Bear
Second honeymoons rarely, if ever, recapture the zest of lost love.
Yet ever since the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991, Russia and China have sought to rekindle the close relations that once supposedly existed between the USSR and Mao’s China before Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin in 1956.
But that renewed Sino-Russian marriage always smacked more of convenience – aimed as it was at checking American hegemony – than of true romance.
Now Russia’s invasion of Georgia has shattered even the illusion of attraction.
In 1969, the Chinese and Soviet armies exchanged fire across their disputed border.
Recently, the two countries signed an agreement that seemed to put an end to their long border dispute.
The agreement was a sort of follow-up to the visit to Beijing of Dmitry Medvedev, who made China one of his first official trips abroad after being elected Russia’s president.
During Vladimir Putin’s presidency, Chinese and Russian troops engaged in joint military maneuvers, and the two countries became dominant powers in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), which, to some Western observers, looked like an effort to counterbalance NATO.
There were also years of “Russia in China” and “China in Russia” cultural exchanges, meant to underscore that the two countries were tied together not just by geopolitical pragmatism, but by genuine cultural/historical ties as well.
But the fact is that 17 years of high-level bilateral cooperation have produced little of substance.
Indeed, in the wake of the invasion of Georgia, China may be seriously rethinking its relations with Russia.
It may not yet be ready to embark on a full-fledged policy of “containment,” but in the wake of the dismemberment of Georgia – and with Russia claiming a zone of “privileged influence” throughout the former Soviet world – China clearly views Russia as an emerging strategic threat.
For example, China has refused to endorse Russia’s recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and has encouraged the SCO’s other members to do the same.
The reasons are not hard to find.
As a general principle of foreign policy, China believes that national borders are sacrosanct.
No power, not even the United Nations, should be allowed to change them without the consent of the country concerned.
More importantly, China views the break-up of the USSR as one of the greatest strategic gifts in its history.
Instead of confronting a (usually hostile) Russian/Soviet empire on its border, a vast swath of buffer states appeared after 1991.
Their continued independence is now deemed essential to China’s national security.
As a result, any more Russian efforts to establish even informal suzerainty over the Soviet successor states are, following the dismemberment of Georgia, likely to meet Chinese resistance.
The economic components of the Sino-Russian relationship – where real attachments are tested – are also dissatisfactory, at least from China’s point of view.
China’s major interest in Russia is oil and gas.
But, while Russia is firmly committed to being a major supplier of gas and oil to Europe, it is hesitant to play a similar role with China.
Moreover, Russia’s efforts to gain monopoly control of the gas pipeline networks across Eurasia pose a direct danger for China, because monopolists can not only gouge their consumers, but also shut off supplies for political purposes, as Russia has done repeatedly over the past two decades.
So China’s national security interest is to ensure that the gas-supplying nations of Central Asia have outlets to sell their gas that are not under Kremlin control.
Other than oil, gas, and other commodities, China has rather limited interests in Russia.
Russia has been China’s major supplier of weapons since the late 1990’s.
But, given the stagnant state of Russian science and technology, even the best Russian equipment nowadays seems out of date.
Indeed, although the war with Georgia demonstrated the revived combat spirit of the Russian army – at least when compared to its ineptness in the two Chechen wars of the 1990’s – it also exhibited the grave defects of Russian military technology.
Most of the arms used were yesterday’s weapons.
As China is now able to harness its own technological might to produce sophisticated weapons, Russia’s usefulness in this area is waning fast.
Nor do the Chinese have much interest in assuming de facto control of Asiatic Russia, despite shrieks from Russian strategic pundits that this is China’s real goal.
China might, indeed, have an interest in some border areas with fertile soil and moderate climate.
But it hardly wishes to colonize the frozen wastes of Siberia.
In fact, Siberia is not much different from China’s own almost empty mountain/desert borderlands, where even agriculture is a daunting task.
As for Russia’s Far East, the Chinese believe it will eventually fall to China anyway, so there is no need to hasten the process.
China is far more interested in focusing on the United States, its major trade partner and rival, and on South Asia and Iran, which supplies much of China’s oil and regards it as a more reliable ally than Russia.
Thus, the settling of the border dispute with Russia was not aimed so much at building a geopolitical marriage as securing each other’s rear, offering both sides a free hand to explore opportunities elsewhere.
What China wants and what it gets may be different things.
With its long borders with Russia, China knows it would have much to regret if a new, oil-fired Russian empire appeared on its doorstep.
The Earth Moves in Britain
LONDON – Volcanoes have consequences – and I’m not just thinking about the chaos caused to air travel by Iceland’s unpronounceable last eruption (known to the Pentagon as E-15).
In 1783, a volcano in Iceland spewed so much ash into the atmosphere that the entire northern hemisphere was cooled for almost three years. This resulted in crop failures and famine, and some historians argue that it helped to precipitate the French Revolution.
Should we blame the “British Revolution” of 2010 on E-15? This undoubtedly would be going too far.
But the agreement between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats to form a coalition government does look revolutionary to many British voters.
In London, governing arrangements that other countries take for granted look like a radically new type of politics.
The election produced an inconclusive result, even though the Conservative Party received 7% more of the popular vote than the second-place Labour Party.
The failure to equalize electorates in different constituencies counted heavily against the winners, as it takes more votes to send a Conservative MP to Westminster than it does a Labour MP.
But the coalition negotiated by David Cameron’s Conservatives with the third-place Liberal Democrats (which should give the government a comfortable majority in Parliament) is not so novel as some people think.
In the last years of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth, coalition governments were quite common in Britain.
It is only in the years since the Second World War that one-party government has been the rule, though the country did have an informal pact between Labour and Liberals in the 1970’s.
Benjamin Disraeli, the nineteenth-century prime minister, famously said that Britain does not like coalitions.
Although it is too early to judge, opinion polls suggest that the British people do at least like the look and the purpose of the current one.
But can this infatuation possibly last?
At the local level, Conservatives and Liberals tend to be at daggers drawn.
This is partly because Liberals have usually thrived by winning seats from Conservatives when Conservative administrations are unpopular.
Conservatives, for their part, think of Liberals as combining sanctimoniousness with hard-ball electoral tactics.
Moreover, there are substantial policy differences between the two parties, with Liberals placing political reform at the top of their agenda, in order to establish an electoral system that would suit them better.
Despite all this, the marriage has taken place, with the two parties’ smart, attractive, and socially similar leaders – David Cameron and Nick Clegg – taking a bold gamble on their ability to get this new show on the road and to keep it there.
Cameron and Clegg have agreed, in a constitutional innovation, that the coalition should last the full five years until the deadline for the next election.
They have hammered out a common platform that has involved give-and-take on both sides.
The Liberals have taken five seats in the Cabinet, and more in the lower ministerial ranks. The Conservatives have agreed to hold a referendum on whether Britain should change its first-past-the-post electoral system to an alternative-vote arrangement.
For both parties, the biggest justification for this unorthodox act of political courage is the scale of the economic problems facing Britain.
The Liberal-Conservative coalition inherits, by common consent, the worst economic legacy since the war, with a huge hole in the public finances that is starting to look ever deeper as new ministers get a chance to inspect things for themselves.
Indeed, Liam Byrne, the outgoing Labour budget chief, left a note to his successor saying “I’m afraid there is no money. Kind regards and good luck.”
It was meant to be a joke. But there won’t be many laughs when cherished public programs are cut, welfare entitlements curbed, and taxes raised.
The bond markets will demand quick and effective action.
So the new government has no alternative but to begin the long haul of restoring the nation’s finances to the black.
The lesson for other governments is clear: if you want independence of action, don’t put yourself in hock.
From the Conservatives’ point of view, there is much to be said for sharing responsibility for what has to be done.
The Liberals, meanwhile, have a golden opportunity to show that they are capable of government, rather than simply flakey representatives of the “None of the Above” party.
As the months pass, both parties will probably find that they face their greatest political difficulty in managing the fringes of their own camps – rightists in the Conservative Party, who don’t like the centrist moderation of the coalition’s policies, and leftists in the Liberal Democratic Party who don’t want to support a largely Conservative government.
But if the coalition works and lasts, then we will see not so much a political volcano in Britain as a real shift in the tectonic plates.
Nothing will be quite the same again.
The East Asian Triangle
Once again, North Korea’s pursuit of nuclear weapons is threatening Asia’s stability.
Japan’s new prime minister, Shinzo Abe, hastily arranged a summit in China with President Hu Jintao on the eve of North Korea’s nuclear test, a meeting that saw both men agree that such a move was “intolerable.”
The meeting is a welcome development.
But Abe comes into office with a reputation as a stronger nationalist than his predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi, whose insistence on visiting the controversial Yasukuni Shrine (where Class A war criminals from World War II are buried) helped sour relations with China.
For stability to be preserved, Sino-Japanese relations must improve.
Although North Korea’s nuclear ambitions are worrying and destabilizing, China’s rise is the key strategic issue in East Asia.
For three decades, its economy has grown by 8% to 10% annually.
Its defense expenditures have an even faster pace.
Yet Chinese leaders speak of China’s “peaceful rise” and “peaceful development.”
Some believe that China cannot rise peacefully, and will seek hegemony in East Asia, leading to conflict with the United States and Japan.
Others point out that China has engaged in “good neighbor” policies since the 1990’s, settled border disputes, played a greater role in international institutions, and recognized the benefits of using soft power.
A decade ago, I oversaw preparation of the US Pentagon’s East Asian Strategy Report , which has guided American policy under the Clinton and Bush administrations.
Back then, there was a debate between those who wanted to contain China’s growing strength increased and those who urged China’s integration into the international system.
Containment was unfeasible, because, unlike the Soviet Union during the Cold War, China’s neighbors did not see it as a clear and present danger.
Moreover, treating China as an enemy would ensure that it became one, thus unnecessarily ignoring the possibility of benign outcomes.
The strategy we chose was to “balance and integrate.”
The East Asian balance of power rested on the triangle of China, Japan, and the US.
By reaffirming the US-Japan security relationship in the Clinton-Hashimoto declaration of 1996, the US helped structure a favorable regional balance.
By simultaneously encouraging China’s entry into the World Trade Organization and other institutions, we created incentives for good behavior.
So integration was hedged by realism in case things went wrong.
That strategy has largely worked.
China’s military power has increased, but its behavior has been more moderate than it was a decade ago.
China is a long way from posing the kind of challenge to American preponderance that the Kaiser’s Germany posed when it surpassed Britain at the beginning of the twentieth century.
The key to military power in today’s information age depends on the ability to integrate complex systems of space-based surveillance, high speed computers, and “smart” weapons.
It is not likely that China (or others) will soon close that gap with the US.
Of course, the fact that China is unlikely to compete with the US on a global basis does not mean that it could not challenge the US in East Asia, or that war over Taiwan is not possible.
If Taiwan were to declare independence, it is likely that China would use force, regardless of the perceived economic or military costs.
But it would be unlikely to win such a war, and prudent policy on all sides can make such a war unlikely.
So what is the strategic problem today?
Stability in East Asia depends upon good relations between all three sides of the US-China-Japan triangle, but ties between China and Japan deteriorated in the Koizumi years.
China permitted demonstrations, sometimes violent, against Japanese consulates in protest of changes in Japanese textbooks that softened descriptions of Japan’s invasion in the 1930’s.
After 22 million Chinese signed a petition against Japanese membership of the United Nations Security Council, Premier Wen Jiabao announced China’s opposition to such a step.
China also objected to Japanese statements about Taiwan.
And there are territorial disputes about small islands and potential gas reserves near the China-Japan maritime boundary.
The most contentious issue, however, has been prime ministerial visits to the Yasukuni Shrine, and, until Abe’s visit, China had been reluctant to engage in any summit meetings with Japan so long as such visits continue.
Although China has become Japan’s largest partner in trade and foreign direct investment, nationalists in the two countries have fueled each other’s extremism, while their governments play with fire.
American interests rest on regional stability and continued growth in trade and investment.
So President George W. Bush could quietly tell Abe that we welcome good relations between Japan and China, and that prime ministerial visits to the Yasukuni Shrine undercut Japan’s own interests in East Asia.
It reminds Asians of the repulsive Japan of the 1930’s rather than the attractive Japan of today.
At the same time, the US can be cautious about involving Japan in Taiwan issues – a neuralgic point for China – while encouraging the development of Asian institutions that increase contacts and dampen conflict.
This can include the development of the East Asian Summit, revival of the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), and the evolution of the current six-party talks on North Korea into a permanent Northeast Asia Security Dialogue.
Fortunately, there are signs that both China and Japan are seeking to back away from the impasse of recent years.
While Abe has maintained his position on Yasukuni, his summit with Chinese President Hu Jintao was a promising step forward.
Some Chinese analysts, for their part, recognize the danger in stimulating too much nationalism toward Japan.
The US should quietly try to nudge these steps forward.
The US-Japan alliance remains crucial to stability in East Asia, but it takes three sides to make a triangle.
The ECB Grows Up
BERKELEY – August 2 marked the first anniversary of the European Central Bank’s “outright monetary transactions” program, under which it stands ready to purchase government bonds on the secondary market.
The ECB announced OMT in response to last summer’s panicked sales of southern European sovereign debt, which threatened to blow apart the eurozone.
At one level, the anniversary was a happy one.
Yields on Spanish and Italian bonds, which had risen to unsustainable heights over fears of a eurozone breakup, fell sharply after the announcement. They have remained at lower levels ever since, despite little visible improvement in the European economy.
Perhaps best of all, the ECB has never had to activate the facility.
It has not actually bought any bonds under the program.
Its promise to act was enough to calm markets.
But the OMT scheme is also condemned for exceeding the ECB’s mandate.
Critics view it as a devious attempt to circumvent the prohibition on the ECB’s direct purchases of eurozone governments’ bonds.
It is thus a source of moral hazard, for it relieves pressure on spendthrift politicians to balance budgets and push ahead with reforms.
In addition, it is seen as exposing the ECB’s principal shareholders, notably Germany, to the risk of losses on their holdings of southern European bonds.
Earlier this summer, these issues were the subject of two days of hearings before Germany’s Constitutional Court, which will issue its ruling shortly.
If it finds that the OMT program is inconsistent with the German Constitution, it could force the Bundesbank to withhold its participation. It might even force the ECB to abandon OMT.
Now, more than 100 economists, half from Germany, half from abroad, have signed a letter in support of the program.
(Full disclosure: I am among them.)
It might seem odd for foreigners to weigh in on a question of German law.
But the stakes are too high to remain on the sidelines.
A normal monetary union, which is what the eurozone aspires to be, requires a normal central bank to carry out the entire range of central-banking functions.
This starts with ensuring price stability.
But, as is acknowledged in the ECB’s statute, it also means ensuring the “smooth operation of payment systems.”
Moreover, it means preserving financial stability.
Recent experience has provided a harsh reminder of the consequences of neglecting this responsibility.
Specifically, the central bank must be ready to act as a lender of last resort when investor panic threatens financial markets.
Americans learned these lessons the hard way.
The founding governors of the Federal Reserve System interpreted their mandate narrowly, viewing the Fed as responsible for maintaining gold convertibility and a stable dollar.
Embracing the “real bills doctrine,” they regarded their role as being to provide as much money and credit as was required for retail and wholesale transactions, and no more.
In particular, they did not see the Fed as a lender of last resort.
Emergency lending to distressed financial institutions and markets, they warned, would only encourage excessive risk taking and create bubbles, while exposing the Fed to losses on its investment portfolio.
The result was a series of escalating banking and financial crises in 1930, 1931, and 1933, the last of which shut down the entire US financial system.
Obviously, this was no way to manage what was already the world’s largest economy.
The result was the Banking Act of 1933, which expanded the Fed’s powers to discount and purchase notes, drafts, and bills, thereby ensuring that retail banks would have the liquidity required to meet depositors’ needs.
The Banking Act – and the experience that prompted it – made clear that the Fed had an obligation to use those powers.
It is no coincidence that the US has not had a 1933-style financial crisis ever since.
The financial crisis of 2008 came close, but it was precisely the Fed’s readiness to step in as an emergency lender that prevented the worst.
The lesson of this US experience is unambiguous.
The eurozone will never be a normal, well-functioning monetary union until it has a normal, well-functioning central bank prepared to act as a lender of last resort.
The OMT program is a step in this direction.
The ECB has recently signaled that it is similarly prepared to take the other steps expected of a normal central bank, publishing its board’s minutes, for example, so that the public can understand its deliberations and hold its members accountable for their actions.
The ECB statute was not engraved on stone tablets and handed down on Mount Sinai.
It is a man-made charter, and it should be treated – by the German Constitutional Court and others – as a living document that is to be interpreted in light of current events.
The rest of us should encourage this approach.
The euro’s fate could well depend on it.
The ECB Picks Up The Pace
Buoyant US economic growth, so far, has provided the European Central Bank with the necessary global backdrop to raise interest rates from very low levels at a slow and steady pace that limits political friction with euro-zone political leaders but that gets the job done.
That is about to change.
The latest anecdotal evidence from the US indicates that the economy is taking a sharp downward turn, which should become manifest in the coming months.
Unless the ECB picks up the pace of interest-rate increases now, the goal of interest-rate neutrality may not be politically feasible, jeopardizing achievement of the bank’s price stability goals.
The ECB should act with greater alacrity not because there are increased prospects for future growth, but for the opposite reason: the fear that European growth will slow, thus limiting the possibility for future rate hikes.
Indeed, even before the sudden downturn in the US economy, a growing number of members of the ECB’s Governing Council already had come to the conclusion that accelerating the pace of interest-rate increases was needed if its goal of monetary neutrality was to be achieved.
The key reason is that several recent “reforms” announced by German Chancellor Angela Merkel – raising the value-added tax, increasing user charges for healthcare, and taxing interest payments as a part of so-called corporate tax reform – promise to reduce German economic growth, perhaps significantly, in 2007.
When Germany sneezes, Europe catches a cold.
As a result, Merkel’s reforms have increased the angst of euro-zone central bankers that the “window of opportunity” for future rate hikes might be closing.
The latest ZEW survey of euro-zone business confidence buttresses these fears.
It shows that current conditions are good, but that expectations about future conditions have dropped off significantly.
The message for the ECB is clear: make haste while the sun shines.
That is exactly what the ECB is doing.
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet indicated at his July press conference that the bank plans to raise interest rates by 25 basis points on August 3, not August 31, as expected.
This implies an interval of two months between interest-rate moves instead of the three-month interval that has become standard ECB practice in the current interest-rate cycle.
The next rate hike in the normalization process is expected in October, two months after the expected August move.
Ironically, the October meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council will take place in Paris this year.
French politicians have been the most aggressive in putting political pressure on the ECB to relax its interest-rate normalization policy.
French Finance Minister Thierry Breton recently warned the ECB about “nasty surprises.”
Prospective French presidential candidate Nicolas Sarkozy wants the ECB to promote economic growth, not just price stability.
The Paris meeting affords the ECB an opportunity to make a political statement – its “Declaration of Independence,” so to speak – by raising interest rates on French soil.
Trichet already has cleared the way for this to happen.
In June, the ECB jettisoned its long-standing practice of not changing rates outside of Frankfurt, increasing them by 25 basis points in Madrid.
Trichet is a clever and resourceful person.
But even he might find it daunting to reconcile the conflicting demands of the ECB to accelerate the interest-rate normalization process and those of the French political establishment to maintain the status quo.
But the recent good economic numbers coming out of France should make an October rate hike easier for French politicians to accept.
The ECB is accelerating the pace of normalization at precisely the right moment.
The danger is that it will be blamed if European growth falters.
However, with the German and US economies slowing precipitously, the ECB would have a perfect cover for its interest-rate moves.
The ECB could convincingly argue that Merkel’s reforms and the US, not its interest-rate hikes, are responsible for the European slowdown, should one occur.
Politically, the path is clear for the ECB to act.
The ECB’s Battle against Central Banking
BERKELEY – When the European Central Bank announced its program of government-bond purchases, it let financial markets know that it thoroughly disliked the idea, was not fully committed to it, and would reverse the policy as soon as it could.
Indeed, the ECB proclaimed its belief that the stabilization of government-bond prices brought about by such purchases would be only temporary.
It is difficult to think of a more self-defeating way to implement a bond-purchase program.
By making it clear from the outset that it did not trust its own policy, the ECB practically guaranteed its failure.
If it so evidently lacked confidence in the very bonds that it was buying, why should investors feel any differently?
The ECB continues to believe that financial stability is not part of its core business.
As its outgoing president, Jean-Claude Trichet, put it, the ECB has “only one needle on [its] compass, and that is inflation.”
The ECB’s refusal to be a lender of last resort forced the creation of a surrogate institution, the European Financial Stability Facility.
But everyone in the financial markets knows that the EFSF has insufficient firepower to undertake that task – and that it has an unworkable governance structure to boot.
Perhaps the most astonishing thing about the ECB’s monochromatic price-stability mission and utter disregard for financial stability – much less for the welfare of the workers and businesses that make up the economy – is its radical departure from the central-banking tradition.
Modern central banking got its start in the collapse of the British canal boom of the early 1820’s.
During the financial crisis and recession of 1825-1826, a central bank – the Bank of England – intervened in the interest of financial stability as the irrational exuberance of the boom turned into the remorseful pessimism of the bust.
In his book Lombard Street, Walter Bagehot quoted Jeremiah Harman, the governor of the Bank of England in the 1825-1826 crisis:
“We lent...by every possible means and in modes we had never adopted before; we took in stock on security, we purchased exchequer bills, we made advances on exchequer bills, we not only discounted outright, but we made advances on the deposit of bills of exchange to an immense amount, in short, by every possible means consistent with the safety of the Bank, and we were not on some cases over-nice.
Seeing the dreadful state in which the public were, we rendered every assistance in our power...”
The Bank of England’s charter did not give it the legal authority to undertake such lender-of-last-resort financial-stability operations. But the Bank undertook them anyway.
Half a generation later, Britain’s Parliament debated whether the modifications of the Bank’s charter should give it explicit power to conduct lender-of-last-resort operations.
The answer was no: granting explicit power would undermine confidence in price stability, for already there was “difficulty restrain[ing] over-issue, depreciation, and fraud.”
Indeed, granting explicit lender-of-last-resort powers to the Bank of England would mean that the “millennium of the paper-mongers would be at hand.”
But the leaders of Parliament also believed that the absence of a codified authority to act as lender of last resort would not keep the Bank of England from doing so when necessity commanded.
As First Lord of the Treasury Sir Robert Peel wrote: “If it be necessary to assume a grave responsibility, I dare say men will be willing to assume such a responsibility.”
Our current political and economic institutions rest upon the wager that a decentralized market provides a better social-planning, coordination, and capital-allocation mechanism than any other that we have yet been able to devise.
But, since the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, part of that system has been a central financial authority that preserves trust that contracts will be fulfilled and promises kept.
Time and again, the lender-of-last-resort role has been an indispensable part of that function.
That is what the ECB is now throwing away.
Saving Europe’s Real Hegemon
MUNICH – Last June, the European Commission announced its about-face on bank restructuring.
The money for recapitalizing distressed banks would now come primarily from creditors, not European taxpayers, with a pecking order to specify which lenders would be repaid first.
All of this is welcome, at least in principle.
In practice, however, the scheme leaves much to be desired.
The problem is that a very long list of exceptions reduces the recoverable assets to such an extent that in many cases it will still be impossible to make do without public money.
The long-term plan is that this money should come from a fund created by European banks themselves.
But the Eurogroup (a meeting of eurozone finance ministers attended by the European Union’s economic and monetary affairs commissioner and the European Central Bank president) is suggesting that, until then, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) – and thus the taxpayers – will fill the gap.
Given that taxpayers are thus supposed to finance guarantees for deposits up to €100,000 ($133,000) – the median level of Dutch household wealth and twice the German median – the Eurogroup’s proposal boils down to a massive redistribution of wealth in Europe, the dimensions of which are not understood by the public.
The idea of exempting banks’ secured debt from the pecking order for repayment is extremely problematic as well.
While this proposal may sound harmless and almost self-evident, it is not; secured debt needs no further protection, because it is already secured.
Viewed from this perspective, the additional protection afforded by the exemption is highly surprising.
The exemption for secured debt undoubtedly concerns mainly the refinancing loans that the ECB has extended to commercial banks against increasingly weak collateral.
For the eurozone’s crisis-ridden economies (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain), the combined total is €732 billion.
These loans extend far beyond providing the liquidity that these countries need for internal circulation, for which a maximum of €335 billion – their available stock of central-bank money – would have sufficed.
Instead, by weakening safety standards, bailing out foreign investors, and financing current-account deficits, the ECB has undercut and replaced the private European interbank market.
With several banks in the crisis countries on the verge of bankruptcy, many of these loans have now turned toxic.
After all, if one takes the average of estimates reported by reputable sources, the write-off losses of the six crisis countries’ banks amount to about €670 billion.
Participating in these write-offs would put huge strain on the Eurosystem (the ECB and the central banks of the eurozone member states), which has only around €500 billion in equity capital.
The riskiness of the ECB’s strategy of using the printing press to bail out banks, including their public and private clients, would become apparent to everyone.
Thus, it is clear how the losses incurred by the ECB’s de facto regional fiscal policy are to be avoided: the write-off costs will be transferred from the ECB to the ESM.
This makes no difference to taxpayers, who will have to pay for both institutions’ losses in the same manner.
But it has the advantage of allowing the ECB to present itself as having a clean balance sheet, thereby enabling it to maintain its current policy.
Ultimately, this is merely a new round of the eurozone’s old game of financial hide-and-seek, whereby losses are obscured by distributing them among different institutions and time horizons.
The game started with the bailout fund for Greece, which was followed by the European Financial Stability Facility, the European Financial Stability Mechanism, and the International Monetary Fund, which in turn were relieved by the ESM.
In each case, a major objective was to reduce the burden on the ECB, which had advanced the money by printing it and would have run into serious difficulties without help.
The entire arrangement is highly problematic from the standpoint of democracy, because the initial decisions about undercutting the capital markets by means of public credit were taken by the ECB’s Governing Council, in which large countries like France or Germany have the same voting power as Cyprus or Malta.
Indeed, the national central banks’ allocation of emergency liquidity assistance required approval by only one-third of the Governing Council’s members, and the six crisis countries had these votes.
According to the Eurogroup’s proposal, these self-awarded loans, too, are now to be secured by ESM funds.
While the European Union’s national parliaments must still decide on the scheme, they essentially have no option but to assent, because to do otherwise would severely harm the ECB.
When they finally get to vote on the matter – years after the ECB’s risky credit maneuvers – they will have no choice but to bail out the ECB, the true hegemon of the eurozone.
The ECB’s Honeymoon is Over
The honeymoon for the European Central Bank is over.
Because European interest rates no longer are clearly out of whack with the fundamentals of the euro-zone economy, monetary policy has become more complex.
At the same time, France has given a strong mandate to its new president, Nicolas Sarkozy, who is without question the most formidable political adversary the ECB has had to face in its brief history.
Sarkozy stands ready to pounce on any mistakes the Bank may make in this more difficult policy environment.
With European interest rates up 200 basis points since late 2005 and the euro near a record high, Sarkozy wants the ECB to stop raising rates now.
ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet and the Governing Council strongly disagree.
At the ECB press conference in early July, Trichet signaled at least one more rate hike—either in September or October.
Some Council members are known to support two more rate hikes before year-end.
The euro is at record levels, oil prices are surging and interest rates are expected to go higher.
The euro-zone economy—including Germany’samp#45;amp#45;is not bulletproof though the hawks in the Governing Council often talk as if it were.
Just as last year when there was unwarranted growth pessimism in Europe, this year there is unwarranted growth euphoria.
Many Germans, in particular, are in denial that the cyclical upturn may be coming to an end.
Were the Governing Council to miss the coming turn in the European economy while blithely raising interest rates, they would be portrayed as drunken sailors on a rate-raising binge.
The roar for greater political control over Europe’s central bank would be deafening—and not only from France.
The political costs for the ECB of making this type of mistake could be exorbitant.
This is why the ECB must be very prudent as it considers whether to maintain the current pace of rate hikes, in which case it would raise rates by 25 basis points in September, or slow the pace down a bit, in which case the next rate hike would come in October at the earliest.
In the current political environment, the dangers to the ECB from outside political interference are much greater from raising rates too fast than too slowly.
If it goes too slow, the ECB has earned sufficient credibility as an inflation fighter to make up for it in the future with little if any economic or political cost.
But if it goes too fast, the political cost could be substantial and irreversible.
Politicians will push for more control and probably get it, Maastricht treaty or no Maastricht treaty.
Waiting until October for the next move up is like buying insurance against a catastrophic loss.
But will the ECB see it this way?
As a matter of principle, the hawks refuse to consider the political costs of their actions.
In earlier times with no formidable adversaries in the political arena, this was a harmless affectation.
But it is an extremely dangerous attitude with people like Sarkozy ready, willing and able to impose high political costs upon the bank should it stumble.
There is more interest in Sarkozy’s populist ideas about currency intervention and adding a new political dimension to monetary policy decisions than is commonly realized.
The hawks also suffer from what can be called a “catch up” complex.
No matter how high rates go, they think they’re behind.
They want to go in September so that they can go again in December (even before knowing the data)—and they won’t stop there either.
Even the doves might support a rate hike in September to counter-act the charge that they are being bullied out of a September hike by Sarkozy.
There is no doubt that Sarkozy’s attacks on the ECB are having a counter-productive effect in this regard.
They are pressuring the ECB to raise rates sooner than later.
But a September rate move also serves Sarkozy’s interests, as it will give him more ammunition to portray the ECB as out of control and in need of political disciplining.
For the ECB to protect itself from such charges, far better to wait until October when the bank can go to the public and say in effect; “Look, do you see how reasonable we have been.
Now we must raise rates.”
In the final analysis, whether the next rate increase comes in September, October or whenever—and it looks like September notwithstanding current warning signs like IFO that suggest a possible slowdown in the coming monthsamp#45;amp#45; the data will determine how far the ECB goes with its rate hikes if the bank is savvy enough to keep the politicians at bay.
But this is a big “if”.
The fight is on between the two French titans—Trichet and Sarkozy—with the fate of Europe’s central bank hanging in the balance.
The ECB’s Path Not Taken
It is now clear that the European Central Bank views higher interest rates as the right response to rising oil prices.
As a result, the ECB risks painting itself into a corner, for the logic behind this week’s interest-rate hike implies that more increases will follow – a series of policy mistakes that will cost the Eurozone economies heavily.
Despite statements to the contrary, no central bank, including the ECB, can simply focus on inflation and ignore what happens to economic activity.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, that stabilizing prices came at the cost of a 30% unemployment rate. Surely nobody would want that.
The ECB’s defenders would say that such an outcome is purely hypothetical – and irrelevant – for there is no conflict between stabilizing inflation and sustaining the appropriate level of economic activity.
Price stability, according to this view, reduces uncertainty, thereby enabling firms and individuals to take the right decisions, so it is good, not bad, for economic activity.
This argument is true – most of the time.
But when an economy faces a major adverse shock, such as a sharp increase in oil prices, then the twin goals of stabilizing inflation and maintaining economic activity conflict, and the central bank’s job becomes more difficult.
Think about what stabilizing inflation means in such a context.
Firms are likely to pass the increase in energy costs on to consumers by raising their prices.
In response, workers are likely to demand higher nominal wages.
If the central bank is to avoid an inflation spiral, it must ensure that the “first round” effects of higher energy prices on inflation do not fuel such “second round” effects.
In an environment where productivity gains and wage growth are already weak, as in Europe today, persuading workers to accept a cut in real wages may be tough.
The interest-rate increase decided this week will soon appear insufficient, and will have to be followed by further hikes and a large increase in unemployment.
In order to achieve its inflation goal, the ECB may have to contract activity until workers are, in effect, beaten into submission.
Is there a better way to respond to adverse shocks?
The answer from monetary theory is an unambiguous “yes”: give workers a chance to adjust to higher energy prices, allow for some pass-through of higher prices to wages over time (so that wages adjust more gradually), and make clear that inflation will return to its target range within, say, a year or two.
Such a policy will limit the increase in unemployment, at the cost of only temporarily higher inflation.
So, why is the ECB set on a tougher course?
There are three plausible reasons.
First, there has been little wage pressure so far.
So the ECB may not have to increase interest rates very much in order to contain inflation.
If this scenario plays out, the impact on economic activity and employment will be minimal.
But there are good historical grounds for thinking that it won’t.
What we are seeing in Europe today is more likely to be delayed adjustment rather than passive acceptance of real wage cuts by workers and unions.
The ECB should not delude itself into thinking that a small increase in interest rates will be enough.
If and when wage pressure comes, the ECB, to remain true to its word, may be forced to increase interest rates much more than it now expects.
The second argument is that if the ECB stands firm, workers will not demand higher nominal wages, for they will understand that this would only lead to higher interest rates and higher unemployment.
This argument is not irrelevant; monetary policy probably has some effect on wage bargaining.
But one should not expect too much from a tough ECB stance.
Think of the limited success of the ECB’s advocacy of greater labor-market flexibility: there has been no dramatic increase in the pace of reforms.
The third argument is that higher inflation today would endanger the ECB’s credibility in the future.
This argument, too, is hardly irrelevant: higher inflation today must not be permitted to change inflation expectations in the medium run.
Leaving interest rates on hold in the face of adverse price shocks thus requires a convincing explanation by the ECB of its underlying policy.
Here, the ECB’s task is all the more difficult because, having focused so narrowly on inflation stabilization, markets would read adoption of a more flexible stance as a change in position.
Moreover, because the ECB has actually exceeded its inflation target in recent years, its credibility is already in doubt.
True, adopting the appropriate policy would require the ECB to articulate its rationale with great care.
Here it can take lessons from its British and American counterparts: credibility does not require dogmatism, but rather clarity of purpose.
What is at stake is too important to ignore.
On its current policy path, unless oil prices fall, the ECB risks being forced to commit to substantially higher interest rates, and thus to a further increase in Eurozone unemployment.
The ECB’s Tone-Deaf President
PALO ALTO – Once upon a time, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet communicated effectively with the outside world.
Not anymore.
More than a few eyebrows were raised after the ECB’s January Governing Council meeting, when Trichet threatened that the Bank would act “preemptively” if labor unions tried to embed higher energy and food prices into new contracts, risking a wage-price spiral.
This threat took a heavy toll on the ECB’s credibility, since an interest-rate hike in the midst of the most serious financial crisis in decades was obviously absurd.
No one believed it, and the ECB not only withdrew its clumsy threat the next month, but it adopted a policy of interest-rate neutrality.
But the announcement of this policy change at the February meeting also did not go smoothly.
Trichet somehow garbled the Council’s message in his press conference, making it sound as if the ECB wanted to shift to an easing bias instead of “wait and see” neutrality.
European fixed-income markets rallied strongly as a result, only to reverse course days later when Trichet and his colleagues made it clear that the markets had “misread” him.
So there was unwelcome and unneeded market volatility because Trichet couldn’t get the message out straight.
Indications that Trichet’s communicative skills were slipping already had become evident last September, when the Governing Council could not follow through with the rate increase the ECB president had promised the previous month.
For some unknown reason, Trichet is keen not to surprise markets over the very short term.
He tips them off about what he plans to do one month in advance, using code words like “vigilance” to signal policy change, all the while maintaining with a straight face that the bank never “pre-commits” its policy stance.
Many on the Governing Council object to this childish game of code words, because it eliminates their freedom of action once the Council commits itself to a course of action.
The Council may then be forced to choose between doing the right thing and preserving the credibility of the ECB’s communications.
This is precisely what happened in September, when the financial crisis made it impossible for the ECB to proceed with the interest-rate hike that it had “announced” in August.
Code word communications, which only work in a stable and crisis-free economic and financial environment, had damaged ECB credibility.
Calm economic waters had given the ECB and Trichet a honeymoon until last fall.
But, with financial markets now in turmoil and likely to stay that way, the time has come for the ECB to jettison its use of code words – a poor substitute for real central bank transparency in any case.
What also needs to be jettisoned from the ECB’s communications policy is its obsession with the short run.
With the United States now in recession (and the possibility of a deep recession not that remote), it is striking how positive ECB officials sound about the European economy: Europe’s “economic fundamentals are sound,” the economy is “robust,” economic performance is “just below potential,” and so on.
The ECB’s policymakers are not blind, merely shortsighted.
They fear that honesty about Europe’s economic prospects over the next year or so might cause markets to force it into an unwanted rate cut now.
So they exaggerate and tell stories about how the European economy is fundamentally different from the US economy.
This is a major mistake, for which the ECB could pay dearly.
Yes, today the European economy is not doing badly.
But how long is this likely to last with the US falling into a deep slump?
The ECB should be preparing Europeans for what many of its own officials admit in private: Europe has not “de-coupled” from the US.
On the contrary, America’s current economic difficulties will hit Europe hard, but with a time lag – the best guess being 2009.
This is not to argue, of course, that the ECB should cut interest rates now.
On the contrary, the Bank’s current policy of fighting inflationary pressures by slower growth, a stronger euro, and the credit crunch seems just about right for the time being.
But, after all the happy talk about the European economy, how much credibility will the ECB have if Europe eventually succumbs to recessionary pressures from abroad?
The ECB’s independence is still a contentious political issue in Europe.
It is more prudent that it voice concern for Europe’s future economic prospects today than face a deceived and angry public tomorrow.
The ECB’s Two Pillars - A Success
The economic analysis pillar is based on a wide set of domestic and international economic indicators from the real and financial sectors (wages, import prices, interest and exchange rates etc.).
It provides a basis for the assessment of 
 short- to medium-term
 price developments. 
This two pillar approach constitutes a framework for cross-checking indications from the shorter-term economic analysis with those from the longer-term monetary analysis in order to obtain a robust view about the risks to price stability.
In the standard model of the neo-keynesian approach, which has become more and more “state-of-the-art”, the usefulness of money to monetary policy analysis is challenged; there is no need for monetary cross-checking, monetary analysis has no value-added and is superfluous.
I am not convinced by these arguments.
Customary inflation forecasts and economic analysis alone are not a sufficient basis for monetary policy decisions.
While such decisions must not ignore longer-term developments, the time horizon for inflation forecasts is usually only one to two years, beyond it gets highly uncertain.
Moreover, while monetary policy has always to be conducted under uncertainty, the ECB was confronted with a situation of extreme uncertainty.
There was uncertainty concerning the state of the economy.
The data situation around the start was very unsatisfactory.
Unobservable indicators like the output gap, which plays e.g. a central role in neo-keynesian recommendations for monetary policy, are generally known to be very difficult to estimate in real time.
Estimates for the output gap of the euro area at that time were especially doubtful with data coming from different international institutions varying widely, and being revised substantially at later stages.
Nor was it clear which models provide the most reasonable account of the functioning of the economy, especially in a case where more or less heterogeneous countries were to form a monetary union.
This was compounded by strategic uncertainty related to how markets, investors and consumers would react to the replacement of national currencies with the Euro. 
In this highly uncertain environment, monetary policy decisions which did not rely on a solid framework could have been misguided.
This posed a risk of substantial policy errors, which would have constituted a deadly blow on reputation, the most important capital of any central bank.
Thus the ECB needed to rely on the few robust results theory and experience can provide.
The long-run connection between money and price developments is among the most robust economic relationships.
“Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon”.
This statement by the late Nobel laureate Milton Friedman has never lost its validity.
And who would deny that monetary policy has to do with money?
Certainly, monetary analysis is no easy task, though this is true for all relevant economic explanations. 
No question, the neo-keynesian approach is useful for a central bank’s policy analysis.
But including monetary analysis in a monetary policy strategy is vital to the central bank’s decision making process.
It would be strange to suggest that any central bank could ignore the information from money.
Many studies have also shown that there is hardly any major asset price inflation episode which was not accompanied if not preceded by strong growth of money and/or credit. 
The question is not whether or not to include monetary analysis in the monetary policy strategy, but how to reconcile the results from the monetary and the economic analyses to achieve a comprehensive and consistent assessment of the risks to price stability.
In the strategy of the ECB this is the role of crosschecking. 
It is not surprising that in a world of low inflation central banks as well as academics have lost interest in “money”.
One can only hope that the world does not have to go through the same process of pathological learning via high inflation which followed the neglect of money during the fifties and sixties of the last century.
After all, is it not premature – if not plainly arrogant- to claim that all this evidence collected over many centuries and across numerous countries has lost any meaning for the present and the future?
Can models without an explicit, well developed financial sector be expected to explain an economic world in which financial markets play an ever-increasing role?
How could central banks, which depend on these financial markets to serve as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, possibly rely on such models?
The ECB has never claimed that its strategy is the ultimate solution to the challenges monetary policy is confronted with.
But, it has recognised the need to include monetary analysis – in a very broad sense – into its policy considerations.
And the strategy was flexible enough to integrate the broadening and deepening of both the monetary and economic analysis.
The two pillar strategy responds to the fact that we (still) lack a model which encompasses both dimensions, the economic or real and the monetary, in a consistent and robust manner.
As long as such a “one-pillar-approach” is unavailable, there is no convincing reason why the ECB should change a strategy which has served it well and allowed it to establish a remarkable track record. 
The Economic Benefits of Disease Control
SAN FRANSISCO – Large parts of the world have not enjoyed the remarkable global progress in health conditions that have taken place over the past century.
Indeed, millions of deaths in impoverished nations are avoidable with prevention and treatment options that the rich world already uses. 
This year, ten million children will die in low- and middle-income countries.
If child death rates were the same as those in developed countries, this figure would be lower than one million.
Conversely, if child death rates were those of rich countries just 100 years ago, the figure would be 30 million.
The key difference between now and then is not income but technical knowledge about the causes of disease, and interventions to prevent disease, or at least the most pernicious symptoms.
Today’s tools for improving health are so powerful and inexpensive that health conditions could be reasonably good even in poor countries if policymakers spent even relatively little in the right places.
Recent research for the Copenhagen Consensus identifies six highly cost-effective options that would tackle some of the planet’s most urgent health problems.
The most promising investment is in tuberculosis treatment.
Some 90% of the 1.6 million tuberculosis deaths in 2003 occurred in low- and middle-income countries.
Because tuberculosis affects working-age people, it can be a trigger of household poverty. 
The cornerstone of control is prompt treatment using first-line drugs, which doesn’t require a sophisticated health system.
Spending $1 billion on tuberculosis treatment in a year would save one million lives.
Because good health accompanies higher levels of national economic welfare in the long run, the economic benefits are worth $30 billion.
The second most cost-effective investment is tackling cardiovascular disease.
Heart disease might not seem like a pressing issue for poor nations, but it represents more than a quarter of their death toll.
Measures to reduce risk factors other than smoking – high intake of saturated animal fat, obesity, binge drinking of alcohol, physical inactivity, and low fruit and vegetable consumption – have had little success. 
Treating acute heart attacks with inexpensive drugs is, however, cost-effective.
Spending $200 million could avert several hundred thousand deaths, yielding benefits that are 25 times higher than the costs.
The third option is prevention and treatment of malaria.
A billion dollars would expand the provision of insecticide-treated bed-nets and facilitate provision of highly effective treatment.
This would save more than a million child deaths and produce economic benefits worth $20 billion.
The nascent Affordable Medicines Facility-malaria (AMFm) is a particularly attractive mechanism for committing resources to malaria control.
The fourth alternative for policymakers is to focus on child health initiatives.
The best measures are familiar ones: expanding immunization coverage, promoting breastfeeding, increasing the use of simple and cheap treatments for diarrhea and childhood pneumonia, ensuring widespread distribution of key micronutrients, and spreading the use of anti-retroviral drugs and breastfeeding substitutes to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission.
Expanding immunization and micronutrient coverage are perhaps the most critical measures.
Spending a billion dollars on such initiatives could save one million lives annually and create economic benefits worth more than $20 billion a year.
The next option is to reduce the number of tobacco-related deaths.
On current patterns, cigarette smoking will account for 10 million deaths per year by 2030.
Most will occur in poor countries.
Some 100 million of China’s 200 million young male smokers and about 40 million of India’s 100 million young male smokers will eventually die from tobacco-related causes.  A multi-faceted approach to smoking control is one of the few proven approaches to prevention of heart disease and cancer.
A tobacco tax is particularly effective, with a 10% increase in price reducing consumption by 4-8%.
Arresting the spread of HIV/AIDS is the sixth option.
For dozens of countries around the world, the AIDS epidemic threatens every aspect of development.
But there is some good news: HIV infection rates are slowing in large parts of Asia and Latin America, which appears to reflect a (very uneven) increase in prevention programs.
The greatest successes in prevention involve what has been called “combination prevention,” involving simultaneous and substantial scaling up of multiple interventions, including condom distribution, treatment of sexually transmitted disease, male circumcision, and peer interventions among sex workers.
Preventing two million HIV infections each year would be relatively expensive, at $2.5 billion, but would yield benefits twelve times higher.
The changes that we are advocating are designed to target specific areas of need instead of strengthening health system capacity.
But there is an important exception: strengthening surgical capacity, particularly in local hospitals, can inexpensively (and often decisively) address abdominal conditions.
Long-neglected investments in surgical capacity would yield high returns.
Even if the costs of all these initiatives were two or three times higher than we estimate, these efforts would still provide amazing opportunities to reduce health inequality and do good in the world.
Water Risk on the Rise
WASHINGTON, DC – Water is never far from the news these days.
This summer, northern India experienced one of its heaviest monsoon seasons in 80 years, leaving more than 800 people dead and forcing another 100,000 from their homes.
Meanwhile, Central Europe faced its worst flooding in decades after heavy rains swelled major rivers like the Elbe and the Danube.
In the United States, nearly half the country continues to suffer from drought, while heavy rainfall has broken records in the Northeast, devastated crops in the South, and now is inundating Colorado.
Businesses are starting to wake up to the mounting risks that water – whether in overabundance or scarcity – can pose to their operations and bottom line.
At the World Economic Forum in Davos this year, experts named water risk as one of the top four risks facing business in the twenty-first century.
Similarly, 53% of companies surveyed by the Carbon Disclosure Project reported that water risks are already taking a toll, owing to property damage, higher prices, poor water quality, business interruptions, and supply-chain disruptions.