Бірақ саясаткерлер оның ұсынысын маңызды деп санамады.
Генридің ұсынысы, ол өзі айтқандай, «әкімшілік тұрғыдан орынсыз немесе қылмыстық мінез-құлыққа ешқандай ұзақ мерзімді әсер етпейтін бір жолғы шара ретінде ретінде саналып, қабылданбады».
Өзінің Қолма-қол ақша қарғысыаттыжаңа кітабындаКеннет Рогофф салықты төлеуден жалтару және қылмыстық әрекетпен күресу мақсатында жоғары атаулы банкноталарды жоюды қолдайды.
Рогофф қолма-қол ақша жинаудың шығындарын жоғарлату арқылы заңсыз іс-әрекеттерді тежеуге болатынына ауқымды дәлелдемелерді көрсетіп өтті.
Салықтан жалтарушылар өз байлықтарын жер, өнер, және зергерлік бұйымдар сияқты ақшалай емес түрде сақтағанымен, қолма-қол ақша, оның өзіне тән өтімділігінің арқасында, арам жолмен тапқан пайда операциялары үшін жетекші құрал болып қалады. Басқаша айтқанда, арам, қара ақша массаларын құрудағы қолма-қол ақшаның рөлі туралы Модидің сынаған сыншылардың шағымдары орынсыз.
Сонымен қатар, Рогофф «қара ақша» мәселесін шешу үшін басқа стратегияны ұсынады. Оның зияны аз және ұзақ мерзімде тіпті тиімдірек де болар еді.  Бұл стратегияның Модидікінен екі өзекті өзгешілігі бар.
Бірақ шоттарды тіркеген адамдардың көбі оларды пайдалана бермейді.
2015 жылы Дүниежүзілік банктің түрлі аймақтардағы банк шотын пайдалану және «ұйқыдағы клиенттерді» зерттеу барысында үнді ересектерінің 15%-ы ғана төлемдерді жіберу немесе қабылдау үшін тіркелген шоттарын пайдаланатынын табылды.
Мұндай жағдайда, қолма-қол ақша тапшылығы экономиканы әлсіретеді.
Модидің саясаты батыл және оның артындағы экономикалық принциптер де түсінікті.
Бірақ ірі банкноталарды біртіндеп, мүлдем шығару жолы қазіргі саясаттай «шок және шошынуды» тудырмаса да, аса нәтижелі болар еді.
Бұл келесі бірнеше айдың ішінде экономикада үлкен шығындар пайда болған сайын неғұрлым айқын бола бастайды.
India with 1.5 Billion People
India's population is now a little over one billion; it will almost certainly surpass 1.5 billion by mid-century, overtaking China's population along the way before it stops growing.
But, as worrying as this might appear, this actually represents a considerable demographic slowdown: India's population more than tripled during the past sixty years. Moreover, the economy is growing much faster than before.
So will India be able to provide a comfortable home for 1.5 billion people?
I recently co-authored a study (with Tim Dyson, Leela Visaria and others) that concludes, with modest optimism, that while India can manage its population growth, it also faces a number of major difficulties.
True, poverty fell in the 1990's, while literacy rates and school attendance rose.
But they did so unevenly.
Most of India's big poor states - Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh - suffer from a combination of relatively slow economic growth and rapid demographic growth.
Only Rajasthan's economy has kept pace with the rest of the country; the other four have not benefited much from trade and regulatory liberalization.
Similarly, states where birth rates fell earlier, such as Kerala and Tamil Nadu, are already enjoying shrinking school-age populations, whereas school-age numbers in Bihar will still be rising until around 2025.
But the majority of children in Kerala and Tamil Nadu are already in school, while in Bihar they are not.
These five poor states contain 45% of India's population, and 56% of its poor.
Our projections indicate that in 20 years they will account for more than half the population and 75% of the poor.
Unless recent trends can be reversed, the growing economic and demographic gulf between India's North and East and its South and West will pose a serious political threat.
The environmental impact of 1.5 billion inhabitants forms the other major challenge.
India's past population growth has been accompanied - if much too slowly and unequally - by improving health, education, and economic welfare.
But the environment has been suffering.
Our study concludes that India can have faster economic and industrial growth, higher rates of energy consumption, and a cleaner environment.
But this is not what has happened so far.
Air, soil, and water pollution has been growing, causing hundreds of thousands of deaths every year.
The key to a clean future is clean technologies, whose costs have been falling steadily, and will continue to do so.
Sometimes these technologies pay for themselves and will be adopted. But Indian producers and transporters will not invest in them if they bear the costs, while the public at large receives the benefits.
In these cases, government will have to provide incentives, or regulate and tax.
Unfortunately, however, when the main beneficiaries are the poor, corporations are powerful, and governments are weak or corrupt, good environmental practices are far from guaranteed.
There are nonetheless some notable success stories.
Delhi's barely breathable air has become tolerable, following a big move to compressed natural gas in public transport, retirement of old vehicles, and higher emissions standards in new ones.
Delhi's cleaner air hasn't cost much, yet other cities have been slow to follow suit.
The biggest problem is water pollution, with discharges into canals and rivers growing faster than treatment capacity.
At the same time, India's growing population will make increasing demands on water supplies - mainly for agriculture, which absorbs more than 80% of all the fresh water India consumes.
If the population grows by 50%, the country will need to grow 50% more food, if it is to continue to feed itself.
But there won't be any more water.
In fact, there could well be less water than there is now, owing to pollution and climate change.
So India will need huge increases in water efficiency.
Here, too, there are examples of improvement.
But there is also far too much populist politicking, with promises of free water for farmers.
Doing what has to be done to ensure sustainable water supplies - controlling pollution, encouraging conservation, regulating and charging where necessary - is politically tough.
Eventually, however, India has no choice: there are already sporadic riots over water shortage, while water tankers move under armed guard in some cities, and virulent conflicts arise between communities over water-sharing.
In questionnaires, the poor say that an adequate water supply is their foremost need.
But one fears that something more dreadful than the daily misery must occur before India's politicians decide to act.
Our study quotes three national water surveys.
Each concludes that India can have a satisfactory water future.
As with the other challenges posed by population growth, the issue is not whether the future can be managed, but whether it will be.
India may or may not be the world's next economic wonder; but it will have to solve its age-old problems, as well as its new ones, if it is going to be a good place to live for the vast majority of its citizens.
Saatnya bagi India untuk Melebarkan Sayap
WASHINGTON, DC – Bayangkan diri anda sebagai orangtua dengan banyak anak dan keterbatasan sumber daya.
Putra pertama anda sudah cukup dewasa untuk mencari tempat tinggalnya sendiri namun ia tidak menghendakinya.
Jadi ia tetap tinggal di rumah dan menghabiskan sumber daya yang jauh lebih dibutuhkan adik-adiknya.
Apakah anda patut membiarkan putra-putri anda yang lain menderita karena kakak mereka enggan hidup mandiri?
Dinamika serupa tengah berlangsung antara Bank Dunia dan penerima bantuan International Development Association (IDA).
IDA mendukung pemerataan pembangunan di negara-negara miskin melalui pemberian pinjaman dan hibah berbunga rendah dan jangka panjang kepada pemerintah pusat.
Program ini membantu 77 negara termiskin di dunia, setengah diantaranya berlokasi di benua Afrika.
Namun IDA juga menyalurkan bantuan kepada satu negara yang tidak membutuhkannya lagi: India.
Di akhir tahun fiskal 2014, India resmi keluar dari program IDA karena tingkat kemiskinan di India tidak cukup parah sehingga bisa masuk kualifikasi negara peminjam IDA.
Bank Dunia menetapkan ambang batas penerimaan bantuan, berdasarkan pendapatan nasional bruto (GNI) per kapita.
Pada tahun fiskal 2016, ambang batasnya adalah $1,215.
GNI per kapita India setiap tahunnya sejak tahun 2010 sudah melampaui batas Bank Dunia.
Pada tahun 2014, angka tersebut adalah $1,570.
India juga dianggap layak kredit (creditworthy) sehingga mampu mengakses pasar modal internasional.
Tetapi India masih menerima bantuan transisi sebanyak $3,2 miliar selama periode tiga tahun dari program IDA, walaupun negara-negara miskin lainnya memohon tambahan dana.
Pada tahun fiskal 2015, India mendapatkan alokasi 11,5% dari $14,6 miliar yang dikucurkan IDA sementara 77 negara penerima bantuan lainnya harus membagi 88,5% dana yang ada.
Tidak ada alasan yang membenarkan perlakuan khusus yang diberikan kepada India.
Dana tersebut lebih baik disalurkan ke negara-negara Afrika Sub-Sahara yang memiliki kebutuhan lebih besar namun mengalami keterbatasan opsi pembiayaan.
Jika alokasi tahun fiskal 2015 yang diterima India dibagikan secara adil diantara negara-negara peminjam IDA lainnya, mereka akan menerima rata-rata tambahan dana lebih dari 13%.
Dana bagi lima negara peminjam IDA yang terbesar – Ethiopia, Nigeria, Kenya, Tanzania, dan Ghana – akan naik sekitar $0,5 miliar.
Jumlah ini cukup untuk membiayai pembangunan jalan sejauh 2.166 kilometer, jarak dari Afrika Selatan hingga Zambia hanya dalam kurun waktu satu tahun.
Bayangkan efek kumulatifnya jika penambahan dana dilanjutkan selama 5 atau 10 tahun ke depan.
Sebuah kajian yang dilakukan Bank Dunia pada tahun 2016 terhadap graduation policy IDA menyimpulkan bahwa dana yang diberikan kepada India diperuntukkan bagi kelancaran masa transisi dan mencegah hilangnya ketersediaan pembiayaan dalam waktu cepat.
India bisa mengatasi kehilangan yang sudah diperkirakan.
India jauh lebih makmur dibandingkan sejawatnya di kawasan Sub-Sahara dan mempunyai cadangan devisa sebanyak hampir $400 miliar.
Beberapa pihak berargumentasi karena sebagian besar penduduk miskin hidup di negara berpendapatan menengah, komunitas donor harus memikirkan ulang pengalokasian dana.
Ravi Kanbur, seorang profesor di Cornell University dan mantan chief economist Bank Dunia untuk benua Afrika, menyerukan adanya perubahan terhadap graduation policy yang saat ini diberlakukan IDA.
Beliau mengutarakan pada kondisi dimana ketimpangan di suatu negara semakin besar, penggunaan kekayaan nasional sebagai ukuran kemiskinan justru mengabaikan jutaan masyarakan miskin.
Saya sepakat.
Akan tetapi, menurut Indikator Pembangunan Dunia yang dikeluarkan Bank Dunia, tingkat kemiskinan di India, yaitu 21,9% ialah setengah dari angka kemiskinan di Afrika Sub-Sahara yang mencapai 44,4% – berarti dana bantuan lebih baik diberikan kepada negara-negara termiskin di kawasan tersebut.
Solusi bagi negara seperti India adalah menemukan cara-cara pemerataan pendapatan yang lebih baik agar pembangunan bisa dimanfaatkan warganya.
Negara-negara maju mempunyai lebih banyak pilihan untuk membantu negara miskin.
India, khususnya, mendapat akses kepada sumber-sumber dana pembangunan, termasuk International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank yang baru diluncurkan, dan New Development Bank yang dibentuk BRICS.
IDA harus diutamakan bagi negara-negara miskin dimana akses mereka kepada pasar reguler terhambat.
Hal ini bukan menyangkut India saja.
Negara-negara Afrika lainnya seperti Zambia, Nigeria, Kenya, dan Ghana diharapkan segera lulus dan harus disiapkan untuk menaati aturan-aturan yang sama ketika tiba waktunya.
Presiden Bank Dunia Jim Yong Kim menganjurkan agar negara-negara donor menambah dukungan kepada IDA ketika menghadiri pertemuan triennial replenishment IDA tahun ini, berpendapat bahwa penambahan dana “bersifat esensial bagi kita untuk meneruskan upaya pengentasan kemiskinan dan pemerataan kesejahteraan”.
Beliau menyebutkan Afrika dan Asia Selatan sebagai kedua area fokus yang penting.
Pemimpin negara-negara di kawasan Afrika Sub-Sahara harus memastikan agar pernyataan Bank Dunia diterjemahkan ke dalam aksi.
Mereka harus melobi agar negara-negara seperti India bisa segera dikeluarkan dari program bantuan dan memastikan agar Bank Dunia menjunjung tinggi misinya untuk membantu negara-negara miskin.
Membolehkan suatu negara tetap bergantung pada IDA selama bertahun-tahun, seperti India, berarti membatasi pilihan bagi negara lain yang berkebutuhan besar.
Jika Bank Dunia tidak memberikan 12 sen dari setiap 1 dolar dana IDA kepada India, sumber dana yang bisa diinvestasikan di Afrika akan melimpah – meskipun besar donasinya tetap sama.
Bantuan transisi IDA bagi India dijadwalkan akan berakhir pada tahun 2017.
Sudah saatnya bagi sang abang untuk meninggalkan rumah selamanya.
Artikel ini direvisi pada tanggal 26 Mei 2016.
Versi sebelumnya menerapkan skenario apabila alokasi total bagi India (tiga tahun) di re-alokasikan kepada negara-negara penerima bantuan IDA pada tahun fiskal 2015.
Skenario baru yang digunakan lebih konservatif dan hanya mengalokasikan ulang dana tahun fiskal India pada tahun 2015 (FY15) kepada negara-negara IDA lainnya di tahun fiskal yang sama.
Social Benefits in the Age of Uber
PARIS – When it comes to compensation, the company you work for often matters more than how good you are at what you do.
In 2013, the average employee of Goldman Sachs, the investment bank, earned $383,000 – much higher than what the best-performing employee in most firms can hope to take home.
Pay differences across companies are considerable.
Research by Jason Furman, US President Barack Obama’s top economic adviser, and Peter Orszag, Obama’s former budget director, has found that rising pay differentials are the prime cause of widening US wage inequality in recent decades. They account for a larger part of the rise in overall income inequality than wage differences within companies or capital income.
At the other end of the spectrum, many labor-force participants are on temporary contracts, work for small firms, or are self-employed.
Some combine different jobs at the same time.
If, as expected by many, the so-called sharing economy develops, their number is bound to grow.
These workers do not benefit from job security and generally earn much less.
Emerging countries offer the example of blatant inequality between employees in the formal sector – companies like Petrobras in Brazil and Infosys in India – and those who work in the informal economy.
But even in advanced economies, where social protection is broad in scope, access to benefits is far from equal.
Employees of large, profitable firms tend to enjoy better health-care coverage, more generous pensions, and easier access to training.
Moreover, some benefits – for example, parental leave – are conditional on seniority within a company.
These are disturbing facts.
Talent and effort should be rewarded, but two people of equal capabilities and dedication should not be treated differently just because one happens to be an insider, with a secure job in a big, successful company.
Such differences are questionable not only in terms of fairness; they are also economically inefficient, because they tend to limit labor mobility across firms and sectors.
Employees may think twice before leaving a company if they are set to lose valuable perks as a consequence.
This prevents potentially positive matching of the skills needed by employers and the available supply of them. It also makes hiring first-class talent excessively difficult for small companies.
Public policy should not prevent successful companies from paying more and offering better working conditions.
But it should ensure that all participants in the labor force, whatever their status, enjoy equal access to essential benefits; and it should aim at minimizing the losses that impede mobility across firms, sectors, and types of employment.
Obama’s health-care reform was an important step in this regard. But social-welfare reforms should go much further.
For fairness as well as for efficiency reasons, rights and benefits should be attached to individuals, not to companies or employment status, and should be fully portable across sectors and jobs.
To attune its social-welfare system to a changing economy and reduce inequality among individuals, France is currently considering a system of so-called Individual Activity Accounts (IAAs).
My colleague Selma Mahfouz chaired a committee that prepared a blueprint for such a system.
Put simply, every new labor-force entrant would be equipped with a lifelong individual account, thereby accumulating points in the same way airline travelers accumulate miles. They would earn them by working in both the private and public sector.
Physically strenuous jobs would yield more points than office jobs.
Pro bono community service would also generate points – perhaps more than paid jobs.
Points earned could be spent on lifelong education and professional training, which would thus become independent from employment status.
Every person could decide to draw on her IAA to prepare for, or when making, a job change.
Other financing could also be mobilized toward the same end.
For example, an employee could decide to shorten the duration of his unemployment benefits and invest the corresponding points to benefit from better education opportunities.
But financing education should not be the only purpose.
Points could also be used to help finance volunteerism or care for elderly family members.
Points earned through hard toil could be spent on retiring earlier. Many more examples of partial fungibility could be imagined.
Such a system would have three additional benefits.
First, it would help improve access to information.
Employees nowadays are often lost in the complexity of the various social benefits to which they are entitled.
The creation of IAAs and the adoption of a single unit of account would go a long way toward making things simpler, especially if all relevant individual information is available to users via a single smartphone app.
Second, IAAs would empower employees, especially the least skilled, who often perceive themselves as being in a state of subjection.
Together with information, the possibility to invest their social benefits, rather than only consuming them, would strengthen their autonomy and freedom of choice.
Finally, the same accounts could serve as vehicles for public policy.
For example, early school-leavers could be endowed with points for later use in professional training.
More broadly, instead of assisting people only when social risks materialize, public policy could support individuals throughout their working life, by adopting a more effective bespoke approach that fits peoples’ needs better than coarsely tailored schemes.
This may sound utopian; in a way, it is.
But at a time when every digital service becomes more and more personalized, why should social policy remain confined to the philosophy and solutions of the twentieth century?
Putting out Indonesia’s Fires
MANILA – Every year, forest fires ravage Indonesia, causing massive environmental, social, and economic devastation.
This year’s fires are the largest in nearly 20 years, destroying three million hectares of land and causing an estimated $14 billion in losses related to agriculture, forest degradation, health, transportation, and tourism.
Perhaps even more alarming is the climate impact.
Indonesia is already among the world’s biggest carbon emitters.
Thanks to the fires, its daily average emissions this September and October were ten times higher than normal.
On October 14 alone, emissions from the fires soared to 61 megatons – nearly 97% of the country’s total emissions for that day.
As a result, this year’s fires – coming just weeks before the current United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris, where world leaders plan to finalize a global pact limiting carbon emissions – have underscored the urgent need for Indonesia and its development partners to act quickly to address this regional and global scourge.
If we don’t, climate change will be even more difficult to combat.
The cause of Indonesia’s recurring infernos is the common practice of lighting fires to clear land for palm oil production, exacerbated by a prolonged dry spell partly attributable to El Niño.
While stricter enforcement of rules against deliberate fires in Indonesia’s 1999 Basic Forestry Law and the 2014 Law on Plantations will help, far more needs to be done.
The reason is simple: Indonesia’s fires aren’t your typical forest fires.
The ground holds peat – dense organic matter in the process of becoming coal.
When the peat ignites, the fire can creep beneath the surface and erupt somewhere else, days or weeks later.
And, like coal, peat stores massive amounts of carbon, which is released into the atmosphere when the land is burned, cleared, and drained to make way for plantations.
The scale of the fires reflects the difficulty of the enforcement challenge the authorities face.
It is much cheaper for farmers to clear land with fire than by other means.
Moreover, farmers have few alternatives to operating palm oil or timber plantations.So every dry season, more and more land is burned.
And every year, the fallout widens.
An estimated 75 million people have been exposed to the smoke this year, and 500,000 in Indonesia alone are believed to have contracted fire-related respiratory illnesses.
Five key steps – all being actively debated in Indonesia – would help prevent the fires.
For starters, the licenses awarded to develop peatlands should be revoked, and concessions should be taken away from landholders if there are fires.
Moreover, a moratorium on new forest clearing should be enforced through local communities.
Re-wetting peatlands and the restoration of degraded peat forests should be the next step, followed by the creation of early warning systems to detect and control forest fires.
Finally, with the support of the private sector, Indonesia needs to establish a community-based forest management system.
Regional cooperation also holds great promise.
Indonesia and Malaysia, which together account for 85% of the world palm oil market, have agreed to establish the Council of Palm Oil Producing Countries, which will harmonize standards and promote environmentally sustainable production practices.
To build on this, consumers and markets also need to send signals to companies that directly or indirectly support slash-and-burn farming.
The 2014 Indonesia Palm Oil Pledge – in which five major producers committed to more sustainable solutions that preclude deforestation, respect human and community rights, and deliver shareholder value – is a good model.
Small farmers need options other than slash-and-burn farming to boost their meager incomes.
There is a clear need for an integrated land-management approach involving conservation, rehabilitation, investment in sustainable livelihoods, and institutional reforms.
There is also a growing consensus on the need for broader industry standards for sustainable production and processing of agricultural commodities.
Multilateral development institutions such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) have a role to play in providing support to ensure that systems, capacity, and market-access initiatives are undertaken in ways that improve compliance.
And national and local regulatory reforms that improve land-use planning, create incentives for forest conservation, and promote the use of low-carbon land must also be supported.
Indonesia is firmly committed to clean, sustainable development.
It recently pledged to reduce its CO2 emissions by 29% through unilateral measures by 2030, and by 41% with international support.
Putting out Indonesia’s forest fires for good will be crucial to meeting these targets.
For the sake of the planet, all of us need to grab a bucket.
Indonesia’s Forgotten Genocide
CANBERRA – October marked 50 years since the Indonesian military launched one of the twentieth century’s worst mass murders.
Yet the anniversary passed almost unnoticed.
The massacre of some 500,000 members or sympathizers of the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) during 1965-1966 is the least talked-about genocide of the last century.
Lifting the veil on the bloodbath is long overdue, but those with a past to hide seem bound to resist this.
Organizers of Bali’s renowned Ubud Writers and Readers Festival have just had a foretaste of what may be a new round of active censorship, with local officials threatening to cancel the entire festival if proposed panel discussions of the massacres went ahead.
The killings started in October 1965 in the aftermath of an abortive coup allegedly planned by the PKI.
The military reacted by portraying the party and its supporters as an atheist force of evil which had to be annihilated.
The resulting carnage was deliberate, systematic, and spanned the country, with the most horrific and intense violence in Central and East Java, Bali, and northern Sumatra.
This year also marks the centenary of the Armenian genocide, about which successive Turkish governments have maintained an indefensible denial.
But at least the fate of the more than one million Turkish Armenians killed outright or death-marched into the Syrian desert in 1915 for their wartime “disloyalty” remains the subject of immense international scrutiny, research, and advocacy.
By contrast, the Indonesian genocide remains the only killing of this scale that has not been the subject of minute international attention.
Nor, apart from a largely ignored National Human Rights Commission report in 2012, has there been any significant domestic truth-finding, let alone a reconciliation process or reparations.
The subject is avoided in history books, evaded by diplomats, and forms no part of domestic political discourse.
The story begins with an abortive coup on the night of September 30, 1965, when junior military officers, claiming to be protecting President Sukarno from a right-wing clique, captured and executed the army commander and five other high-ranking generals.
The following evening, Major General – later President – Suharto led a successful counter-coup.
Suharto’s action marked the beginning of the end of the Sukarno era, and the birth of his “New Order”: the pro-Western, business-friendly regime that would govern Indonesia for the next three decades.
Suharto and his associates immediately blamed the PKI as the masterminds of the “September 30 Movement,” and spread gruesome stories about the torture and mutilation of the executed officers.
Army-led and militia-implemented mass murders soon followed.
Controversy continues to this day as to who was actually responsible for the initial coup.
Candidates include Suharto himself (he certainly had some foreknowledge of events), acting with or without United States support, and even the British Foreign Office.
The balance of opinion among international scholars is that a small group around PKI leader Aidit was involved, but not in a way that even remotely implicated the entire party, or that could even begin to justify the bloody nationwide purge which followed.
With Suharto’s accession to power, Indonesia shifted almost overnight from being a strong voice for neutrality and anti-imperialism, actively courting the attention of the Soviet Union and Communist China, to becoming a more compliant partner with the US, which now saw Indonesia as a major stabilizing force in a volatile region.
As a result, there was no appetite among the US and its allies – including my own country, and the Australian government of which I was a member – to look closely, then or since, at how Suharto’s New Order consolidated its power.
Within Indonesia itself, even with the Suharto era long gone, anti-communist sentiment remains strong, survivors remain cowed, and demands for justice and accountability remain few.
Things may, however, be starting to change, especially following the release three years ago of Joshua Oppenheimer’s extraordinary documentary film, The Act of Killing.
Oppenheimer records, in meticulous and horrifying detail, a group of former death-squad leaders re-enacting the murders they committed – not, at least initially, in any spirit of confession or remorse, but rather to portray themselves as the heroes of a necessary process of national purification.
Some viewers are not persuaded of the film’s accuracy, or are troubled by the occasionally surreal character of the film-within-a-film structure adopted by the director.
But to me its essential truth resonates profoundly: The Act of Killing is the most haunting and emotionally lacerating documentary I have ever seen.
I hope that Oppenheimer’s film and its recently released follow-up, The Look of Silence, achieve the audience and impact they deserve – and not just at the world’s film festivals, but in Indonesia itself.
The Indonesian genocide – and it deserves to be so described, even if its impulse was ideological rather than ethnic, religious, or national – is an alarming case study in the politics of mass murder.
It shows what leaders can get away with when they demonize opponents, achieving conceivably defensible ends by morally atrocious means.
That is just one reason Indonesia’s campaign of killing demands much more of the world’s attention, and censure, than it has so far received.
Pola Makan Nabati sebagai Solusi untuk Mengatasi Kelaparan
BERLIN – Masyarakat yang berada di negara-negara industri memiliki pola makan yang tidak sehat, tidak bersifat adil, dan tidak ramah lingkungan.
Sebagian besar daging yang kita konsumsi diproduksi dalam kondisi ekologi, etik, dan sosial yang patut dipertanyakan.
Dan sekarang tata cara produksi ini juga digunakan oleh negara-negara berkembang – khususnya India dan Tiongkok – dimana terjadi peningkatan konsumsi daging khususnya oleh kelas menegah yang jumlahnya kian meningkat.
Secara global, 300 juta ton daging diproduksi setiap tahunnya, dan menurut perkiraan Organisasi Pangan dan Pertanian PBB, jumlah produksi daging per tahun akan meningkat hingga mencapai 455 juta ton pada tahun 2050 jika jumlah permintaan terus meningkat sesuai dengan laju yang ada saat ini.
Daging sejumlah itu hanya bisa diproduksi dalam skala industri, dan menyebabkan dampak buruk pada aspek sosial, politik dan ekologi.   
Produksi daging menggunakan lahan pertanian yang sangat tidak efisien karena dibutuhkan lebih banyak lahan untuk menanam pakan ternak dibandingkan lahan yang dibutuhkan untuk menanam bahan pangan untuk dikonsumsi dalam pola makan nabati.
Misalnya, untuk memproduksi satu kilogram daging ayam, babi, atau sapi, masing-masing membutuhkan 1.6, tiga, dan delapan kilogram pakan ternak.
Hal ini menyebabkan peternak dan produsen pakan ternak bersaing secara sengit untuk mendapatkan lahan pertanian.   
Sementara itu, produksi kedelai – pakan ternak terpenting di dunia – meningkat dari 130 juta pada tahun 1996 menjadi 270 juta pada tahun 2015, dan 80% hasil produksi ini digunakan untuk produksi daging, khususnya di Tiongkok (70 juta ton) dan Eropa (31 juta ton).
Peningkatan produksi kedelai yang disebabkan oleh peningkatan permintaan daging menyebabkan meningkatnya harga tanah.
Oleh karena itu, di negara-negara berkembang, lahan publik diprivatisasi, hutan hujan ditebang untuk membuka lahan pertanian, dan perusahaan agrobisnis internasional mengambil alih lahan yang masih menjadi sumber penghidupan dari sepertiga penduduk dunia. 
Produksi pakan ternak, dan lahan pertanian intensif yang diperlukan untuk memproduksi hal ini tidak hanya merusak ekosistem dan mengurangi keanekaragaman hayati namun juga berkontribusi pada perubahan iklim.
Secara global, diperkirakan bahwa sistem pertanian industri berkontribusi sebesar 14% terhadap emisi gas rumah kaca secara global; hal ini mencakup emisi yang secara langsung dihasilkan oleh pembukaan lahan hutan dan jika ditambahkan dengan hal-hal yang berhubungan dengan produksi pupuk, maka jumlah emisi ini mengingkat menjadi 24%.
Selain itu, banyaknya penggunaan pupuk dan pestisida – 99% dari kedelai yang diproduksi merupakan hasil rekayasa genetik, dan secara teratur diberikan pestisida – juga mencemari sumber air tanah, menghancurkan keanekaragaman hayati, dan mengikis tanah.     
Kita tidak bisa lagi mengabaikan dampak buruk dari tata cara produksi daging.
Jika kita ingin serius untuk menangani perubahan iklim dan menjamin hak setiap manusia untuk mendapatkan nutrisi yang cukup dan keamanan pangan, kita harus menentang anggapan bahwa model pertanian industri, terlebih lagi daging, diperlukan untuk memberi makan penduduk dunia.      
Faktanya, anggapan tersebut tidak tepat.
Program Lingkungan Hidup PBB memperkirakan bahwa pada tahun 2050, lahan seluas Brazil dan India harus dialihkan fungsinya menjadi lahan pertanian jika tren pola makan seperti saat ini terus berlanjut.
Namun jika 9.6 milyar orang yang diperkirakan akan menghuni bumi pada tahun 2050 beralih ke pola makan nabati, produksi daging dalam skala industri bisa ditinggalkan dan seluruh penduduk bumi bisa mendapatkan sumber makanan tanpa perlu membuka lahan pertanian baru.  
Bagi banyak orang, kompetisi untuk mendapatkan lahan pertanian adalah masalah kelangsungan hidup.
Akses terhadap lahan, yang distribusinya jauh lebih tidak merata dibandingkan pendapatan, adalah faktor penentu apakah seseorang akan menderita kurang gizi atau tidak: 20% dari rumah tangga yang menderita kelaparan tidak mempunyai tanah, dan 50% dari orang yang menderita kelaparan adalah petani skala kecil.  
Rantai produksi sistem pertanian industri harus digantikan dengan rantai produksi lokal yang terdesentralisasi dan ramah lingkungan.
Hal ini tergantung pada pemerintah untuk mengedepankan hak-hak masyarakat terhadap makanan dan nutrisi diatas kepentingan ekonomi sektor swasta.
Tidak seharusnya hak masyarakat untuk mendapatkan penghidupan layak dan keamanan pangan dikesampingkan demi keuntungan perusahaan agrobisnis.  
Untuk mencapai tata cara pertanian yang ramah lingkungan dan berkeadilan sosial, kita bisa memanfaatkan kerangka politik yang ada, seperti Kebijakan Pertanian Bersama Uni Eropa.
Saat ini, produsen daging dalam skala besar mendapatkan banyak keuntungan dari subsidi yang diberikan Uni Eropa; tapi subsidi ini bisa dialihkan sebagai investasi untuk produksi daging yang terdesentralisasi dan produksi gandum yang ramah lingkungan. 
Dengan melakukan hal ini, kita menyadari adanya alternatif lain yang bisa dilakukan untuk menggantikan pertanian industrial.
Misalnya, “agroekologi” – sebuah sistem yang didasari oleh kearifan lokal yang diturunkan dari generasi ke generasi – sangat mudah untuk dilakukan di berbagai kondisi geografis.
Faktanya, pada tahun 2006, Jules Pretty dari Universitas Essex menemukan bahwa tata cara produksi ini bisa meningkatkan hasil panen sebesar 79%.   
Namun untuk melakukan perubahan ini, pemerintah harus memastikan bahwa semua orang mempunyai akses terhadap lahan dan air bersih untuk dikonsumsi, dan pemerintah harus menciptakan kerangka politik untuk meningkatkan tata cara pertanian yang ramah lingkungan dan berdampak baik pada aspek sosial – yang, secara definisi, tidak mencakup pertanian industrial.  
Tantangan untuk menyediakan makanan bagi semua orang harus dilihat sebagai sesuatu yang bertentangan atau tidak termasuk upaya untuk mencapai keadilan sosial atau pelestarian alam.
Kemiskinan, malnutrisi, dan kelaparan adalah dampak politik, bukan dampak kekurangan pangan.
Industrialization’s Second Golden Age
WASHINGTON, DC – “The golden age of finance,” the economist Barry Eichengreen has said, “has now ended.”
If that is true – and let us hope that it is – what follows will most likely be a new golden age of industrialization.
Historically, except for a few oil-exporting economies, no country has ever become rich without industrializing.
Thus, all eyes nowadays should be on our economies’ real sectors.
Confronted by the global financial crisis that looms over Europe, political leaders around the world are waking up to a stark new reality: unless the developed countries stop relying excessively on financial deal-making and start to rebuild from the ground up, they will lose their current standard of living.
The global community must look beyond the eurozone and sovereign-debt crises and pay attention to the opportunity of structural transformation in the developing world’s real sectors.
By structural transformation, I mean the process by which countries climb the industrial ladder – their workforces move into higher value-added manufacturing sectors as their sources of production advance.
Throughout 2011, I was struck by the potential for less-developed countries – including in Sub-Saharan Africa – to emulate successful industrializing East Asian countries such as Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, China, and Vietnam.
Indeed, by focusing development efforts on the comparative advantages of poorer countries, we can rebuild confidence in the business sector and reinvigorate investment in job creation – not only in developing countries, but also in advanced economies.
The current global financial crisis, which is rooted in the advanced countries’ structural problems, requires investment and innovation policies, in addition to monetary or fiscal measures.
In advanced countries, research and development costs are quite high, because their technologies and industries are already in the vanguard.
By contrast, developing countries, including those in Sub-Saharan Africa, have the potential to expand their industrial sectors rapidly, because they can borrow technology from the advanced countries with little risk and at low cost.
So developing countries’ backwardness in terms of technology and industry means that they can grow for decades at an annual rate several times that of high-income countries before they close the income gap.
This May, in Maputo, Mozambique, I delivered the United Nations University’s annual WIDER lecture on development.
I explained how the winning formula for developing countries is to build up the same tradable industries that have been growing for decades in wealthier countries that have endowment structures similar to their own.
The pattern of flying geese is a useful metaphor to explain this idea.
Beginning in the eighteenth century, the less-developed West European and East Asian countries followed their more successful neighbors: emulating a flying-geese pattern, they benefited from the leaders’ tailwind as they first industrialized and then became advanced countries themselves.
Large, dynamic emerging-market economies (particularly Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) that have industrialized quickly offer unprecedented opportunities for other developing economies to emulate their success – and thus to jumpstart their own industrialization processes.
China – once a “follower goose” – is on the verge of becoming a leader, with the potential to relocate 85 million low-skilled manufacturing jobs in the coming decade.
The scale of this shift is huge when compared with the 9.7 million jobs that Japan created in the modern sector in the 1960’s, or South Korea’s 2.3 million modern jobs in the 1980’s.
And a similar trend will arise in other emerging-market economies.
In fact, it is already happening: China’s outward foreign direct investment reached $68 billion in 2010, exceeding that of Japan and the United Kingdom.
India, Brazil, Russia, and South Korea are not far behind.
Moreover, India’s outward FDI is heavily concentrated in the manufacturing sector, accounting for 42.7% of the total in 1999-2008.
For developing countries to benefit fully from industrial upgrading in China and other large emerging-market economies, their governments must identify tradable industries that are consistent with their latent comparative advantage.
They also must help private firms to resolve information, coordination, and externality issues in the process of industrial upgrading.
Rapid industrialization in developing countries will require large imports of capital equipment from advanced countries.
Given that developing countries have accounted for as much as two-thirds of global growth in GDP and imports over the past five years, focusing on how to foster development in their industrial sectors could benefit advanced countries by helping to boost demand, thereby pulling the world out of its economic malaise.
In short, the imminent golden age of industrialization in developing countries will help to create jobs and spur recovery in advanced countries.
The benefits of this new era will be two-pronged: it will contribute to the achievement of the UN Millennium Development Goals – the plan to cut world poverty in half by 2015 – and also will help to drive a global recovery.
Then, we may see a golden age for all.
Industrial Policy Comes Out of the Cold
WASHINGTON, DC – One of the best-kept economic secrets was strongly reconfirmed in 2010: most countries, intentionally or not, pursue an industrial policy in one form or other.
This is true not only of China, Singapore, France, and Brazil – countries usually associated with such policies – but also for the United Kingdom, Germany, Chile, and the United States, whose industrial policies are often less explicit.
Given that industrial policy broadly refers to any government decision, regulation, or law that encourages ongoing activity or investment in an industry, this should come as no surprise.
After all, economic development and sustained growth are the result of continual industrial and technological change, a process that requires collaboration between the public and private sectors.
Historical evidence shows that in countries that successfully transformed from an agrarian to a modern economy – including those in Western Europe, North America, and, more recently, in East Asia – governments coordinated key investments by private firms that helped to launch new industries, and often provided incentives to pioneering firms.
Even before the recent global financial crisis and subsequent recession, governments around the world provided support to the private sector through direct subsidies, tax credits, or loans from development banks in order to bolster growth and support job creation.
Policy discussions at many high-level summits sought to strengthen other features of industrial policy, including public financing of airports, highways, ports, electricity grids, telecommunications, and other infrastructure, improvements in institutional effectiveness, an emphasis on education and skills, and a clearer legal framework.
The global crisis has led to a rethinking of governments’ economic role.
The challenge for industrial policy is greater, because it should assist the design of efficient, government-sponsored programs in which the public and private sectors coordinate their efforts to develop new technologies and industries.
But history also tells us that while governments in almost all developing countries have attempted to play that facilitating role at some point, most have failed.
The economic history of the former Soviet Union, Latin America, Africa, and Asia has been marked by inefficient public investment and misguided government interventions that have resulted in many “white elephants.”
These pervasive failures appear to be due mostly to governments’ inability to align their efforts with their country’s resource base and level of development.
Indeed, governments’ propensity to target overly ambitious industries that were misaligned with available resources and skills helps to explain why their attempts to “pick winners” often resulted in “picking losers.”
By contrast, governments in many successful developing countries have focused on strengthening industries that have done well in countries with comparable factor endowments.
Thus, the lesson from economic history and development is straightforward: government support aimed at upgrading and diversifying industry must be anchored in the requisite endowments.
That way, once constraints on new industries are removed, private firms in those industries quickly become competitive domestically and internationally.
The question then becomes how to identify competitive industries and how to formulate and implement policies to facilitate their development.
In developed countries, most industries are advanced, which suggests that upgrading requires innovation.
Support for basic research, and patents to protect successful innovation, may help.
For developing countries, Célestin Monga and I have recently developed an approach – called the growth identification and facilitation framework – that can help developing-country governments increase the probability of success in supporting new industries.
This framework suggests that policymakers identify tradable industriesthat have performed well ingrowing countrieswith similar resources and skills, and with a per capita income about double their own.
If domesticprivate firms in these sectors are already present, policymakers should identify and remove constraints on those firms’ technological upgrading or on entry by other firms.
In industries where no domestic firms are present, policymakers should aim to attract foreign direct investment from the countries being emulated or organize programs for incubating new firms.
The government should also pay attention to the development by private enterprises of new and competitive products, and support the scaling up of successful private-sector innovations in new industries.
In countries with a poor business environment, special economic zones or industrial parks can facilitate firm entry, foreign direct investment, and the formation of industrial clusters.
Finally, the government might help pioneering firms in the new industries by offering tax incentives for a limited period, co-financing investments, or providing access to land or foreign exchange.
Our approach provides policymakers in developing countries with a framework to tackle the daunting coordination challenges inherent in the creation of new, competitive industries. It also has the potential to nurture a business environment conducive to private-sector growth, job creation, and poverty reduction.
As economies around the world struggle to maintain or restore growth in 2011, industrial policy is likely to be under a brighter spotlight than ever before.
Given the right framework, there is no reason for it to remain in the shadows.
Inequality and Discontent
In the last two decades, the world as a whole has gotten richer, but, while some national economies have advanced sharply, others have fallen farther behind.
The increase in aggregate wealth has not led to the abolition, or even reduction, of poverty.
Much the same is true within countries.
Almost everywhere, globalization has produced both a new class of multi-millionaires and an underclass comprising people who are not just poor in the statistical sense of earning less than half the national average, but who are excluded from opportunities that are supposed to be open to all.
Globalization’s dynamism has benefited many, but it has also increased inequality.
Is that necessarily a bad thing?
There are many who think so.
In fact, entire countries have a built-in egalitarian streak.
They dislike the business leaders who take home huge sums even when they fail, and they hate to see poor and excluded people in their midst.
But, while it is comfortable to live in the social-democratic world of Scandinavia, Germany, and other European countries, many of them have purchased their equality on credit from future generations.
Moreover, an egalitarian climate does not promote innovation and a sense of dynamic development.
Creative individuals tend to leave societies in which there is strong pressure not to be different.
Inequality is not merely compatible with freedom, but is often a result of and stimulus for freedom.
Is that the choice we have to make then: freedom or equality?
Things are not quite so simple.
A free society recognizes two limits to economic and general inequality.
Both raise quite difficult practical questions, though they are clear in principle.
Inequality is incompatible with freedom if it limits individuals’ chances of participation in the political community, in the market, and in civil society.
At the lower end of the social scale, this raises the old and vexing question of equality of opportunity.
What is clear is that everyone must have access to elections and political parties, to education and the labor market, and to the associations of civil society.
In short, citizenship in the full sense of the word requires basic rights and the ability to enforce them.
It also requires a basic economic status, including an income guarantee, which can be provided in a variety of ways.
One difficult question is where, exactly, to draw the line that defines the basic status to which all citizens are entitled.
In most countries, it should probably be higher than it is now.
Another difficult question is how the basic status is to be guaranteed.
The debate about individual income supplements versus general public services has become lively everywhere.
It may well be resolved with different answers that accord with different countries’ traditions, although tax credits and similar additions to people’s incomes are more compatible with free societies.
At the upper end of the social and economic scale, a different issue arises.
Many people object to business managers who take away in pay, bonuses, and stock options hundreds of millions of dollars from their companies.
Indeed, there is a legitimate question whether the behavior of today’s capitalists promotes the general acceptance of capitalism.
But individual wealth becomes a problem only if and when it can be used to restrict others’ chances of participation.
When wealth turns into unchecked power, something must be done to restrict it.
What has come to be called money laundering, that is, the attempt to turn illicit gains into legitimate riches, provides one example of the need for action.
There are others, including the question of inheritance taxes, which have long been regarded as a necessary component of a free society.
Nevertheless, while a free society recognizes limits to inequality, it also accepts that inequality exists, for it provides hope for many by showing what one might achieve with ability and luck – or perhaps even luck alone.
Inequality adds color and variety to societies; it is one of the marks of lively, flexible, and innovative countries.
It is thus not bad in itself, even if its excesses must be capped in the name of citizenship for all.
Social exclusion and personalized power through wealth are always unacceptable.
But if we want freedom, then social and economic inequalities are a legitimate, and necessary, price to pay.
Inequality on the March
How much should we worry about inequality?
Answering that question requires that we first answer another question: “Compared to what?”
What is the alternative against which to judge the degree of inequality that we see?
Florida is a much more materially unequal society than Cuba.
But the right way to look at the situation – if Florida and Cuba are our alternatives – is not to say that Florida has too much inequality, but that Cuba has much too much poverty.
On the global level, it is difficult to argue that inequality is one of the world’s major political-economic problems.
It is hard, at least for me, to envision alternative political arrangements or economic policies over the past fifty years that would have transferred any significant portion of the wealth of today’s rich nations to today’s poor nations.
I can easily envision alternatives, such as Communist victories in post-World War II elections in Italy and France that would have impoverished nations now in the rich North.
I can also envision alternatives that would have enriched poor nations: Deng Xiaoping becoming China’s leader in 1956 rather than 1976 would have done the job there.
But alternatives that would have made the South richer at the price of reducing the wealth of the North would require a wholesale revolution in human psychology.
Nor should we worry a great deal that some people are richer than others.
Some people work harder, apply their intelligence more skillfully, or simply have been lucky enough to be in the right place at the right time.
But I don’t see what alternative political-economic arrangements could make individuals’ relative wealth closely correspond to their relative moral or other merit.
The problems that can be addressed are those of poverty and social insurance—of providing a safety net—not of inequality.
But on the level of individual societies, I believe that inequality does loom as a serious political-economic problem.
In the United States, the average earnings premium received by those with four-year college degrees over those with no college has gone from 30% to 90% over the past three decades, as the economy’s skill requirements have outstripped the educational system’s ability to meet them.
Because the required skills acquired through formal education have become relatively scarcer, the education premium has risen, underpinning a more uneven distribution of income and wealth.
Ceci Rouse and Orley Ashenfelter of Princeton University report that they find no signs that those who receive little education do so because education does not pay off for them: if anything, the returns to an extra year of schooling appear greater for those who get little education than for those who get a lot.
A greater effort to raise the average level of education in America would have made the country richer and produced a more even distribution of income and wealth by making educated workers more abundant and less-skilled workers harder to find – and thus worth more on the market.
Likewise, America’s corporate CEO’s and their near-peers earn ten times more today than they did a generation ago.
This is not because a CEO’s work effort and negotiation and management skills are ten times more valuable nowadays, but because other corporate stakeholders have become less able to constrain top managers and financiers from capturing more of the value-added.
Similar patterns are found elsewhere.
Within each country, the increase in inequality that we have seen in the past generation is predominantly a result of failures of social investment and changes in regulations and expectations, and has not been accompanied by any acceleration in the overall rate of economic growth.
For the most part, it looks like these changes in economy and society have not resulted in more wealth, but only in an upward redistribution of wealth—a successful right-wing class war.
This kind of inequality should be a source of concern.
Bill Gates, Paul Allen, Steve Ballmer, and the other millionaires and billionaires of Microsoft are brilliant, hardworking, entrepreneurial, and justly wealthy.
But only the first 5% of their wealth can be justified as an economic incentive to encourage entrepreneurship and enterprise.
The next 95% would create much more happiness and opportunity if it was divided evenly among US citizens or others than if they were to consume any portion of it.
An unequal society cannot help but be an unjust society.
The most important item that parents in any society try to buy is a head start for their children.
And the wealthier they are, the bigger the head start.
Societies that promise equality of opportunity thus cannot afford to allow inequality of outcomes to become too great.
The Inequality Puzzle
NEW YORK – Over the past decade, income inequality has come to be ranked alongside terrorism, climate change, pandemics, and economic stagnation as one of the most urgent issues on the international policy agenda.
And yet, despite all the attention, few potentially effective solutions have been proposed.
Identifying the best policies for reducing inequality remains a puzzle.
To understand why the problem confounds policymakers, it is helpful to compare the world’s two largest economies.
The United States is a liberal democracy with a market-based economy, in which the factors of production are privately owned.
China, by contrast, is governed by a political class that holds democracy in contempt.
Its economy – despite decades of pro-market reforms – continues to be defined by heavy state intervention.
But despite their radically different political and economic systems, the two countries have roughly the same level of income inequality.
Each country’s Gini coefficient – the most commonly used measure of income equality – is roughly 0.47.
In one important way, however, their situations are very different.
In the US, inequality is rapidly worsening.
In 1978, the top 1% of the US population was ten times richer than the rest of the country.
Today, the average income of the top 1% is roughly 30 times that of the average person in the remaining 99%.
During the same period, inequality in China has been declining.
This poses a challenge for policymakers.
Free market capitalism has proved itself to be the best system for driving income growth and creating a large economic surplus.
And yet, when it comes to the distribution of income, it performs far less well.
Most democratic societies have attempted to address the problem through left-leaning redistributive policies or right-leaning supply-side approaches.
But neither seems to be particularly effective.
In the US, income inequality has steadily widened under both Democratic and Republican administrations.
China’s success in this arena points to the possible advantages of its heavy-handed system – a conclusion that makes many Western policymakers uncomfortable.
One aspect of the discussion, however, need not be so controversial.
Adding to the challenges of the policy debate are assertions that inequality is unimportant.
If a rising tide is lifting all boats, the thinking goes, it doesn’t matter that some may be rising more slowly than others.
Those who argue for de-emphasizing income inequality maintain that public policy should seek to ensure that all citizens enjoy basic living standards – nutritious food, adequate shelter, quality health care, and modern infrastructure – rather than aiming to narrow the gap between rich and poor.
Indeed, some contend that income inequality drives economic growth and that redistributive transfers weaken the incentive to work, in turn depressing productivity, reducing investment, and ultimately harming the wider community.
But societies do not flourish on economic growth alone.
They suffer when the poor are unable to see a path toward betterment.
Social mobility in the US (and elsewhere) has been declining, undermining faith in the “American Dream” (which includes the belief that hard work will make one better off than one’s parents).
Over the past 30 years, the probability that an American born into the bottom quartile of the income distribution will end his life in the top quartile has more than halved.
To be sure, much progress has been made.
Over the past 50 years, as countries such as China and India posted double-digit economic growth, the global Gini coefficient dropped from 0.65 to 0.55.
But further headway is unlikely – at least for the foreseeable future.
Economic growth in most emerging economies has slowed below 7%, the threshold needed to double per capita income in a single generation.
In many countries, the rate has fallen below the point at which it is likely to make a significant dent in poverty.
This bleak economic outlook has serious consequences.
Widening inequality provides fodder for political unrest, as citizens watch their prospects decline.
Reports that just 158 wealthy donors provided half of all campaign contributions in the first phase of the 2016 US presidential election cycle highlight the worry that income inequality can lead to political inequality.
Globally, the slowdown in economic convergence has similar implications, as richer countries maintain their outsize influence around the world – leading to disaffection and radicalization among the poor.
As difficult a puzzle as income inequality may seem today, failing to solve it could lead to far more severe challenges.
In Europe We Distrust
MADRID – For decades, critics of the European Union have spoken about a democratic deficit.
I never accepted that reproach of the EU and its institutions, but I do see a new and dangerous deficit within the Union – a trust deficit, both among governments, and among the citizens of various member countries.&#160;Indeed, if today’s euro banknotes included a motto, as dollars do, it could well be, “In Europe We Distrust.”
This lack of trust has brought the eurozone to the cusp of implosion, and is calling into question the very future of European unity.
The arc of EU history seems to be bending to catastrophe – the sort of periodic European disaster that integration was intended to prevent.
Grandiloquent as it might sound, the disintegration of the euro and the disarray that would engulf the European project, not to speak of the global repercussions, would unleash comparable devastation.
But few official pronouncements, let alone policies, are addressing Europe’s deficit of trust and credibility.
The current crisis has exposed the original lacunae and widening cracks in the compact between Europe’s citizens and EU institutions, between Europe’s north and south, and between its peoples and its elites.
Indeed, a dangerous emotional discourse has emerged, reflecting – and feeding – the worst stereotypes of the “lazy South” and the “despotic North.”
It is indicative that the latest Pew Research Survey in late May reveals unanimity about who the least hardworking Europeans are: southerners, especially Greeks.
Likewise, polls and elections signal the ascent of populists across Europe, while financial markets’ vulture-like behavior stems from the cynical calculation that the EU lacks the wherewithal to restore its credibility.
That, after all, is the point of Europe’s straightjacket of austerity, which hampers its growth prospects, and thus makes little sense in economic terms.
The ultimate aim of austerity is precisely the restoration of trust – among northern Europeans that the money transferred to troubled economies will not be squandered, and among the peoples affected by painful spending cuts that their efforts are recognized and supported.
Speaking from the heartland of the troubled South, I can attest to the fact that the need for austerity has been the leitmotif of Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy’s government, a course that gained explicit popular support in the recent elections.
Reforming Spains’s cajas (savings banks), labor market, welfare provisions, and how its autonomous regions function top the national agenda (though unfortunately only at the insistence of the European Commission and Germany).
But restoring trust and credibility requires more than southern discipline.
Northern Europe must hold up its side of the bargain.
Germany, in particular, must acknowledge that, far from being an innocent victim, its economy is the eurozone’s biggest beneficiary – and has been since the euro’s inception.
That, together with the counterfactual – the economic calamity that would befall Germany following a collapse of the euro – implies a unique obligation to maintain it.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has been a favorite target of opponents of austerity for some time now, and it is understandable that, after months of being a bystander to the EU’s painful inability to govern, Germany has reluctantly – indeed, insufficiently – taken charge.
Looking ahead, as the threat of disintegration looms larger, the need for German leadership will be even greater.
But, once the crisis has passed, EU institutional reform will be a critical element in restoring trust.
The EU’s supposed democratic deficit is a corollary of the “technocratic imperative” that has emerged as a favorite scapegoat in the ongoing European drama.
According to this view, European integration was flawed from the outset, more than six decades ago, because it was conceived and developed as an elite project.
But, for as long as the European project delivered prosperity, no one bothered to question its rationale.
Today, however, the EU is the last point of reference as far as prosperity is concerned.
According to the Pew survey, EU favorability is down almost everywhere since 2007, having dropped 20 points in the Czech Republic and Spain, 19 points in Italy, and 14 points in Poland.
If EU institutions are to regain trust and relevance, they need to articulate concrete policies and deliver on issues that bear directly on citizens’ interests – youth unemployment, urban planning, health care, bio-tech research, energy conservation, transport, and aging.
All of these issues were an integral part of the EU’s ambitious Lisbon Strategy (which in 2000 promised to make Europe the world’s most competitive economy by 2010), and all were quickly hijacked by national political agendas.
That cannot be allowed to happen again.
In fact, there is nothing inevitable about the euro's failure.
The dismal image that Europe projects to the world nowadays does no justice to reality.
Europe has the world’s healthiest and most educated population, its largest economy, and huge stores of soft power, owing also to its commitment to human rights and democratic values.
And yet Europe is facing a calamity.
Discipline and morality may well be key to reinforcing trust and credibility to Europe’s social fabric – a point that northern Europeans never tire of making.
But, unless all Europeans accept responsibility for saving the euro – and, with it, the EU – everything else is shallow rhetoric.
The Inexorable Logic of the Sharing Economy
MILAN – When Amazon was founded in 1994, and eBay the following year, they harnessed the connectivity of the Internet to create new, more efficient markets.
In the beginning, that meant new ways of buying and selling books and collectibles; but now e-commerce is everywhere, offering customers new goods and used goods – and becoming a global force in logistics and retail.
Likewise, while today’s sharing-economy companies may be just out of their infancy, their services will one day be ubiquitous.
By now, most people have heard of Airbnb, the online apartment-rental service.
The company has just 600 employees but a million properties listed for rent, making it larger than the world’s biggest hotel chains.
Of course, what Airbnb offers is different from what hotels provide; but if Airbnb offered options for, say, maid service or food, they could become closer competitors than one might initially imagine.
The insight (obvious in retrospect) underlying Airbnb’s model – and the burgeoning sharing economy in general – is that the world is replete with under-utilized assets and resources.
How much time do we spend actually using the things – whether cars, bicycles, apartments, vacation homes, tools, or yachts – that we own?
What value do office buildings or classrooms generate at night?
Answers vary by asset, individual, household, or organization, but the utilization numbers tend to be astonishingly low.
One recent answer for cars was 8%, and even that may seem high to someone not burdened by long commutes.
But those numbers are changing, as the Internet enables creative new business models that increase not only a market’s efficiency but also the utilization of our various assets.
Hundreds of experiments are being conducted. Clearly, not all of them will experience the astonishing growth of Airbnb and Uber.
Some, like Rent the Runway for designer clothes and accessories, may find profitable niches; others will simply fail.
The digital platforms that act as the basis of all this e-commerce need to meet two related challenges.
The first is to produce a network effect, so that buyers and sellers find one another often enough and rapidly enough to make a business sustainable.
Second, the platform must create trust – in the product or the service – on both sides of the transaction.
Trust is crucial to the network effect; hence the need for two-way evaluation systems that encourage buyers and sellers to be repeat users of the relevant platform.
Small players can then act in large markets, because – over time – they become known quantities.
The power of these platforms derives from overcoming informational asymmetries, by dramatically increasing the signal density of the market.
Indeed, in order to encourage infrequent e-commerce users, innovators and investors are exploring ways to combine the evaluation databases of separate, even rival, platforms.
Whatever the legal and technical issues that must be overcome, down the road we can surely imagine the kind of data consolidation already practiced internally by retail giants like Amazon or Alibaba.
There can, of course, be other incentives to support “good” behavior, such as fines and deposits (for bicycles borrowed for too long or not returned, for example).
But punitive measures can easily lead to disputes and inefficiency. By contrast, refining evaluation systems holds far more promise.
The urge to exploit under-utilized resources should not be confined to material assets.
The McKinsey Global Institute has recently studied internet-based approaches to the labor market and the challenge of matching demand for talent and skills with supply.
Some sharing models – perhaps most – rely on both labor and other assets: for example, a person and his or her car, computer, sewing machine, or kitchen (for home-delivered meals).
This throwback to the cottage industries that preceded modern production is possible today because the Internet is lowering the costs of dispersion that once compelled the concentration of work in factories and offices.
Perhaps inevitably, regulatory issues arise, as Uber is now discovering from California to Europe.
Taxis and limousines are to some extent protected from competition because they need licenses to operate; they are also regulated for customer safety.
But then Uber invades their market with a differentiated product, subject largely to its own regulations for vehicles and drivers.
In the process, it threatens to lower the value of licenses just as surely as any official decision to issue new licenses would.
No wonder the taxi drivers of Paris and other French cities – hitherto protected from competition – have protested so vehemently (and, on occasion, violently).
An intriguing question is how far the financial sector will embrace the sharing economy.
Peer-to-peer lending and crowdfunding already represent new ways of matching borrowers with investors.