There may even be considerable international tolerance for some carefully defined and limited action in Syria in the event of an obvious imminent humanitarian threat.
If the campaign against the Islamic State is defined and conducted with humanitarian protection as its primary and overwhelming objective, it should succeed not only in stopping further atrocities, but also in making large inroads into curbing the wider terrorist threat at its source.
If the West strays from that primary goal, the enterprise is likely to end in tears, like so many others in the Middle East.
The Right Time to Reform Fuel Pricing
CAMBRIDGE – World oil prices, which have been highly volatile during the last decade, have fallen more than 50% over the past year.
The economic effects have been negative overall for oil-exporting countries, and positive for oil-importing countries.
But what about effects that are not directly economic?
If we care about environmental and other externalities, should we want oil prices to go up, because that will discourage oil consumption, or down because that will discourage oil production?
The answer is that countries should seek to do both: Lower the price paid to oil producers and raise the price paid by oil consumers, by cutting subsidies for oil and refined products or raising taxes on them.
Many emerging-market countries have taken advantage of falling oil prices to implement such reforms.
The United States, which is now surprisingly close to energy self-sufficiency, so that the macroeconomic effects roughly balance, should follow suit.
Consider this: America’s roads and bridges are crumbling, and the national transportation infrastructure requires investment and maintenance.
And yet the US Congress shamefully continues to evade its responsibility to fund the Federal Highway Trust Fund and put it on a sound long-term basis, owing to disagreement over how to pay for it.
The obvious solution, which economists have long advocated, is an increase in America’s gasoline taxes.
The federal gas tax has been stuck at 18.4 cents a gallon since 1993, the lowest among advanced countries.
And yet, on July 30, Congress adopted only a three-month stopgap measure, kicking the gas can down the road for the 35th time since 2009.
Fossil-fuel pricing is a striking exception to the general rule that if the government has only one policy instrument, it can achieve only one policy objective.
For starters, the money saved from a reduction in subsidies or an increase in taxes in the oil sector could be used either to reduce budget deficits or to fund desirable spending (such as US highway construction and maintenance).
At the same time, lower oil consumption would reduce traffic congestion and accidents, limit local air pollution and its adverse health effects, and lower greenhouse-gas emissions, which lead to global climate change.
Fuel taxes are a more efficient way to achieve these environmental goals than most of the alternatives.
There is also a national-security rationale.
If the retail price of fuel is low, domestic consumption will be high.
High oil consumption leaves a country vulnerable to oil-market disruptions arising, for example, from instability in the Middle East.
If gas taxes are high and consumption is low, as in Europe, fluctuations in the world price of oil have a smaller effect domestically.
Subsidies to US oil producers have often been sold on national-security grounds; in fact, a policy to “drain America first” reduces self-sufficiency in the longer run.
Finally, although fuel subsidies are often misleadingly sold as a way to improve income distribution, the reality is more nearly the opposite.
Worldwide, fossil-fuel subsidies are regressive: far less than 20% of the payments benefit the poorest 20% of the population.
Poor people are not the ones who do most of the driving; rather, they tend to use public transportation (or walk).
The conventional wisdom is that it is politically impossible in the US to increase the gas tax.
But other countries have political constraints, too.
Indeed, some developing-country governments have faced civil unrest, even coups, over fuel taxes or subsidies.
Yet Egypt, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, and the United Arab Emirates have all reduced or abolished various fuel subsidies in the last year.
Besides raising taxes on fuel consumption, the US should also stop some of its subsidies for oil production.
Oil companies can immediately deduct a high percentage of their drilling costs from their tax liability, which other industries cannot do with their investments.
Likewise, the oil industry has often been able to drill on federal land and offshore without paying the full market rate for the leases.
Most politicians know that sound economics would call for these benefits to be eliminated; but those who complain the loudest that the government must not pick corporate winners and losers seem to be the least able to summon the political will to act.
A recent study by the International Monetary Fund estimated that global energy subsidies are running at more than $5 trillion per year, while fossil-fuel subsidies in the US have been conservatively valued at $37 billion per year (not including the cost of environmental externalities).
As leaders in emerging-market countries have recognized, falling oil prices represent the best opportunity to implement reform.
Governments that act now can reduce energy subsidies or increase taxes while sparing consumers an increase in the retail price from one year to the next.
For the US and other advanced countries, it is also a good time for reform from a macroeconomic standpoint.
In the past, countries had to worry that a rising fuel tax could become built into uncomfortably high inflation rates.
Currently, however, central bankers are not worried about inflation, except in the sense that they want it to be a little higher.
The US Congress will have to come back to highway funding in September.
If other countries have found that what was politically impossible has suddenly turned out to be possible, why not the US?
Promises to Keep in 2016
DAVOS – We live in extraordinary times.
Each day seems to bring fresh headlines about an unfolding crisis – whether it is migration, economic volatility, security, or climate change.
One factor common to all these complex and unprecedented challenges is poverty; so eliminating it will make overcoming them significantly easier.
There is good reason for optimism about progress on reducing inequity.
Since the turn of the century, remarkable strides have been taken toward a world in which every person has the chance to lead a healthy, productive life.
Maternal deaths have almost halved; child mortality and malaria deaths have halved; extreme poverty has more than halved.
And last year, the world signed up to finish the job.
The centerpiece of the Global Goals to which the United Nations’ 193 countries agreed in September is to end poverty in all its forms everywhere by 2030.
We are confident that this is not only possible, but that we will see major breakthroughs along the way, which will provide unprecedented opportunities to people in poor countries.
Indeed, we think their lives will improve faster in the next 15 years than at any other time in history – and that their lives will improve more than anyone else’s.
But while progress is possible, it is not inevitable.
Success will require political will, global cooperation, and human ingenuity – a message we are taking into our various meetings and engagements at the World Economic Forum in Davos this week.
For our part, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will focus on the areas of greatest need and take risks that others can’t or won’t.
This year, we are concentrating our efforts in three broad areas.
First, we will continue to support the institutions that helped get us to where we are now.
Since 2002, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria has unlocked an unprecedented wealth of human and financial resources to combat infectious diseases that disproportionately affect the poorest.
By providing medicines, training doctors and nurses, and building stronger health-care systems, the Global Fund has so far helped save 17 million lives.
That is some achievement.
And the Fund’s pledge conference later this year will be another opportunity to help build a better world.
We need to make the most of it – not only to help save up to eight million more lives, but also to support health systems in low-income countries and thereby reduce the risk of future health crises.
Similarly, since the start of the decade, nearly four million more people are alive today because they were immunized against infectious diseases, thanks in large part to the work of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance.
In the next five years, Gavi and its partners are positioned to immunize another 300 million people, helping millions more children and young people survive and thrive – and thereby boosting developing-country economies.
Second, women and girls will be at the heart of our endeavors.
By any measure, the world is a better place for women and girls than ever before.
But it’s still not nearly good enough.
They need better access to health care, especially family-planning services; expanded economic opportunities; and more decision-making power over their own lives (which in turn requires greater social participation and public leadership).
Empowering women and girls to transform their lives is one of the smartest investments we can make.
Improving their health and wellbeing, ensuring they get a good education, and unleashing their economic potential are fundamental to building more prosperous communities and countries.
But we need to improve our understanding of how best to empower women to succeed.
And in order to overcome centuries of gender inequity, we need more momentum behind this agenda.
The Women Deliver conference in May is the next global opportunity to push for more action and for donors to demonstrate their commitment.
Third, we will invest in innovation.
Scientific and technological advances – from new vaccines and hardier crops to much cheaper smartphones and tablets – are among the greatest drivers of poverty reduction.
In just the last few weeks, the world has shown that it is prepared to spend more to find new ways to provide reliable, affordable, clean energy sources.
This is one of the most important ways to help poor people cope with climate change.
Meanwhile, innovations in health care have already brought the world close to wiping out polio, and we expect to see dramatic results from a new triple drug therapy that could eradicate elephantiasis, which affects 120 million people.
But the hard truth is that current funding for research and development to address the health needs of the world’s poorest people is insufficient.
And the tools and technologies we have now aren’t enough to get us to where we need to be.
If we want to achieve the targets established by the Global Goals for maternal health, child health, and infectious disease, we will have to double R&D funding by 2020.
That is why we must ensure that R&D is on the agenda at the G7 summit in Japan in May, with a focus on developing and deploying products that both save lives and dramatically improve the economic prospects of the poorest.
Sustained support for institutions like the Global Fund and Gavi, for the empowerment of women and girls, and for innovation is crucial to accelerating progress for the world’s poorest people.
But much more can and should be done.
The world must unite behind all efforts to eradicate poverty as a vital first step toward overcoming the many other challenges – from migration to terrorism – that we face today.
The daily headlines all too often reflect the gap between today’s world and a world without poverty.
But what the headlines don’t reveal is all the ways life is already getting better for those in greatest need.
If we keep our promises to them, it will be front-page news.
LGBT at Work
DAVOS – When Apple CEO Tim Cook announced last year that he is gay, I was inundated by emails and telephone messages from executives around the world.
As an “out” executive at Ernst &amp; Young (EY), everyone seemed to want to know what I thought this meant for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) inclusion on a global scale.
Apple, after all, resides in fifth place on the Fortune 500 list of the world’s largest companies.
Was this the end of the “lavender ceiling”?
In his Bloomberg Businessweek article, Cook describes how being gay has affected him: “I’m proud to be gay, and I consider being gay among the greatest gifts God has given me.
Being gay has given me a deeper understanding of what it means to be in the minority and provided a window into the challenges that people in other minority groups deal with every day.”
My own experience of being “different” is multifaceted.
Like Cook, being in the minority informed my propensity to be an inclusive leader.
Unlike Cook, in addition to being closeted, I was a woman and an introvert, and my politics tended to differ from those of my peers in my heavily male, extrovert-dominated profession.
Since coming out in 2011, I have been publicly truer to myself and more authentic with others.
That has made me a better leader.
And being out in a leadership position in a global organization has provided me a platform to talk openly on a wide range of issues.
There is no question about it: Cook’s announcement was a huge step forward.
And international organizations have made considerable progress in LGBT inclusion by relying on external and employee networks and non-discrimination policies.
But most of today’s available statistics reflect progress in Europe and the United States.
According to a recent study by the women’s advocacy organization Catalyst, 62% of Fortune 500 companies now offer health insurance to domestic partners, while 87% of Fortune 500 companies – and 94 of the top 100 – have non-discrimination policies that include sexual orientation.
By contrast, Todd Sears, founder of Out Leadership, an advocacy group for LGBT employees, estimates that 90% of LGBT workers in Asia are closeted.
In 78 countries, including Uganda and Nigeria, being gay is still illegal.
Singapore recently upheld its stringent anti-homosexuality law.
In Russia, on the same day Cook made his announcement, a memorial to Apple founder Steve Jobs was dismantled, ostensibly to comply with a law prohibiting “gay propaganda.”
Even in the US, where members of the same sex can marry in 35 states (as I did in New York last April), in 29 states it is still legal to fire someone solely on the basis of their sexual orientation.
In 34 states, it is legal to fire a transgender employee.
That said, multinational companies can take several steps to further their LGBT inclusion strategies on a global scale.
For starters, they can strengthen the “ally effect.”
Research conducted by the Center for Talent Innovation shows that allies – people who support LGBT colleagues or work as advocates – play a decisive role in creating an inclusive community.
In fact, 24% of the LGBT workers surveyed attribute their decision to come out professionally to their network of allies.
Employers can create networks that invite straight colleagues to support their LGBT co-workers and sponsor LGBT individuals and groups.
Likewise, senior executives being visibly out makes a huge difference.
Cook is a great example.
LGBT employees are 85% more likely to be out at companies where senior executives are out (24% versus 13%).
At EY, our LGBT leadership participated in the “It Gets Better” video project in 2011, sharing stories for the benefit of at-risk LGBT youth. I took advantage of the opportunity, and, with the full support of EY’s leadership, officially came out.
I not only talked openly about my own experiences; I also shared how my organization’s philosophy played an important role in my decision.
That leads to a more general point: The more people hear, see, and know about what is going on in an organization, the more quickly cultural change takes place.
Speaking up is an important part of that, because people not only listen to what is said, but also notice what passes without being challenged.
Too often, when an organization does not correct a misstatement, it is taken as agreement.
Customized solutions also help.
Companies should meet with LGBT groups at other organizations, both locally and globally, and implement policies from the more progressive regions in which they do business (say, Europe and the US).
But one size does not fit all.
Strategies work best when they are tailored to fit the requirements of specific conditions, such as geographic locations, business unit type, or department function.
Finally, companies should continue to facilitate an inclusive workplace for everyone, not just LGBT employees.
That means shifting from a culture of diversity, with its implicit focus on “them,” to an inclusiveness-centered culture of “us.”
Cook and I share many of the same attitudes about our LGBT identity.
And I find that his announcement accords with my own experience: “[Being gay has] made me more empathetic, which has led to a richer life.
It’s been tough and uncomfortable at times, but it has given me the confidence to be myself, to follow my own path, and to rise above adversity and bigotry.”
The lavender ceiling has been cracked, but there is nowhere in the world today where inclusiveness has been fully achieved.
There is still much more to do.
Gaza Shrugs
GAZA CITY – Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has now personally presented Palestine’s bid for full United Nations membership to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon.
What remains to be seen is whether Hamas, which has controlled the Gaza Strip since June 2007, will eventually support this initiative by its bitter rival, Abbas’s West Bank-based Palestinian Authority.
The failure for more than a year to make any progress in negotiations with Israel has convinced Abbas and his colleagues to pursue the UN option.
And Israel’s continuing settlement construction on the West Bank has sharpened their sense that negotiations would not be productive, whereas the raft of UN resolutions supporting a two-state solution could now be put to the test.
Moreover, it is widely believed that the Arab Spring has encouraged the Palestinian leadership to seek to change the rules of the game.
Arabs throughout the region, though preoccupied with domestic affairs, are nonetheless pressing a new generation of leaders to support the Palestinian cause more actively.
The collapse of Hosni Mubarak’s regime in Egypt, the subsequent departure of the Israeli ambassador from Cairo, the political upheaval in Syria, and the expulsion of the Israeli ambassador from Ankara are causing great uncertainty in Israeli leadership circles.
Israel is more isolated regionally and internationally than ever, owing to Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu diplomatic failures.
Abbas, whose bid is supported unanimously by the Arab and most Islamic countries, is convinced that the Arabs will stand with the Palestinians, regardless of the consequences.
More than 120 countries are believed to support the Palestinian bid for statehood.
But the Palestinians must secure the approval of the UN Security Council and the support of two-thirds of the UN General Assembly in order to gain full official recognition.
The US has threatened to veto the resolution in the Security Council, and the US Congress has threatened to suspend American aid to the Palestinian Authority.
Members of the European Union are still divided and continue to hope for a compromise and other options.
Israel has denounced the Palestinian strategy as a unilateral initiative, and has threatened the Palestinians with severe reprisals.
Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman suggested canceling the Oslo Accords, signed with the Palestine Liberation Organization in September 1993, which provided the basis for the creation of the Palestinian Authority in 1994.
Israel is also considering a suspension of transfers of Palestinian tax and customs revenues, and has threatened to annex parts of the West Bank.
At the same time, Hamas suspects that Abbas’s effort to gain UN recognition is intended to impose pressure on Netanyahu to revive peace negotiations on the basis of the 1967 borders, a position that Hamas rejects.
Hamas believes that if Israel were to come under pressure and, for example, freeze settlement construction, Abbas’s position would be strengthened.
Hamas slammed Abbas’s speech at the UN and his bid for statehood, because it relinquishes 78% of historic Palestine and endangers Palestinian refugees’ right of return.
Meanwhile, the significance of the reconciliation agreement signed last May by Hamas and Fatah, the secular nationalist movement that controls the Palestinian Authority, remains uncertain.
While some commentators were hopeful that the agreement meant that Hamas would give its tacit support to Abbas’s negotiating strategy, this is doubtful.
Indeed, Hamas is convinced that any success for Abbas and the Palestinian Authority will further discredit its rule and increase its isolation in besieged Gaza.
Hamas’s support for Palestinian statehood within the 1967 borders would convey at least indirect recognition of Israel.
Yet Hamas continues to reject territorial concessions, insisting that all of historic Palestine must be under Muslim jurisdiction.
The Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, suffering for more than four years from siege and isolation, are apathetic to the UN bid.
They already feel alienated from the state-building efforts on the West Bank by Salam Fayyad’s government.
Poverty and unemployment have left them frustrated and desperate, and the slowdown in implementing the Hamas-Fatah reconciliation agreement gives them little hope of meaningful change.
If Palestine does achieve full UN membership, Palestinians recognize that it will be little more than symbolic.
After all, more than 100 countries already recognized Palestine after Yasser Arafat declared the establishment of a state on November 15, 1988.
Moreover, Palestinians are not convinced that UN recognition will change their daily lives as long as the international community takes no action to end the Israeli occupation on the West Bank and the siege and blockade of Gaza.
However, the Palestinian bid at the UN will internationalize the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and discredit US mediating leverage.
As always, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict stands perched between diplomacy and violence.
It remains for the US, working with Israel and the international community, to break this logjam and press forward toward a settlement.
But the ultimate failure of Abbas’s diplomatic strategy – the absence of tangible benefits even if it succeeds – will damage what is left of his credibility among the Palestinians and strengthen Hamas’s political clout.
A National Security Blind Spot
WASHINGTON, DC – Erin Saltman saw a disturbing trend.
For months, the senior counter-extremism researcher at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue had obsessively tracked the profiles of more than 130 Western women who had joined the Islamic State (ISIS).
Saltman and her team noticed that instead of journeying through Turkey to reach ISIS headquarters in Syria, the women were heading straight to Libya.
Because women’s roles within ISIS are related mostly to reproduction and consolidating territory, Saltman was able to deduce the reason: “ISIS wasn’t just looking to have combat forces in Libya, but also to build statehood there,” she explained.
“We flagged and highlighted that before security forces were aware of it.”
To Saltman, investing time and money to think about the differences between men’s and women’s movement in ISIS wasn’t “about gender equality.
It was about having a better grasp on the security issues at hand.”
It’s a radical idea.
Considering the divergent ways men and women might act, think, or respond is not just ticking a politically correct box.
It can actually help us craft better policy and identify emerging threats.
Yet many policymakers in the United States and around the world still don’t seem able to grasp that examining the behavior of women and men alike can improve their analysis and their proposed measures.
New America recently conducted unprecedented research to find out whether and how, after nearly two decades of research, data, and advocacy has crystallized the crucial linkage between gender and national security, US officials consider it when formulating policy.
The short answer is: they mostly don’t.
That’s akin to a nearsighted person choosing to forgo glasses when surveying a new landscape.
Ignoring the impact that gender differences have on policy effectiveness is reckless and risky.
Many countries, including the US, pay lip service.
Nearly 80 countries have adopted a National Action Plan to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325, which sets forth a blueprint for engaging women in all aspects of security policy.
But action plans have not translated into active consideration of the gender-differentiated effects of policies.
According to our research, policymakers think they are overcoming their gender blind spot because more women are sitting around the table.
Including more women on decision-making teams, it is assumed, will automatically integrate gender considerations into policy.
That assumption has yet to be proved.
Quite the contrary.
Consider Germany’s refugee and immigration policies.
Although Germany has a National Action Plan, is 11th on the Global Gender Gap Index (which ranks countries on levels of gender equality), and has a strong female chancellor and its first-ever female defense minister, it still failed at first to consider how its policy might have different effects on men and women.
For example, most government refugee shelters didn’t provide gender-exclusive toilets and showers – a disaster for women from conservative Islamic backgrounds.
Likewise, the intensive language program the government required for migrants didn’t account for women’s inability to attend class without childcare.
Ultimately, such failures made those policies less effective for the entire population, and could lead to long-term security consequences for Germany.
Our interviews also suggest that some policymakers still regard gender-blindness positively: not thinking about the possible gender-specific effects of policies, they believe, contributes to an atmosphere of greater gender equality.
But decades of research have shown that inclusion and equality should not mean ignoring differences between underrepresented groups.
“The consequence of policy is often the same for men and women,” one respondent told our research partners at POLITICO Focus.
“Hearing myself say that gives me pause.
I have no idea what that conclusion is actually based on — am I just regurgitating the company line?”
In fact, the consequence of policy often isn’t the same for men and women, in part because they tend to have unequal access to opportunities and resources.
But policymakers often claim an absence of data about different impacts, particularly data that can be mapped onto national security objectives.
“It’s difficult to break things down by gender impact,” one person said.
“Human rights and aid organizations are better at this; our [national security] tools aren’t that granular.
And oftentimes, you’re measuring success anecdotally when it comes to things like gender and education data.”
But plenty of research cements the gender and security connection.
Data2X, WomanStats, and Inclusive Security are just a few of the many organizations that have made it their mission to gather in global databases this kind of gender-differentiated data and research, providing irrefutable and empirical proof that women’s status is inextricably linked to state power, stability, corruption, prosperity, and many other indicators.
In other words, weak, unstable, corrupt, and poor states are states where women’s status is low.
Most policymakers would draw the conclusion that strengthening and cleaning up government and promoting economic growth will improve the status of women.
But what if the causal arrows run in the opposite direction?
International policymakers need to think about gender, too, in the fight against ISIS – and across all other national-security and foreign-policy contexts.
It is certainly important to have women at the table.
But it is equally important that all policymakers discuss the women who aren’t there and never will be.
Pola Makan Seimbang demi Kesetaraan Gender
COPENHAGEN – Selama satu abad terakhir, perjuangan untuk mewujudkan kesetaraan bagi perempuan sudah diupayakan di ruang kelas, di bilik suara, dan di ruang rapat perusahaan-perusahaan yang masuk daftar Fortune 500.
Jika kita menghendaki penghapusan ketimpangan gender, kita tidak bisa terus-terusan mengesampingkan salah satu penyebab dan konsekuensi terbesar ketidaksetaraan tersebut: malnutrisi.
Kini, sebanyak 1,6 miliar orang di seluruh dunia menderita anemia, penyakit akibat kekurangan zat besi – dan salah satu gejala krisis nutrisi global yang jauh lebih banyak diderita perempuan.
Sesungguhnya, anemia lebih sering menyerang perempuan dibandingkan pria – hampir satu dari tiga perempuan di seluruh dunia menderita anemia – dan mengakibatkan seperlima kematian ibu bersalin.
Pada tahun 2012, World Health Assembly mengesahkan target penurunan prevalensi anemia sebanyak 50% pada tahun 2025.
Namun mengingat kondisi dan tingkat kemajuan sekarang, target tersebut baru bisa terwujud pada tahun 2124.
Meskipun keberhasilan tersebut bisa dicapai melalui kerja keras, kita masih tertinggal jauh dalam hal pemenuhan aspek krusial bagi kesehatan dan pengembangan perempuan serta anak-anak mereka.
Tapi masih ada harapan.
Kalau kita berinvestasi pada perbaikan gizi mulai sekarang, kita bisa menjamin masa depan lebih cerah bagi perempuan di semua negara selama ratusan tahun ke depan, bahkan lebih.
Kita tidak bisa lagi memperlakukan diskriminasi gender dan malnutrisi sebagai dua isu terpisah.
Keduanya terkait erat dan saling menguatkan melalui suatu pola yang menyentuh  perempuan di setiap tahap kehidupan.
Malnutrisi – dalam segala bentuk – adalah penyebab dan akibat dari ketimpangan kekuasaan yang sangat besar antara laki-laki dan perempuan.
Ketidaksetaraan gender bermula sejak masa kandungan.
Setiap tahun, 16 juta gadis menjalani persalinan dan sebagian besar terjadi di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah.
Ketika seorang ibu tinggal di area dimana tingkat stunting cukup tinggi dan ia masih berusia remaja, anak yang dilahirkannya kemungkinan besar mengalami stunting dan semakin rentan terkena penyakit dan lemahnya perkembangan kognitif parah yang bersifat irreversible (tidak bisa normal kembali) sehingga berdampak buruk pada kemampuan anak dalam menjalani pendidikan dan mencapai potensi diri yang maksimal.
Anak-anak yang mengalami kondisi di atas biasanya menerima pendapatan lebih rendah, akibatnya kemungkinan mereka hidup di tengah kemiskinan dan menderita malnutrisi semakin besar dan memiliki risiko lebih tinggi terjangkit penyakit-penyakit kronis seperti diabetes dan tekanan darah tinggi.
Mengingat adanya bias-bias dalam persepsi sosial dan ekonomi, keadaan-keadaan di awal kehidupan menempatkan para perempuan dalam posisi yang semakin dirugikan.
Siklus ini terus berulang; kelompok perempuan yang lemah, tidak berdaya, dan kekurangan gizi akan melahirkan anak-anak yang menderita stunting, ini memperburuk siklus ketidaksetaraan.
Demi memperbaiki manfaat nutrisi bagi anak-anak perempuan dan wanita dewasa, kita perlu menambah intervensi gizi dan memastikan agar program pembangunan lainnya juga mencakup aspek gizi.
Misalnya, upaya menggalakkan pemberian ASI sejak dini dan segera sangat penting dan ini merupakan cara terbaik untuk mengatasi stunting dan obesitas.
Kebijakan dan program pembangunan juga harus mempertimbangkan aspek ketimpangan gender.
Program-program perlindungan sosial yang menguatkan kendali perempuan atas bantuan sosial atau redistribusi pendapatan, contohnya, dikaitkan dengan manfaat nutrisi yang lebih baik bagi perempuan dan keluarganya.
Di banyak negara, kaum perempuan mendapat giliran makan terakhir di keluarganya, ini mengurangi kesempatan mereka memperoleh gizi yang cukup.
Sarana dan prasarana bagi ibu hamil dan menyusui juga lemah sehingga menyulitkan perempuan merawat anaknya.
Program-program intervensi perubahan intervensi, komunikasi, dan pendekatan panutan/teladan semuanya bisa membantu melemahkan jeratan norma-norma sosial yang merugikan promosi gizi baik dan gender.
Pemenuhan tujuan ini akan dimungkinkan melalui sebuah cetak biru yang memuat aksi politik.
Pada tanggal 14 Juni 2016 Global Nutrition Report akan diterbitkan secara global.
Laporan ini bermaksud mengkaji tingkat kemajuan, meningkatkan akuntabilitas demi pemenuhan komitmen global, dan merekomendasikan tindakan yang perlu dilakukan pemerintah dan pemangku kepentingan utama untuk mengakhiri segala bentuk malnutrisi pada tahun 2030.
Wacana ini harus dimulai sekarang.
Pekan ini, Women Deliver 2016 Conference – pertemuan terbesar dalam satu dekade terakhir yang dihadiri pendukung hak-hak perempuan – diselenggarakan di Copenhagen.
Lebih dari 5.000 pemimpin dunia, pembuat kebijakan, dan aktivis dari 150 negara bertemu untuk mendiskusikan banyak hal, diantaranya cara memutus siklus kemiskinan dan ketidaksetaraan gender yang merugikan kesehatan perempuan.
Seruan atas tindakan untuk memutus hubungan antara gizi dan ketidaksetaraan gender harus cukup lantang agar bisa bergaung di semua negara.
Kita harus menghilangkan semua faktor yang memperburuk ketimpangan gender dan itu diawali dengan perbaikan gizi warga.
Kemajuan di masa depan mengandalkan upaya tersebut.
The Unfinished Sexual Revolution
WASHINGTON, DC – In the United States, the revolution for equality between men and women is stuck halfway.
Over the past 50 years, women’s roles have changed dramatically, with almost 60% of American women now in the workforce.
Men’s roles, however, have barely budged.
Despite insisting on the equal dignity and value of men and women, we still regard men’s traditional work of breadwinning as more valuable and important than women’s traditional work of caregiving.
The result is a profound social and economic imbalance that is holding back women and men alike.
The solution is to focus less on women and more on elevating the value of care and expanding the roles and choices open to men.
Electing and appointing more women to powerful roles remains essential.
But focusing on women’s advancement is biased toward tracking how many are rising to the top: the overall percentage at work, their average salaries, and how many become CEOs, senior managers, tenured professors, bankers, surgeons, law partners, parliamentarians, presidents, and ministers.
A focus on care, by contrast, opens the door to the dual problem of too few women at the top and far too many at the bottom.
American women hold less than 15% of executive-level positions in Fortune 500 companies and 62% of minimum-wage jobs.
As a result, one in three adult women are living in or on the edge of poverty, with the picture especially bleak for single mothers, almost two-thirds of whom are working in dead-end, poorly compensated jobs without flexibility or benefits.
What is common to both sets of women, and all the women in between, is that they are still charged with primary responsibility for caregiving – for children, parents, and other family members – in a system that devalues and provides little support for the care work they do.
Although wealthy women can and do buy the care work of poorer women, many also choose to work part-time or flexibly to provide the stimulation and education their children need.
But many professional women’s career advancement is systematically blocked should they choose this path.
If a young female lawyer or banker on a promising career track decides to leave the office “early” every day to be home with her kids for dinner, work part-time, or take time out to be a full-time caregiver, she is quickly knocked out of the competition for top jobs.
And if she decides to devote herself to full-time caregiving, that time becomes a black mark on her résumé, a hole that she must vainly try to hide or explain away if and when she tries to re-enter the job market.
A woman at the bottom faces an even harsher reality.
She is likely to be a single mother who has no choice but to be the sole breadwinner and caregiver for her family.
Half of single mothers in the US make less than $25,000 a year.
Compared to single parents in other high-income countries, American single parents have the highest poverty rate and the weakest income-support system.
No US state provides affordable daycare, early education, and after-school programs that take up the caregiving slack.
Only a few states provide paid leave that any worker can use when a child is sick.
The result is that a mother with dependent children must patch together an unstable and unreliable network of caregivers in ways that sharply hamper her ability to succeed at her job and climb out of poverty.
Other advanced industrial countries are far ahead of the US in providing an entire infrastructure of care to help families invest in the next generation and care for their own parents.
Indeed, virtually every developing country in the world is ahead of the US in at least requiring paid maternity leave.
But before foreign observers get too smug, consider the other solution to America’s unfinished revolution.
Valuing care means valuing it enough to expect men to take on caregiving responsibilities to the same extent that we now expect women to take on breadwinning.
Of course, any couple will divide up breadwinning and caregiving work according to their individual circumstances and personalities.
In a genuinely equal world, men and women would approach this division of labor the same way a same-sex couple does.
When it is two men or two women figuring out how to provide an income for their family and to turn that income into the food, shelter, clothing, nurture, education, discipline, and moral support needed to raise children, they cannot rely on societally imposed default roles.
They turn to different criteria: Who has the bigger income?
Who is more ambitious?
Who has the more flexible job?
Who has a boss or company that better supports reconciling work and family obligations?
Attitudes about male caregiving are beginning to shift in the US.
Only a third of millennial men believe in traditional gender roles.
America’s biggest tech companies are beginning to compete for talent by offering paternity leave.
Scandinavian countries and Germany have led the way on paternity leave in Europe, yet many European men (and certainly Asian, African, Indian, and Latin American men) have a long way to go with regard to shedding traditional attitudes about the male/female division of labor.
It is one thing to let women into the workforce; it is quite another to embrace full equality and create a cultural, economic, and social climate that encourages both men and women to support one another and their families equally with cash and care.
That is what it will take, however, to complete the unfinished business of the movement for women’s equality.
What’s Blocking Gender Equality?
BERKELEY – One year ago, the United Nations adopted the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), one of which aims for true gender equality by 2030.
Empowering women and girls is morally right and economically smart.
Several recent studies confirm that there are substantial economic- and human-development costs associated with pervasive and significant gender gaps in economic opportunities and outcomes.
A recent report by the UN Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel, which we authored, identifies actions that governments, businesses, nongovernmental organizations, and multilateral development agencies can take now to close these gaps and accelerate progress toward achieving the SDGs’ overarching goal of inclusive economic growth.
The report shows that greater gender equality in a country is associated with better education and health, higher per capita income, faster and more inclusive economic growth, and greater international competitiveness.
A widely cited McKinsey Global Institute study finds that closing gender gaps in labor-force participation rates, part-time versus full-time work, and the composition of employment would add 12-25% to global GDP by 2025.
Other studies, using a variety of methodologies, find similar prospective gains, especially in low-fertility countries such as Japan, South Korea, and Germany, and in countries (for example, in the Persian Gulf) with low labor-force participation rates for women.
The business case for gender quality is also compelling, because women make substantial contributions to all parts of the value chain.
The UN report identifies numerous benefits for companies that have pursued gender equality in employment, pay, and leadership, including the ability to attract, motivate, and retain talented workers, and to address complex problems with more diverse teams.
And several new studies find that companies with more women in top leadership and board positions have higher financial returns.
More than 90% of girls worldwide now finish primary school, and more women than men are now graduating from college in most regions.
Yet, despite these gains, large gender gaps persist in all kinds of work – whether paid or unpaid, formal or informal, public or private, agricultural or entrepreneurial.
Globally, only 50% of women aged 15 and above are in paid employment, compared with about 75% of men.
At the same time, women do about three times more unpaid work than men do.
When women are paid, their jobs tend to reflect gender stereotypes and provide relatively low earnings, poor working conditions, and limited opportunities for career advancement.
Even when women perform the same or equal-value jobs as men, they are paid less, on average (although the size of the pay gap varies considerably around the world).
Women are under-represented in leadership positions in both business and government.
And, compared to businesses owned by men, enterprises owned by women are smaller, employ fewer people, and are more concentrated in sectors with limited opportunities for profit and growth.
Moreover, according to the World Bank, 103 countries do not legally mandate gender non-discrimination in hiring, and 101 do not require equal remuneration for work of equal value in formal-sector jobs.
Hundreds of millions of women work informally, without any protection, either in law or in practice, of their social and labor rights.
In India, for example, some 120 million women (around 95% of women in paid labor) work informally, as do around 12 million women in Mexico (around 60% of employed women).
People working informally often have no voice to demand better workplace conditions or pay, and this is especially true for women, who also face sexual harassment, violence, and restrictions on their reproductive rights.
Large gender gaps in unpaid work and care are a major driver of diminished economic opportunities for women.
The household work and care responsibilities of women are reflected in a sizeable “motherhood pay penalty.”
Around the world, mothers with dependent children earn, on average, less than women without dependent children, and less than fathers with similar household and employment characteristics.
In fact, there is some evidence of a “fatherhood pay premium” – a positive relationship between a man’s wages and how many children he has.
Reducing and redistributing the time required for unpaid care responsibilities requires investments by both the private and public sectors – in infrastructure, affordable care services, early childhood education, family leave, and family-friendly workplaces.
Such investments are beneficial not only for individuals and families, but also for businesses and the economy as a whole, because they increase women’s labor-force participation rates and productivity, create paid jobs in care services, and improve children’s school performance, boosting their future educational-attainment levels and productivity.
Drawing on evidence from around the world, the UN report provides numerous examples of proven and possible measures to tackle the constraints on women’s economic opportunities.
At this year’s annual World Bank and IMF meetings, world leaders sought policies to spur faster, more inclusive growth.
They would do well to move gender equality to the top of the list.
Training for Gender Equality
MUSCAT – For centuries, women around the world have struggled for even the most basic rights.
The fight for equality has been an uphill climb – one that is far from over.
This is certainly the case in the Middle East, where the challenges women face are typically rooted in social norms, cultural systems, and religious doctrine, and can be enshrined in law.
In some Middle Eastern countries, women may not travel, work, or register to vote without permission from a man in her family.
Even if it is not explicitly prohibited, joining the workforce is often very difficult for women, not least because of widespread resistance among the men who dominate these societies.
Any woman who has sought to apply for a job knows just how vehement that opposition can be.
The result of these norms and structures is that women in the Middle East are often subject to discrimination, isolation, and frustration.
They are unable to participate freely in their societies or contribute to their countries’ economic development.
But the world is changing fast.
At a time of ever-deepening interconnectedness, people are more aware than ever of what is possible, and more motivated than ever to seek reforms – whether educational, economic, or political – that improve their lives.
So which reforms are needed to advance gender equality?
A central area of focus must be education.
First and foremost, schools give girls the knowledge they need to fulfill their potential in the future.
But it is also vital to instill in both girls and boys an understanding of the need for social and economic equality, to reflect the fundamental equality of opportunity that all deserve.
Advancing gender equality also requires changes to policies and regulations.
Beyond ensuring equal rights under the law, countries should work to boost the representation of women in politics and government.
Women need to know that they can reach positions of genuine authority, even in domains from which they have historically been excluded – and they need encouragement to get there.
The same is true for the economy.
Women need opportunities and support to develop and run their own businesses, to innovate, and to become financially independent.
This would benefit not only women, but also their families, communities, and the economy as a whole.
Even women who do not own or run businesses would have much to offer, if given the chance to enter the workforce and earn their own living.
To this end, training is crucial.
Women need access to guidance, workshops, and longer-term training programs that prepare them to participate in the labor market, while ensuring that they know – and can defend – their rights.
An important initiative that could provide a useful model for such efforts is the Springboard Women’s Development Programme, developed by the British Council.
The program aims to give women the confidence and capabilities they need to make a better life for themselves, both professionally and personally; to expand their role and influence in public life; and to help support open, stable, and inclusive societies across the Middle East and North Africa.
The key to the program’s success is its focus on empowering women to fulfill their potential.
It helps participants explore and develop their abilities, and then apply them in practical settings, such as acquiring funding to start or expand their own businesses.
It also prepares women to confront – and overcome – the obstacles they will inevitably face as they gain independence and influence.
Delivered by a network of licensed trainers, the Springboard Women’s Development Programme has already been used by over 230,000 women in more than 40 countries.
In just four years, the program has trained more than 700 women in my country, Oman, through the Ministry of Education.
And many more women are clamoring to participate.
Achieving gender equality in the Middle East will be a long process, requiring fundamental educational, social, and economic reforms.
But giving women the right training now can kick-start the process, enabling half the population finally to reach their potential – to the benefit of all.
Gender Equality and Earth\u0027s Future
NEW YORK – Twenty years ago, the adoption by 189 governments of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action marked a turning point in the history of women's rights.
This progressive blueprint remains a powerful source of inspiration in the effort to realize equal opportunities for women and girls.
But while much progress has been made in the intervening decades, much more remains to be done to ensure that women and children are guaranteed healthy lives, education, and full social inclusion.
Those participating would be wise to remember that inclusive sustainable development can be realized only when all human rights – including gender equality – are protected, respected, and fulfilled.
The three of us – each from different continents – support these international processes.
We share a common motivation for our work: protecting our planet for our children and grandchildren, and ensuring the development of a world where all people – regardless of their gender, race, religion, age, disability, or sexual orientation – have an equal opportunity to achieve their aspirations.
It is critical that we continue to engage men and boys actively in the fight against gender-based discrimination and violence.
We have an opportunity to secure a better future and raise a new generation of girls and boys who respect one another and work together to protect the rights of all people.
The implications of not providing girls with equal voices, choices, and opportunities affect not just their lives, but the future of the planet.
Efforts to promote inclusive sustainable development and fight climate change are inextricably linked.
If we care about development, we must care about the consequences our greenhouse-gas emissions are having around the world.
And if we do not take urgent action, we will irreparably damage the natural systems on which life depends.
This is not a threat that we can set aside until we have eradicated poverty worldwide.
Nor is it a problem that we can leave to future generations to address.
Left unchecked, climate change – along with other unsustainable patterns of development – could wipe out the gains of recent decades.
All countries – developed and developing – have a role to play in ensuring a stable world for our children.
Women are among those most vulnerable to the impacts of unsustainable practices and climate change, because they often have no independent income or land rights.
In many countries, women are responsible for the provision of water and food for their families.
And when the usual sources of these resources are disrupted, women are forced to travel farther and spend more time working for less return.
Scarcity requires them to make difficult choices like pulling children out of school or deciding which family member can afford to skip a meal.
In many homes around the world, women are at the heart of the household's nexus of water, food, and energy – and thus often know firsthand about the challenges and potential solutions in these areas.
In our conversations with women around the world, we hear about their struggles, but also their ideas, many of which, if applied, could facilitate change.
Women are the most convincing advocates for the solutions that they need, so they should be at the forefront of decision-making on sustainable development and climate-change mitigation.
Over the coming weeks, during the 59th session of the Commission on the Status of Women in New York, the international community will take stock of the progress that has been made toward achieving what was pledged 20 years ago in Beijing and assess where more efforts are needed.
This year will be crucial.
With the Financing for Development conference in July, the Special Summit on Sustainable Development Goals in September, and the UN Climate Change Conference in December, we have the opportunity to integrate gender equality and women's empowerment fully into the effort to promote sustainable development and fight climate change.
The three of us wake up every morning thinking about how to make this happen.
Everyone should.
We call on all women and men to join us in making their voices heard loudly and in seizing this opportunity for a just and equitable future for all.
The Working Women Windfall
MUMBAI – Narrowing the global gender gap would have huge potential economic benefits.
According to the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), if every government helped its citizens catch up to the country in its region that has made the fastest strides toward gender parity, the total annual payoff in additional GDP could reach $12 trillion in 2025.
Gender parity is also a moral imperative, recognized in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which were adopted by 193 countries in 2015.
Together with the aggregate economic payoff, investing in women and girls would transform millions of lives for the better.
The question, then, is how to realize these enormous gains.
Achieving economic gender equality is not possible without working toward social gender equality.
The two need to be tackled together.
An important part of the answer, it turns out, lies in improving access to essential services such as education and family planning.
MGI estimates that the additional annual investment required to deliver essential services to those who need them is between $1.5-2 trillion in 2025.
This compares with estimated spending of $6.3 trillion on these services in 2014.
In other words, the potential economic payoff in 2025 would be 6-8 times the spending required.
In six areas – education, family planning, maternal health, financial inclusion, digital inclusion, and assistance with unpaid care work – improved access to services could unlock women’s economic potential and help to meet the SDGs’ gender-equality targets.
Assistance with unpaid care work represents one the biggest opportunities for improvement worldwide, but there is broad scope for improvement in financial and digital inclusion in South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa is greatly in need of advances in maternal health.
In order to meet the path set by the SDGs, 58 million more girls and 60 million more boys will need to be enrolled in schools.
Some 224 million more women will need to gain access to formal financial services to close the gender gap completely.
And roughly 445 million people will need improved access to safe water supplies – part of reducing the unpaid care work carried out by women in developing countries.
This ambitious agenda will not be delivered effectively without action from governments working in concert with the private sector and nongovernmental organizations.
It will require additional investment, the creation of job opportunities for women, and the introduction of measures to help women move into more productive work.
MGI identified several interventions around the world that could easily be deployed more broadly.
Measures proven to improve access to education include building more secondary schools, ensuring that girls are provided with sanitation facilities in the places where they study, and creating financial incentives – including cash transfers – to raise enrollment and keep girls in school.
When it comes to family planning and maternal health, the main priorities are to expand the number of health workers and develop emergency services and maternal-health services in rural areas.
Improving supply chains for the delivery of contraceptives and expanding sex education in schools are also important measures.
One of the most effective ways to reduce the amount of time women spend on unpaid care work is expanding the provision of childcare, whether government-subsidized, employer-assisted, or self-funded.
Digital technologies can help more women gain access to financial services, but only if countries expand their infrastructure and help enhance women’s digital and financial literacy.
These measures will, of course, have to be funded; but MGI has found that 60% of countries can generate the additional funds from taxes on the incremental GDP growth that empowering women will deliver.
In places where such tax revenues may not be sufficient, private investment can be attracted.
Legislation enacted this year by New York State, for example, requires that employers and employees each contribute funds to finance paid family leave.
But policy changes will be insufficient if attitudes prevent people from making use of new rights and services.
Even in Sweden, where gender equality has advanced very far, studies suggest that roughly 33% of men take parental leave, compared to more than 75% of women.
To be sure, participation in paid work or domestic work is ultimately a matter of personal choice, but social attitudes may need to be addressed if they hinder true freedom to decide.
There are grounds for optimism.
Many developing countries, including India, are now at a tipping point, with sharply narrowing gender gaps in education implying huge potential gains in women’s economic prospects.
In the United States, New York is not alone in adopting policies enabling paid family leave.
And the rapid spread of digital technologies is improving access to finance and work opportunities in completely new ways.
Finally, awareness of the immense economic benefits of tackling gender inequality is increasing.
We have a $12-trillion incentive to accelerate progress.
Bahaya dari Kepunahan Terencana
HONOLULU –– Sebuah gerakan yang sinis sedang berlangsung untuk mempromosikan teknologi baru, hebat, dan mengganggu yang dikenal sebagai “gene drives” untuk keperluan konservasi.
Teknologi ini berbeda dengan modifikasi genetis yang disebut “GMO”; gene drive adalah teknologi radikal baru yang menciptakan “reaksi berantai mutagenik” yang dapat mengubah sistem kehidupan dengan cara yang tidak terbayangkan. 
Gene drive merupakan representasi inovasi rekayasa genetik, biologi sintetik, dan penyuntingan genetis.
Teknologi ini mengesampingkan peraturan umum warisan genetis, memastikan bahwa sifat tertentu yang dimasukkan oleh manusia ke dalam DNA suatu organisme dengan menggunakan teknologi penyuntingan genetis, menyebar keseluruh generasi berikutnya dari organisme tersebut, sehingga hal ini mengubah masa depan seluruh spesies.  
Teknologi ini adalah alat biologis dengan kekuatan yang belum pernah ada sebelumnya.
Namun, alih-alih meluangkan waktu untuk benar-benar mempertimbangkan masalah etis, ekologi dan sosial terkait teknologi ini, banyak orang yang malah secara agresif mempromosikan teknologi gene drive untuk konservasi. 
Sebuah proposal bertujuan untuk melindungi spesies burung asli di Pulau Kauai di Hawaii dengan menggunakan gene drive untuk mengurangi populasi sebuah spesies nyamuk yang membawa virus malaria burung.
Rencana lainnya, yang diusulkan oleh konsorsium konservasi termasuk badan-badan dari pemerintahan Amerika Serikat dan Australia, akan memberantas spesies tikus yang invasif dan membawa penyakit bagi burung di beberapa pulau tertentu dengan menggunakan tikus yang direkayasa genetis sehingga tidak bisa mempunyai keturunan perempuan.
Menciptakan tikus yang tidak bisa menghasilkan keturunan perempuan adalah langkah pertama menuju Biokontrol Genetis pada Spesies Tikus Invasif, yang dirancang untuk menyebabkan kepunahan spesies yang dianggap hama, misalnya tikus, untuk menyelamatkan spesies yang lebih disukai, seperti burung yang terancam punah.       
Asumsi yang mendasari rencana-rencana diatas adalah manusia mempunyai pengetahuan, kemampuan, dan kehati-hatian dalam mengendalikan alam.
Gagasan bahwa kita bisa – dan harus – menggunakan kepunahan yang direncanakan untuk mengatasi kepunahan yang disebabkan oleh manusia adalah sesuatu yang mengerikan.     
Saya tidak sendiri dalam keprihatinan saya.
Pada Kongres Konservasi Dunia, Perserikatan Internasional untuk Konservasi Alam (IUCN) yang sedang berlangsung di Hawaii, sekelompok ahli konservasi dan ilmuwan ternama menulis surat terbuka yang berjudul “Seruan Konservasi dengan Hati Nurani”, yang meminta penangguhan penggunaan gene drive dalam konservasi.
Saya adalah salah satu yang menandatangani surat terbuka tersebut, bersama dengan tokoh pelestarian lingkungan David Suzuki, ilmuwan fisika Fritjof Capra, Jaringan Pelestarian Lingkungan Masyarakat Adat Tom Goldtooth, dan pelopor organik Nell Newman.      
Diskusi yang telah dimulai di kongres IUCN akan dilanjutkan di Konvensi Keberagaman Biologis PBB di Meksiko pada bulan Desember ini, pada saat tersebut para pemimpin dunia harus mempertimbangkan usulan untuk menerapkan moratorium gene drive.
Diskusi tersebut mencerminkan permintaan dari tokoh masyarakat untuk penimbangan menyeluruh permasalahan-permasalahan ilmu pengetahuan, moral, dan hukum yang terkait dengan penggunaan gene drive.
Menurut saya, kita kurang mempertanyakan masalah-masalah yang penting.
Kemampuan teknologi kita hanya dilihat dari lensa teknis, sedangkan para teknisi cenderung hanya fokus pada pertanyaan, “Apakah akan berhasil?”
Namun, sebagaimana dinyatakan Angelika Hilbeck, Presiden Jaringan Ilmuwan Eropa untuk Tanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan (European Network of Scientists for Social and Environmental Responsibility/ENSSER), pertanyaan yang lebih tepat seharusnya: “Apa yang juga bisa dilakukannya?”
Ketika membahas proyek GBIRd, misalnya, ada yang akan bertanya apakah “tikus tanpa ibu” itu dapat keluar dari ekosistem dimana dia diperkenalkan, sebagaimana yang terjadi pada tanaman pangan GMO dan salmon hasil ternak, dan apa akibatnya jika hal tersebut terjadi.
Sebagaimana yang terjadi pada nyamuk-nyamuk di Hawaii, mungkin ada yang mempertanyakan apa pengaruh dari pengurangan populasi mereka pada spesies kelelawar hoary yang langka?
Memastikan bahwa pertanyaan-pertanyaan seperti ini ikut dipertimbangkan bukanlah suatu hal yang mudah.
Sebagai seorang ahli hukum yang berpengalaman dalam peraturan-peraturan pemerintah Amerika Serikat, saya dapat mengatakan dengan penuh keyakinan bahwa kerangka peraturan yang ada sekarang sangat tidak memadai untuk menilai dan mengatur teknologi gene drive.
Lebih parahnya lagi, media telah gagal memberi pemahaman kepada masyarakat mengenai risiko-risiko yang timbul dari teknologi genetik.
Beberapa pihak memahami bahwa, sebagai sejarawan ilmu pengetahuan dari MIT, Lily Kay menjelaskan bahwa rekayasa genetis telah dikembangkan dan dikampanyekan sebagai alat untuk pengendalian biologis dan sosial.
Pihak-pihak yang mendorong dan mengendalikan proses tersebut bertujuan untuk menjalankan tugas untuk “intervensi sosial berbasis ilmu pengetahuan”
Teknik-teknik dahsyat seperti modifikasi genetis dan, apa lagi, teknologi gene drive memunculkan angan-angan pihak-pihak dengan agenda tertentu, dari pihak militer (yang dapat menggunakannya untuk membuat senjata biologis) hingga pegiat kesehatan yang berniat mulia (yang dapat menggunakannya untuk menghapus penyakit-penyakit mematikan).
Hal ini tentunya menggugah untuk dikaitkan sebagai narasi kepahlawanan yang cenderung disukai rekan-rekan sesama pecinta lingkungan.
Namun, faktanya adalah bahwa kita belum memiliki dasar intelektual untuk memahami tantangan-tantangan mendasar yang dibawa gene drives-apalagi teknologi dahsyat lainnya. sekarang kita harus menahan dorongan kritis kita dan percaya pada janji elit-elit teknologi bahwa mereka akan menggunakan gene drive secara bertanggung jawab untuk mencapai tujuan-tujuan lingkungan hidup yang sepertinya berdampak baik.
Diskusi publik sepertinya tidak diperlukan.
Namun, mengapa kita harus percaya bahwa semuanya akan dapat kita kendalikan?
Dalam pandangan saya, sorotan pada penggunaan teknologi gene drive untuk pelestarian ialah sebuah muslihat untuk mendapat persetujuan masyarakat dan mendapat payung hukum.
Buat apa memaparkan hal ini terhadap pengawasan masyarakat dan ada kemungkinan dibatasi kalau anda dapat mengatakan bahwa hal ini akan bermanfaat?
Risikonya terlalu besar jika para pendukung gene drive membicarakannya secara terbuka.
Berdasakan pengalaman saya selama 20 tahun lebih meneliti dan melaporkan teknologi transgenik, saya selalu berpikir bahwa saya sudah melihat janji palsu dan harapan besar yang dikemukakan.
Namun gene drives tidaklah seperti apapun yang pernah kita lihat dan menjadi tantangan paling besar dari kemampuan kita mengendalikan diri.
Apakah kita dapat sepenuhnya mempercayai ilmu pengetahuan untuk menuntun kita atau apakah kita akan secara ceroboh melemparkan diri kita ke jurang keampuhan teknologi ke depan?
Untungnya, masih ada pilihan yang dapat kita ambil.
Kenyataan bahwa gene drive dapat mengubah hubungan dasar antara manusia dan alam adalah tantangan sekaligus kesempatan.
Sekarang kita dapat melakukan apa yang seharusnya sudah kita lakukan sejak dulu kala mengenai teknologi nuklir dan transgenik: mulailah waspada pada bahayanya kepandaian manusia – dan tingkatkanlah penghormatan kita pada kepandaian alam.
Belly-Up Brazil?
SAO PAULO – After years of impressive growth, Brazil’s economic prospects appear increasingly dim.
Since the World Cup ended in July, economic activity has plummeted, inflationary pressures have intensified, and consumer and business confidence have collapsed, leading many economists to slash their growth forecasts for this year.
So just how sick is Brazil’s economy, and how will its malaise affect the outcome of the presidential election in October?
In fact, Brazil most likely experienced a technical recession during the first half of this year.
And annual growth during Rousseff’s presidency has probably averaged less than 2% – the slowest for any Brazilian president since the 1980s, when the country began its transition from hyperinflationary basket case and serial defaulter to stable and increasingly prosperous middle-income economy.
Moreover, had the government not cut taxes and delayed much-needed increases in gasoline and electricity prices, average annual inflation would stand at 7.5% – a level not reached in decades.
In services, where the government has taken no measures to suppress inflation, the rate exceeds 9%.
Dig deeper, and one finds that the economy’s foundations are plagued with fragilities and imbalances.
Though overall economic activity is weak, the current-account deficit has reached a 12-year high of 3.5% of GDP.
Industrial production is 7% below its pre-crisis peak in 2008.
This, together with the decline in manufactured goods as a share of total exports, from 54% a decade ago to 37% today, points to a substantial loss of competitiveness.
Even the economy’s apparent strengths – a thriving service sector and low unemployment – rest on unsustainable credit policies.
Of course, rapid credit growth is a natural consequence of declining real interest rates.
But, in Brazil, lending by state-owned banks has outpaced that of private banks significantly since 2008, meaning that lending at deeply subsidized rates has largely driven the increase in bank credit, to 58% of GDP (roughly double the rate eight years ago).
Against this background, Brazil is preparing for its most important presidential election since its transition from dictatorship to democracy in 1985 – and the polls do not bode well for Rousseff.
Despite higher incomes and lower inequality, 70% of Brazilians have expressed a desire for change.
This is not surprising, in view of the street protests that erupted last year over the poor quality of public services and rising prices.
But is Rousseff’s government entirely to blame?
The short answer is no.
While Rousseff’s government is largely responsible for the recent bout of cyclical weakness and social upheaval, Brazil’s problems are rooted in a broader unwillingness to shake off the yoke of policies adopted during more than two decades of military rule.
The 1994 Plano Real, a macroeconomic stabilization program, together with subsequent structural reforms, enabled Brazil finally to quash inflation and ride a wave of cheap global liquidity and surging Chinese demand for commodities.
As the government attempted to direct these gains toward wealth redistribution, public expenditure rose and the social-benefits system – underpinned by so-called “acquired rights” – became increasingly rigid.
Brazil needs a new growth model, based on four key elements: tighter fiscal policy, looser monetary policy, a reduced role for state-owned banks in credit provision, and measures to lower Brazil’s astronomical private lending costs.
The next government, whether of the left or the right, will also face the unenviable task of reforming the acquired-rights system to make social benefits more flexible and affordable.
Its approach will determine whether Brazil goes the way of Venezuela, which is currently mired in stagflation, or Chile, widely regarded as Latin America’s best-run economy.
Given the protections afforded to acquired rights, the process of rooting out economic distortions and restoring Brazil’s finances to a stable equilibrium will require a lengthy process of constitutional reform.
And, though the transition will undoubtedly be painful, it is essential to Brazil’s future economic growth and development.
Whether or not the next government can do what is needed will depend on its ability to unify the electorate and a disparate group of regionally focused political parties.
But, first, it must reject the temptingly easy – but ultimately damaging – route of raising taxes and doubling down on redistributive policies.
That path leads to Venezuela – and to a far less stable and prosperous Latin America.