It would allow all countries – not just major economic powers – to enjoy “seigniorage,” or the profits brought by money creation.
Moreover, as the IMF economist Jacques Polak suggested long ago, the IMF could finance its programs by creating SDRs, eliminating the cumbersome negotiations required to secure credits or raise member quotas.
And SDRs could support development; for example, they could be allocated in a larger proportion to developing countries, which have greater demand for foreign-exchange reserves.
China’s G20 leadership could be the impetus the group needs to initiate this shift.
Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, was among the first to question the dollar’s role, some seven years ago, and China has been working steadily to internationalize the renminbi.
That effort reached a milestone in 2015, when the IMF Board agreed to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determines the SDR’s value.
Beyond the push to use SDRs more actively in IMF programs, governments could issue SDR-denominated bonds.
Moreover, private banks could increase their use of this monetary unit, just as some European banks used the so-called European Currency Unit, helping to pave the way for the euro.
The G20’s China summit represents an important opportunity to improve macroeconomic cooperation and launch major reforms of the global monetary system.
For the sake of balanced growth in developed and developing countries alike, it must not be squandered.
Inclusive Growth and Global Justice
ANKARA – As France and the world mourn the terrorist slaughter of innocents in Paris, the leaders of the G-20 are meeting in Antalya, Turkey.
Terror will now vault to the top of the long list of pressing issues that will be discussed.
The G-20, whose members account for about 85% of the world economy, has an important responsibility to respond to challenges that affect the lives and prosperity of millions of people around the world.
It cannot risk falling into complacency and inaction, whether regarding terrorism or the fragile state of the world’s economy.
Since Turkey assumed the presidency of the G-20 in December 2014, our approach toward ensuring inclusive and robust growth through collective action has enjoyed the support of the organization’s members.
This effort has been built on three pillars: decisive implementation of past commitments, boosting investments as a powerful driver of the global economy, and promotion of inclusiveness so that the benefits of growth are shared by all.
When it comes to implementation, great strides have been made.
By promoting sound macroeconomic and fiscal policies and implementing solid, structural reforms, we have made significant progress toward our objective of expanding the G-20’s collective GDP by 2.1% by 2018.
The global financial system is now more resilient than it has ever been.
Financial capacities are being rebuilt, and new growth targets are being met.
But there remains much more to be done.
G-20 members should expedite efforts to deliver on their commitments to boost productivity and eliminate structural bottlenecks to investment, competition, trade, and jobs.
We must also cement the fundamental reforms to the global financial system that the G-20 has delivered over the past seven years.
Our focus on investment – a key driver of growth, jobs, and development – is also beginning to pay off.
There is a huge investment gap in the global economy, both in advanced and developing countries.
That is why we need developed-country strategies that bring together concrete policy actions and commitments to improve the investment ecosystem, support small and-medium-size enterprises, and promote the construction of efficient, high-quality infrastructure.
If the G-20 members fully implement their commitments under these strategies, their collective GDP is expected to increase by another 1%.
Economic growth must be strong and sustainable; but, above all, it must be inclusive.
Inequality is rising in many G-20 countries; in some cases, it has reached historic highs.
This is a dangerous development, one that can retard growth, threaten the cohesion of societies, and jeopardize people’s wellbeing.
It is imperative that the G-20 tackle inequality head on and demonstrate its determination to ensure that all of its member countries’ citizens enjoy the fruits of economic growth.
Reducing unemployment is central to the fight against inequality.
There are about 100 million jobless people in the G-20, and another 200 million young people who are neither working nor studying.
Significantly reducing youth unemployment is one of the G-20’s most important commitments.
Inclusiveness cannot stop at the borders of the G-20.
We must work to ensure that the benefits of growth and prosperity are shared by people all over the world.
In Antalya, we will discuss how we can align our efforts with the new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and increase our engagement with low-income, developing countries.
As politics and economics are increasingly intertwined, the G-20 must also work together to confront our era’s geopolitical challenges.
This year is an important one in the fight against climate change.
We must send a strong political message from Antalya in support of a successful outcome at the United Nations Climate Change Conference that takes place in Paris from November 30 to December 11.
Meanwhile, the terror attacks in Paris have brutally reminded us, once again, that global challenges – such as terrorism, the war in Syria, and the refugee crisis – require truly global responses.
The G-20 is an ideal forum in which to address them.
The Syrian civil war – now well into its fourth year – must be brought to an end, and a fair and sustainable political transition must be ensured.
The conflict and the brutal state terrorism of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime is not only the cause of terrible suffering in Syria and the death of more than 360,000 people; it is also the root of the refugee crisis and the emergence of Daesh – a threat to all countries.
Turkey is a member of the coalition against Daesh, and we are seeking to degrade and destroy this terrorist menace in our country and beyond our borders.
At the same time, we must not allow ourselves to forget the plight of those fleeing the brutality of the Assad regime and Daesh.
The international community that shuddered at the photograph of Alan Kurdi, the three-year-old Syrian toddler who was found dead on a Turkish beach, must be made to remember that many more like him are dying every day in the cold waters of the Mediterranean and the Aegean.
Turkey is currently hosting some 2.2 million Syrian refugees, and we have spent more than $8 billion over the last three years caring for them.
The international community must agree on a mechanism that ensures that the burden is fairly shared.
Finally, it is important to note that Turkey continues to confront the threat of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), an organization listed as a terrorist group by both the United States and the European Union.
Turkey has implemented a large number of reforms and made major investments to the benefit of our Kurdish citizens.
And yet the PKK has refused to disarm, instead amassing weapons and attacking civilian and security targets across the country. As we continue to fight the scourge of terrorism in our country, we call on all countries not only to mourn the dead in Paris, but to reject terrorism in all of its forms.
The G-20 Summit in Antalya will address these and other major issues confronting the world.
Whether the subject is economics, finance, climate change, or politics, the guiding principle must be equality and justice for all.
A Debt Agenda for the G7
CAMBRIDGE – On May 26-27, the heads of the Group of Seven leading industrial countries will gather in Japan to discuss common security and economic problems.
A major common problem that deserves their attention is the unsustainable increase in the major developed countries’ national debt.
Failure to address the explosion of government borrowing will have adverse effects on the global economy and on debt-burdened countries themselves.
The problem is bad and getting worse almost everywhere.
In the United States, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the federal government debt doubled over the past decade, from 36% of GDP to 74% of GDP.
It also predicts that, under favorable economic assumptions and with no new programs to increase spending or reduce revenue, the debt ratio ten years from now will be 86% of GDP.
Even more worrying, the annual deficit ratio will double in the next decade to 4.9% of GDP, putting the debt on track to exceed 100% of GDP.
The situation in Japan is worse, with gross debt at more than 200% of GDP.
Japan’s current annual deficit of 6% of GDP implies that the debt ratio will continue to rise rapidly unless action is taken.
Conditions differ among the eurozone countries.
But three of the European Union’s four largest economies – France, Italy, and the United Kingdom – all have large debts and annual deficits that point to even higher debt ratios in the future.
A rising level of national debt absorbs funds that would otherwise be available to finance productivity-enhancing business investment.
Businesses now fear that the increasing deficits will lead to higher taxes, further discouraging investment.
That is a worrying prospect for everyone.
When interest rates rise, as surely they must, the cost of servicing the debt will require higher taxes, hurting economic incentives and weakening economic activity.
And the persistence of large deficits reduces the room that governments have to increase spending when there is an economic downturn or a threat to national security.
Reducing deficits is obviously a task for those responsible for tax revenue and public spending: governments and legislatures.
But central banks also play a role, affecting the problem in two ways.
Low-interest-rate policies in advanced countries are depressing the current size of budget deficits, but at the cost of reducing pressure on political leaders to address future deficits and encouraging voters to favor more spending programs and larger tax cuts.
Central banks can help by announcing clearly that interest rates will rise substantially in the future, making it more expensive for governments to borrow and to roll over existing debt.
Reducing annual deficits requires either increased tax revenue or decreased outlays.
Raising marginal tax rates is both politically unpopular and economically damaging.
In the US, there is scope to raise revenue without increasing tax rates, by limiting so-called tax expenditures – the forms of spending that are built into the tax rules rather than appropriated annually by Congress.
For example, an American who buys an electric car receives a $7,000 tax reduction.
Larger tax expenditures in the US include the deduction for mortgage interest and the exclusion from taxable income of employer-paid health-insurance premiums.
Although eliminating any of these major tax expenditures might be politically impossible, limiting the amount by which a taxpayer could reduce his or her tax liability by using these provisions could raise substantial revenue.
So I do my best to persuade my Republican friends in Congress that reducing the revenue loss from tax expenditures is really a way to cut government spending even though the deficit reduction appears on the revenue side of the budget.
The good news is that a relatively small reduction in annual deficits can put an economy on a path to a much lower debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the US, cutting the deficit from the projected 4.9% of GDP to 3% of GDP would cause the debt ratio to drop toward 60%.
The same is true elsewhere.
The long-run debt-to-GDP ratio is equal to the ratio of the annual budget deficit to the annual rate of growth of nominal GDP.
With 4% nominal GDP growth, a budget deficit of 2% would bring the long-term debt ratio down to 50%.
That should be the goal for which all of the G7 countries aim.
The G-7’s Sustainability Mission
FRANKFURT – In six months, representatives from countries around the world will gather in Paris in an effort to reach a global accord to fight climate change.
When the G-7’s leaders meet next week in Germany, they should use the occasion to take the first steps toward avoiding the most dangerous consequences of global warming.
With the world’s safety and prosperity at stake, the question is not whether or when to begin the transition to a low-carbon economy, but how to manage the effort.
In 2014, investments in clean energy reached a new high of $310 billion, after two years of decline.
That is good news, but it is still far short of the $1.1 trillion per year that the International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates is needed in the low-carbon energy sector.
In the meantime, some $950 billion was invested in oil, gas, and coal in 2013 – a figure that has doubled in real terms since 2000.
The value of an investment is based largely on the perception of how risky it is.
Investment will not shift decisively toward greener sources of energy unless and until portfolio managers begin to account for the risks of dangerous climate change.
Investors also need to consider “carbon bubbles,” the overvaluation of fossil-fuel companies based on the assumption that they will be able to continue burning the world’s reserves until depletion.
Until recently, traditional forms of energy production have had the advantage of being based on established and mature industries.
But the tides are shifting.
Sovereign wealth funds and institutional and private investors are increasingly recognizing that climate change will undermine their returns, and that governments eventually will begin to address the problem.
Likewise, the Bank of England is undertaking important work on the risk that assets like coal or oil reserves could be “stranded” by policy changes intended to limit dangerous climate change.
And the G-20 finance ministers recently requested that the Financial Stability Board undertake a broad assessment of climate-related risks and opportunities.
The G-7 countries should clearly signal that they are serious about the low-carbon transition, and the most effective way to do that would be to support a global goal of cutting net greenhouse-gas emissions to zero by 2050.
In addition, governments and regulators can take concrete steps to stimulate private-sector investment in cleaner forms of energy.
For starters, governments should take the equivalent of the Hippocratic oath and pledge to do no active harm to the planet.
The New Climate Economy Report, released by the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, on which I serve, underlines the importance of phasing out fossil-fuel subsidies and questions the wisdom of allowing export credit agencies to finance coal projects.
Governments must set themselves a firm four-year deadline to end fossil-fuel subsidies and redirect funding to areas like green infrastructure projects and development assistance.
Second, governments must lead by example.
High-level meetings in Addis Ababa and Paris later this year offer the opportunity to create synergies between the fight against climate change and financing for development and infrastructure.
Governments should also encourage public pension funds to invest responsibly, especially when it comes to the climate.
More, too, could be done to support the market for green bonds, including by issuing green government bonds.
Third, governments must create policy frameworks that foster low-carbon investments.
Putting a price on carbon is critical.
The slow but steady progress that countries are making toward this goal is encouraging.
In the meantime, governments should use a shadow carbon price and carbon discount rate in their decision-making processes.
In addition, governments and regulators should adopt policies ensuring sustainable financial-sector practices, including annual reporting by companies and investors on environmental, social, and governance issues and due diligence and risk models regarding environmental hazards.
Consideration of the possibility of stranded assets must be systematically expanded.
Finally, policymakers should foster partnerships and new instruments that nudge the economy toward low-carbon alternatives.
Development banks, for example, can help leverage private-sector investment.
And new institutions like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank are in a position to make sustainability a core mandate.
Managing the transition from an economy based on fossil fuels to one based on low-carbon alternatives will not be easy.
But that is why it is essential to begin today.
It is time for the G-7 to recognize its responsibility and lead the world toward a sustainable future.
G-8 Summit and Climate Change
Two years ago, the G8 Summit in Gleneagles, Scotland promised to advance a clean development agenda and mobilize financial support for greener growth in the key emerging market economies.
This year’s meeting, in Heiligendamm, Germany, must deliver on that promise.
Since Gleneagles, a critical mass of public support to act decisively on climate change has developed.
Some say a tipping point has occurred.
An important way to achieve both objectives is by expanding carbon markets.
Carbon finance is an effective vehicle for channeling funds for climate-friendly investments, including to the developing world.
Last year alone the size of the world carbon market tripled to over $30 billion, of which about 20 percent went to projects in the developing world.
By one estimate, with a long term, predictable, and equitable post-2012 global regulatory framework for curbing greenhouse gas emissions (when the Kyoto protocol expires), carbon markets could develop exponentially and deliver financial flows to developing countries of anywhere between $20 and $120 billion dollars/year.
The funds are sorely needed.
The World Bank calculations show that developing countries need an annual investment of about $165 billion through 2030 just to supply electricity to their people.
A forest carbon facility can reward forest conservation as a means of protecting the climate while also preserving ecosystems and generating income for poor communities in developing countries.
The World Bank is keen to work with partners to experiment with such a facility for avoided deforestation. 
An expanded carbon market can help pay for a transformation to a low carbon economy, but it won’t be enough.
Like other new markets, it will take time to mature and reach out to places with weaker market institutions. 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has said that rich countries need to take the lead because only then will the less developed economies follow, and she is right.
The meeting in Heiligendamm can advance the commitments made at Gleneagles two years ago and bring the world closer to a more sustainable future.
Gambler’s Ruin
San Francisco – From Adam Smith (1776) until 1950 or so, capital was considered by economists to be absolutely essential for economic growth.
You also needed a few good basic institutions. “Security of property and tolerable administration of justice,” as Smith put it.
If these fundamental institutions were right, then landlords, merchants, and manufacturers would invest and improve.
In investing and improving, they would add to the capital stock: “In all countries where there is a tolerable security [of property], every man of common understanding will endeavor to employ whatever [capital] stock he can command, in procuring either present enjoyment or future profit... A man must be perfectly crazy, who, where there is a tolerable security, does not employ all the stock which he commands, whether it be his own, or borrowed of other people...”
A larger capital stock would mean thicker markets, a finer division of labor, and a more productive economy.
A highly productive society based on a sophisticated division of labor was how you secured “the wealth of nations.”
Reverse the process, however, and you get the poverty of nations, which Smith believed he saw in the Asia of his time.
For Smith and his successors over the first 175 years, any episode of sustained economic growth overwhelmingly required investment capital.
We economists were by and large capital boosters, and our magic formula for economic development was saving, investment, thrift, and wealth accumulation.
The last and fullest expression of this line of thought comes at the end of the 1950’s with W.W. Rostow’s book The Stages of Economic Growth .
Then Robert Solow and Moses Abramovitz challenged this near-consensus.
They calculated that 75% to 80% of economic growth did not come from increasing the capital-output ratio – at least not if the private marginal product of capital was taken as an indicator of the social marginal product.
Instead, the keys to growth and development appeared to lie beyond an increase in capital intensity as measured by capital-output ratios: skills, education, technology broadly understood, and improvements in organizational management.
Yet capital continued to be seen as necessary, if not sufficient.
In the framework developed by the development economist Dani Rodrik, a shortage of capital can be a binding “growth constraint”: the place where “the biggest bang for the [policy] reform buck can be obtained.”
And even when other factors constrain growth more, they cannot be changed without changing the shape and form of the economy’s capital stock.
Indeed, high investment serves as a sign that other binding constraints to growth are absent, implying prosperity and that things are going right.
The problem is that for poor economies, raising the capital needed to relax binding growth constraints is difficult.
That’s why the world took the neo-liberal bet in the 1990’s: international capital mobility would come to the rescue by relaxing capital constraints where they were binding, and by reducing the scope for corruption and rent-seeking, which was often a more significant binding growth constraint.
The hope was that, like the pre-1913 era of British overseas investment, which financed a huge amount of industrialization in the resource-rich, temperate periphery of the world economy, net capital outflows from the industrial core would finance much late twentieth and twenty-first century industrialization.
But we all know the outcome: while international capital flows soared, the large net flow of capital from rich to poor countries simply never materialized.
In fact, the principal outcome was an enormous flow of capital from the periphery to the rich core.
For most of the past generation, and looking into the future, the message of the market is that the benefits of international capital mobility do not include a relaxation of the capital constraint, and thus an acceleration of growth in the global periphery.
The reason is not that the periphery offers an attractive labor force from which capital profits, but rather that the core – especially the United States – offers a form of protection for capital against unanticipated political disturbances.
But even though net international capital flows are going the wrong way, there are still substantial gross capital flows outward from the world economy’s core to its periphery.
And we can hope that these capital flows will carry with them the institutions and managerial expertise that have made the core so wealthy.
Nevertheless, a dispassionate observer might point out that for someone with limited resources and opportunities for policy reform to keep betting double-or-nothing on neo-liberalism is a strategy that has a well-deserved name: “Gambler’s Ruin.”
Gaming US Fiscal Reform
NEWPORT BEACH – It sounded like a really clever idea: Use a very public and sizeable threat to get bickering politicians to collaborate and compromise.
Well, it has not worked so far, and the already-sizeable stakes just got bigger.
No, I am not talking here about Europe’s debt crisis, decisive resolution of which still requires greater cooperation and shared responsibility, both within individual eurozone member states and between creditor and debtor countries.
I am referring to the complex fiscal situation in the United States – a fluid problem that has just been rendered more consequential by the recent warning from the ratings agency Moody’s that the US could lose its top credit rating next year if Congress fails to make progress on medium-term fiscal reforms.
Hobbled by the self-inflicted wounds of the debt-ceiling debacle in the summer of 2011 – which undermined economic growth and job creation, and further damaged Americans’ confidence in their political system – the US Congress and President Barack Obama’s administration recognized the need for a measured and rational approach to fiscal reform.
To increase the likelihood of this, they agreed on immediate spending cuts and tax increases that would automatically kick in (the “fiscal cliff”) if agreement on a comprehensive set of fiscal reforms eluded them.
On paper, at least, this sizeable threat – involving blunt fiscal contraction amounting to some 4% of GDP – should have properly aligned incentives in Washington, DC.
After all, no politician would wish to go down in history as being responsible for pushing the country back into recession at a time when unemployment is already too high, income and wealth inequalities are increasing, and a record number of Americans live in relative poverty.
Yet, so far, the threat has not worked.
To understand why, we can appeal to game theory, which provides economists and others a powerful framework with which to explain the dynamics of both simple and complex interactions.
The objective of threatening a fiscal cliff was to force a “cooperative outcome” on an increasingly “non-cooperative game.”
But, in the absence of a credible enforcer (and lacking sufficient mutual assurances), participants felt that they had more to gain from continuing their non-cooperative behavior.
Politicians on both sides of America’s political divide have generally felt that compromise would be viewed as a sign of weakness.
Moreover, too many have made prior commitments – for example, promising never to increase taxes – that they find hard to break, especially ahead of elections that both sides deem to be of defining significance for the country’s future, reflected in the candidates’ campaigns, which are getting nastier by the day.
The cost-benefit calculations will likely evolve after the election in November.
At that point, the cost of being singled out as collaborating with members of the other side – and thus the risk of being unseated by more extreme forces in one’s party – may well decline.
Moreover, since early September, the potential benefits of cooperation now include avoiding an embarrassing credit-rating downgrade next year if medium-term fiscal reform does not materialize.
I suspect that some will be quick to dismiss the consequences of a Moody’s downgrade.
And it certainly is tempting to do so.
After all, the global financial crisis badly damaged the credibility of ratings agencies as a whole.
Moreover, one would be hard pressed to identify any meaningful hit to the US from the decision by another major agency, Standard &amp; Poor’s, to downgrade America’s sovereign rating in August 2011.
On the contrary, rather than spiking higher following S&amp;P’s unprecedented move, US market interest rates continued to fall, reaching record-low levels.
This seemingly contradictory fall in financing costs reflected an abundance of foreign capital seeking to invest in the US, including money fleeing from Europe.
The absence of any adverse impact on government finances may thus lead some to dismiss the impact of a potential Moody’s downgrade in 2013.
Yet, those of us who are exposed on a daily basis to the inner workings of financial markets would caution against too upbeat an attitude toward a second downgrade by a major ratings agency.
Moreover, the potential impact certainly is not linear.
Owing to the way that investment contracts are written and guidelines specified, there is a meaningful difference between a single and multiple rating downgrades.
Were Moody’s to follow S&amp;P in stripping the US of its triple-A rating, the most likely outcome is that the universe of global investors who are both able and willing to increase their holdings of US government securities would shrink over time.
Fortunately for the US, the immediate adverse impact on borrowing costs would be alleviated, if not nullified, by investors’ lack of readily available alternatives to US government bonds, as well as a Federal Reserve that has been buying large volumes of US Treasuries.
But this is not a long-term risk worth taking.
Historically, it has taken countries many years of difficult fiscal-policy efforts to regain a triple-A status.
And, while no one can be certain about where the limits lie, there are both theoretical and operational bounds to how many government bonds can (and should) be placed on the balance sheet of a modern, well-functioning central bank.
All of this suggests that, whether in the lame-duck congressional session following the elections or in the first few months of the new Congress, US politicians will likely dismantle the fiscal cliff.
Based on an assessment of potential commonality among the political parties, such a compromise would limit the contractionary fiscal impact to some 1.5% of GDP.
Such a mini-bargain would go a long way toward reducing the risk of a serious US recession.
But it would fall short of the type of fiscal reforms that would satisfy Moody’s.
Such reforms require a grand bargain between America’s political parties, which in turn presupposes visionary leadership by both of them.
Emansipasi yang Timpang dalam Pendidikan di Dunia Arab
PARIS – Pembahasan tentang pendidikan di dunia Arab jarang sekali berfokus pada peran sekolah dalam mengubah nilai-nilai sosial dan politik.
Hal ini sungguh disayangkan sebab rata-rata penduduk di negara-negara Arab yang terdidik cenderung tidak bebas secara politik dan sosial, dibandingkan sejawatnya di negara-negara lain.
Jika masyarakat Arab ingin lebih terbuka dan memiliki perekonomian yang dinamis, sistem pendidikan yang berlaku sekarang perlu merangkul dan mempromosikan nilai-nilai yang sejalan dengan tujuan itu.
Kesenjangan ini tercermin dalam World Value Survey (WVS), sebuah jajak pendapat global yang membuat perbandingan atas beragam nilai di beberapa negara.
Baru-baru ini, WVS melakukan survei terhadap 12 negara Arab – Yordania, Mesir, Palestina, Lebanon, Irak, Maroko, Aljazair, Tunisia, Qatar, Yaman, Kuwait, dan Libya – dan 47 negara di luar Arab.
Survei ini menghasilkan hasil perbandingan penduduk di dunia Arab dengan kawasan lain yang tidak pernah diperoleh sebelumnya.
WVS mengukur empat nilai politik dan sosial yang dianggap penting: dukungan pada demokrasi, kesiapan partisipasi sipil, kepatuhan pada penguasa, dan dukungan pada nilai-nilai patriarkal yang melandasi diskriminasi terhadap perempuan.
Ketika negara umumnya bertambah makmur, lebih berpendidikan, dan lebih terbuka secara politik, dukungan pada demokrasi dan kesiapan partisipasi sipilnya akan meningkat, dan kepatuhan pada penguasa dan dukungan pada nilai-nilai patriarkal akan melemah.
Namun data yang diperoleh menunjukkan bahwa negara-negara Arab jauh tertinggal bila dibandingkan negara-negara lain dengan tingkat pembangunan yang sama.
Penduduk Arab memiliki preferensi rendah pada demokrasi (selisih 11%), tingkat keaktifan sipil yang lebih sedikit (selisih 8%), rasa hormat kepada penguasa yang besar (lebih tinggi 11%), dan sangat menghargai nilai-nilai patriarkal (lebih tinggi 30%).
Terdapat dua karakteristik dunia Arab yang bisa menjelaskan fenomena ini: ini adalah kawasan yang menjadi rumah bagi mayoritas penganut agama Islam dan pemerintah otokratis yang menguasai sebagian besar kawasan selama 50 tahun terakhir.
Menurut WVS, nilai keagamaan memang merangsang konservatisme, tapi bukan berarti lebih diutamakan di negara-negara Arab dibandingkan di kawasan lain.
Meskipun demikian, mengingat ukuran nilai keagamaan (religiosity score) yang dipegang teguh masyarakat Arab hampir dua kali lebih besar dibandingkan negara lain, faktor ini cukup menjelaskan adanya konservatisme di kawasan tersebut.
Namun yang lebih menariknya disini adalah peran yang dimainkan – atau gagal dimainkan – sistem pendidikan dalam mengembangkan keterbukaan sosial dan politik di dunia Arab.
Perbedaan terbesar antara negara-negara Arab dan negara lain bisa nampak dari warganya yang berpendidikan.
Contohnya preferensi pada demokrasi.
Dalam hal ini, selisih antara penduduk Arab dan non-Arab yang sama-sama memiliki gelar sarjana adalah 14%, sementara selisih antara penduduk yang lulusan pendidikan menengah hanya 5%.
Efek serupa juga terlihat pada tiga nilai lainnya.
Nampaknya pendidikan memiliki pengaruh yang lebih lemah dalam hal nilai-nilai sosial di negara-negara Arab dibandingkan tempat lain – bahkan 3 kali lebih rendah.
Dengan demikian, pihak-pihak yang ingin mendorong keterbukaan di dunia Arab harus berfokus tidak hanya pada dampak agama Islam tapi pendidikan yang dijalani penduduk Arab.
Memang benar, salah satu penjelasan yang wajar tentang kesenjangan nilai-nilai sosial adalah karena pendidikan secara sengaja digunakan sebagai alat indoktrinasi, dengan tujuan menyatukan beberapa pemerintah yang otokratis.
Sebetulnya, melalui penerapan pendidikan massal pada tahun 1960an, pendidikan di dunia Arab dijalankan oleh proyek-proyek nasionalis yang bersifat top-down.
Kemudian, pada tahun 1970an, setelah modernisasi yang dimotori negara gagal dan pemerintah menjadi semakin represif, kebijakan pendidikan lalu disisipkan dengan nilai-nilai agama dan konservatisme – pada awalnya untuk melawan kelompok oposisi sayap kiri, namun akhirnya untuk bersaing dengan kelompok islam di dalam negeri.
Sebuah kajian literatur pedagogi tentang sistem pendidikan di dunia Arab menyingkap indoktrinasi yang sedikit banyak dijalankan melalui pendidikan.
Sebagian besar ditandai dengan hafalan (rote learning), tidak diajarkannya kemampuan analitis, penekanan berlebih pada mata pelajaran agama, tidak adanya dorongan untuk ekspresi diri dengan dalih konformitas, dan rendahnya keterlibatan siswa di dalam masyarakat.
Semua unsur ini dirancang untuk mendorong kepatuhan dan menghalangi warga mengkritik penguasanya.
Mungkin ini terkesan seperti paradoks bahwa rezim sekuler bertanggung jawab atas “pengislaman” sistem pendidikan.
Tapi ini masuk akal jika hal tersebut dikenali sebagai upaya untuk mengeksploitasi karakteristik budaya lokal untuk melancarkan indoktrinasi (seperti yang dilakukan di Cina).
Menyalahkan budaya lokal, yang umumnya diwariskan kepada masyarakat, bukanlah sesuatu yang konstruktif.  Mengakui bahwa rezim otokratis secara sengaja menghilangkan potensi modernisasi dalam pendidikan demi mempertahankan keberlangsungannya sendiri merupakan suatu langkah maju.
Namun sayangnya bagi negara-negara Arab, jalan yang dilalui masih cenderung berliku.
Kaum elit tidak akan mau melakukan reformasi pendidikan apabila tindakan tersebut dapat mengancam kedudukan dan kelangsungan hidup mereka.
Aktivis dari organisasi masyarakat sipil harus memperjuangkan perubahan nilai-nilai yang menopang sistem pendidikan mereka, melalui penguatan partisipasi sipil, penanaman prinsip-prinsip demokrasi, dukungan terhadap kesetaraan gender, dan promosi keberagaman dan pluralisme.
Hanya melalui tindakan-tindakan ini, nilai-nilai yang diharapkan akan terpupuk di setiap sekolah dan akan menguat sehingga mampu mengubah masyarakat Arab.
The Right Iraqi Intervention
CANBERRA – US President Barack Obama deserves unconditional support for his decision to use military force to protect the persecuted Yezidi minority from threatened genocide by marauding Islamic State (IS) militants in northern Iraq.
The United States’ action is completely consistent with the principles of the international responsibility to protect (R2P) people at risk of mass-atrocity crimes, which was embraced unanimously by the United Nations General Assembly in 2005.
The US military intervention touches all of R2P’s bases of legality, legitimacy, and likely effectiveness in meeting its immediate objectives.
In contrast to the original military intervention in Iraq – which touched none of these bases – the current US action, though lacking Security Council authorization, is being taken at the request of the Iraqi government, so there is no question of a breach of international law.
The available evidence is that the many thousands of men, women, and children who have sought refuge in the Sinjar mountain range of northern Iraq are indeed at risk.
They face death not only from starvation and exposure, but also from genocidal slaughter by the rapidly advancing IS forces, who regard the Yazidis as apostates and have already perpetrated atrocities unrivaled in their savagery.
The US motive in mobilizing air power to protect them is unquestionably humanitarian.
It is clear that no lesser measures will be sufficient, and the only question about proportionality that arises is whether the air strikes and supply drops will do too little, rather than too much, to address the emergency.
Unlike the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, it cannot be argued that external military intervention will be likely to cause more harm than good.
It should be at least as effective in protecting the Yezidis (and Kurds and others in nearby Erbil) as was the intervention in Libya in 2011 to stop the threatened massacre by Muammar el-Qaddafi’s forces of the people of Benghazi.
Whether it will contribute to reversing the major gains already made by IS forces in northern Iraq, and to re-establishing the territorial integrity of the Iraqi state, is a different question.
As the Obama administration has made clear, that will depend, above all, on whether the disastrously divisive leadership of Nouri al-Maliki, Iraq’s Shia prime minister, gives way to a more inclusive regime, and whether, in that context, the ineffectual Iraqi army can regroup and rally.
Though some conservative American voices are already calling for more to be done, no compelling case can be made in the US, Europe, or my own country for sacrificing further blood and treasure in an effort to prop up a regime so demonstrably unable and unwilling to help itself hold the country together.
As I have argued previously, the only possible justification – moral, political, or military – for renewed external military intervention in Iraq is to meet the international responsibility to protect victims, or potential victims, of mass atrocities.
It is a little frustrating to those of us who have worked to embed R2P principles in international policy and practice that US leaders remain reluctant to use that terminology – a reluctance that partly reflects the perceived domestic political risk in relying on anything that comes from the UN.
But it would be churlish to complain when, as here, Obama talks of “upholding international norms,” and in practice moves to do exactly what the R2P norm requires.
There are also, of course, American voices – like that of the foreign-policy realist Stephen Walt – arguing for less to be done, on the ground that US interests are insufficiently engaged to justify any military intervention, however limited.
But this is to adopt a narrowly traditional view of the national interest – focusing only on direct security and economic advantage – and to ignore a third dimension, reputational advantage, which increasingly determines the extent to which countries respect and relate to one another.
It is in every country’s national interest to be – and to be seen as – a good international citizen.
There can be no better demonstration of good international citizenship than a country’s willingness to act when it has the capacity to prevent or avert a mass atrocity crime.
Obama has recently been criticized, in the context of his attitude toward the Palestinian-Israeli peace process, as being “cerebral in part of the world that’s looking for the visceral.”
His response to the plight of the Yezidis in Iraq has been both cerebral and visceral, and both America and the world are better for it.
Sorry is the Hardest Word
CANBERRA – Apologies, or the lack of them, have been back in the news, raising questions again about how useful they are in resolving international problems.
The efficacy of timely and sincere apologies in defusing personal tensions cannot be doubted.
Is the same true for diplomacy?
In some recent cases, the issue has been not much more than an irritating sideshow, as when Afghan President Hamid Karzai demanded an apology from the United States late last year for causing unintended civilian deaths – at the price, bizarrely, of allowing the Americans to continue defending him and his country (the US understandably refused).
But in other cases, the stakes have become very high indeed.
Bilateral relations between Indonesia and Australia since last November have become more frigid than they have been in decades, owing to President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono’s very real anger at Australia’s refusal to offer an apology for tapping his private telephone (and his wife’s).
And Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s visit in December to the Yasukuni Shrine, which honors Japan’s war dead – including, since 1978, its most serious convicted war criminals – has re-opened long-festering wounds among Japan’s neighbors, who perceive a lack of sincere contrition for waging aggressive war and committing wartime atrocities.
It has certainly added tension to Japan’s already-fraught standoff with China over their competing claims to the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands in the East China Sea.
In the case of Indonesia’s reaction to former US intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden’s revelations of Australian spying on its first family, a personal apology from Prime Minister Tony Abbott would have made all the difference.
He had merely to follow the playbook of President Barack Obama’s response to German Chancellor Angela Merkel when the US was similarly caught out.
Had he coupled this with a simple promise to “review our collection processes and priorities,” there might even have been no need to pledge explicitly, as the US now has, to end all monitoring of “the leaders of our close friends and allies.”
I was in Jakarta at the time, and formed that judgment after speaking to very senior officials, and I advised the Australian government accordingly.
But the government took the view that when it comes to intelligence matters, apologies are for wimps.
With elections looming in Indonesia, and nationalist sentiment there strong, Australia will be paying the diplomatic price for a long time unless it changes course.
The case of Japan is more complex.
Under strong international pressure in the 1980’s and 1990’s – to which I hope I contributed as Australia’s foreign minister – a series of powerful apologies were in fact offered.
Notable among them was then-Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono’s statement in 1993 on the issue of Korea’s “comfort women,” and Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama’s expression, on the 50th anniversary of the end of the World War II, of “deep remorse” and “heartfelt apology.”
There has been no subsequent outright disavowal of these apologies; indeed, this month Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida said that Abe’s cabinet members “have never denied” the Kono and Murayama statements.
But, save for a gracious acceptance by South Korea’s then-President Kim Dae-jung in 1998, Japan’s apologies simply have not resonated much in the region, because they have regularly been accompanied by apparent side-stepping or backsliding.
Japan’s Diet, for example, failed to endorse Murayama’s statement in 1995, agreeing only to express “a deep feeling of remorse” (and even then 241 MPs abstained).
Above all, there have been Japanese leaders’ recurring pilgrimages to Yasukuni.
The shrine not only records war criminals in its “Book of Souls”; it also contains the Yushukan museum, where Japan’s conquests in the 1930’s and 1940’s are glorified as “just wars fought for survival and self-defense” or for the “liberation of Asia.”
Certainly some of the outraged reaction by Japan’s neighbors is of questionable sincerity.
South Koreans have often failed to acknowledge the number and intensity of statements about comfort women (who were forced to provide sexual services to Japanese soldiers) and the amount of compensation on offer.
China, for its part, periodically mobilizes nationalist sentiment to divert attention from internal problems, and partly encouraged Abe’s recent assertiveness by declaring an Air Defense Identification Zone beyond its acknowledged national airspace in the East China Sea – a move that, while not illegal, was certainly provocative.
But Japan could and should have done much more to give real substance to its apologies, as the Germans have done.
At least since 1970, Germany has taken a comprehensive and credible approach to atoning for its Nazi past, fully acknowledging its horrors in school curricula, graphically commemorating them in museums, monuments, and ceremonies, and employing official discourse that has been unfailingly contrite.
Harvard’s Ezra Vogel, while not sparing China from his prescriptions, recently mapped some strategies by which Japan could defuse historical issues.
Vogel recommends a full and objective official account of the suffering Japan’s military aggression caused, lengthening the time that students must devote to modern Japanese history, and including regional reactions and criticism in that study.
Diplomats can learn from examples of transformative national apologies.
The reconciliation of indigenous and white Australians was hugely advanced by Prime Minister Paul Keating’s Redfern speech in 1992, in which he declared: “We committed the murders.
We took the children from their mothers.
We practiced discrimination and exclusion.
It was our ignorance and our prejudice...” Likewise, former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd offered a strong apology in 2008 to the “stolen generations” of Aboriginal children taken from their families by welfare officers.
There are many situations in which apologies are not necessary, because both sides agree to move on.
And “non-apology apologies” – for example, “I’m sorry if you feel I have offended you” – are often worse than nothing, although they are a familiar diplomatic stock-in-trade of which I, too, have been guilty of using.
It is also conceivable that genuine apologies may be counterproductive, because they trigger a backlash from local extremists, which may in turn fuel even more flames on the other side.
I would, however, resist the conclusion that Japan’s apologies have been a net negative in this respect.
These arguments will continue.
But it is difficult to believe that when a wrong has been done, a sincere apology will not have some restorative impact.
In public, as in private life, honest apologies are a powerful tool, and should be used less nervously and more often.
Cambodia’s Violent Peace
CANBERRA – Cambodia’s government has been getting away with murder.
Not the kind of genocidal slaughter conducted by the Khmer Rouge in the 1970’s. Nor the scale of killing that has been roiling Syria, or that has put Ukraine, Venezuela, Thailand, and Bangladesh in the global headlines of late.
But murder nonetheless, with Cambodian citizens deliberately targeted by their country’s security forces.
On January 3, five striking garment workers were shot dead in Phnom Penh while peacefully demanding a minimum livable wage.
Many others were severely injured by gunfire and beatings.
More than 20 have been detained without trial.
This followed deadly violence against unarmed demonstrators protesting last year’s deeply flawed national election, won, yet again, by Prime Minister Hun Sen’s ruling Cambodian People’s Party, which has dominated political life for more than three decades.
The recent killings repeat a pattern of political violence that has recurred all too often at crucial moments in Cambodia’s history – even after the 1991 Paris Peace Agreements, which were intended to bring not only peace, but also democracy and human-rights protection to the country’s long-suffering people.
No country in the world deserved all three more, ravaged as it was for two decades by massive United States bombing, civil war, a genocidal reign of terror by the Khmer Rouge, invasion by Vietnam, and more civil war – with some two million dead as a result.
Hopes were high that Cambodia had been set on a transformative path by the success of the United Nations peace plan, the huge peacekeeping operation that followed, and the remarkably peaceful election of 1993 (in all of which Australia played a leading role during my time as Foreign Minister).
In some respects, those hopes have been realized.
The Khmer Rouge did wither away, and with it the lingering threat of renewed civil war.
The Cambodian economy – strongly supported in recent years by aid and investment from China – has grown steadily (though it lags behind most of its regional neighbors, and concerns about corruption and political instability are preventing it from reaching its full potential).
But Cambodia’s record on democracy and human rights since the Paris Peace Agreements has not been a good one.
A grenade attack on an opposition rally led by Sam Rainsy in March 1997 killed 16 people and injured more than a hundred.
That July, after an uneasy period of sharing power with Prince Norodom Ranariddh’s royalist party, Hun Sen launched a bloody coup in which his opponents were exiled, arrested, tortured, and in some cases summarily executed.
Neither episode generated much international reaction: Hun Sen still had enough political capital from his fight against the Khmer Rouge and his cooperative role in the peace process, while Sam Rainsy was regarded as deeply flawed, and the royalist leadership as feckless.
Cambodia-fatigue among policymakers also played a role.
At the time, I wanted to believe that these reverses would be temporary, and there were too many like me.
Since then, while preserving a democratic façade, Hun Sen has ruled, for all practical purposes, as an autocrat, showing scant regard for rights of free expression and association – and resorting to violent repression whenever he has deemed it necessary to preserve his and his party’s position.
This has been accompanied by staggering levels of corruption, with Cambodia ranked 160th by Transparency International, out of 175 countries.
There are stories, unverifiable but plausible, that 20 or more of Hun Sen’s closest associates have each amassed more than $1 billion through misappropriation of state assets, illegal economic activity, and favoritism in state procurement and contracting.
There has also been political patronage bordering on parody, with one recent count putting the government’s size at 244 ministers and secretaries of state.
For far too long, Hun Sen and his colleagues have been getting away with violence, human-rights abuses, corruption, and media and electoral manipulation without serious internal or external challenge.
But things are beginning to change.
A credible new opposition party – the Cambodia National Rescue Party – has emerged under Sam Rainsy (who looks a little more like a national leader now than just a monochromatic anti-Vietnamese crusader), gaining significant popular support.
A large number of social-media-savvy young voters have been turning out in the streets demanding a change of government.
Internationally, too, some pressure has been building, but not enough.
Ed Royce, Chairman of the US House Foreign Affairs Committee, has called on Hun Sen to resign; condemnatory resolutions have been passed in a number of parliaments; and many states entered criticisms of one kind or another into the record when the UN Human Rights Council reviewed Cambodia’s human-rights record in Geneva a few weeks ago.
But the tone of too many of these statements has been muted.
Australia’s statements have been typical – falling over backward to avoid giving offense, and too anxious to balance criticism with praise.
Officials are “concerned” about “recent disproportionate violence against protesters” but “welcome the Government’s stated commitment to undertake electoral reforms.”
Australia’s new foreign minister, Julie Bishop, has talked, as foreign ministers often do, of the need to avoid unproductive “megaphone diplomacy” and to “engage, not enrage” her counterparts.
But, it seems that no robust critique was delivered when she met privately with Hun Sen in Phnom Penh on February 22 – even though Australia’s high standing in Cambodia (not least owing to its historical role in the peace process) means that its voice certainly would have been listened to.
There is a place for quiet diplomacy that relies on genuine engagement to encourage significant behavioral change.
But when states behave badly enough for long enough, loud megaphones can also be in order.
I know Hun Sen and worked well with him in the past.
I have resisted strong public criticism until now, because I thought there was hope for both him and his government.
But their behavior has now moved beyond the civilized pale.
It is time for Cambodia’s political leaders to be named, shamed, investigated, and sanctioned by the international community.
Abe’s Asian Gambit
CANBERRA – With the world producing more history than most of us can consume right now, it is easy to lose sight of recent developments that could have even greater consequences for long-term peace and stability than recent alarming events in eastern Ukraine, Gaza, and Syria-Iraq.
The outcome of the nuclear negotiations with Iran, the change of leadership in India and Indonesia – two of the world’s three largest democracies – and the re-energizing of the BRICS group of major non-Western states (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) may all be such game-changers.
But Japan’s international muscle-flexing under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe may be even more significant.
Unless it is very carefully managed by all concerned, including the United States and Japan’s other closest Asia-Pacific allies, Abe’s makeover of Japanese foreign policy could undermine the fragile power balances that have so far kept the Sino-American rivalry in check.
Japan is right to be concerned about China’s new regional assertiveness, and Abe’s recent diplomatic push to strengthen Japan’s relations in Southeast Asia, and with Australia and India, is understandable in that context.
Nor is it inherently unreasonable – despite opposition at home and abroad – for his government to seek to reinterpret Article 9 of Japan’s “peace constitution” to permit wider engagement in collective self-defense operations and military cooperation with allies and partners.
But the risks in all of this must be openly acknowledged.
Opposition to any perceived revival of Japanese militarism is hard-wired in Northeast Asia.
Abe is an intensely conservative nationalist, still deeply reluctant to accept the extent of Japan’s World War II guilt (even when acknowledging, as he did in Australia recently, “the horrors of the past century’s history” and offering gracious condolences for “the many souls who lost their lives”).
His refusal to rule out future visits to the Yasukuni Shrine, with its war-glorifying Yushukan Museum alongside, fuels hardline skepticism in China.
It also makes common cause with South Korea much more difficult, and heightens the risk of maritime territorial disputes becoming explosive.
Less noticed, but possibly more important in the long term, have been Japan’s efforts to reshape regional security arrangements, which for many years have had three key elements.
First, there have been the hub-and-spoke alliances of the US with Japan, South Korea, and Australia (and more loosely with Singapore, Thailand, and the Philippines).
These alliances are accepted and well understood, if not loved, by China.
Second, there are national defense efforts, encouraged by the US, increasingly aimed at greater self-reliance in the event that China’s rise becomes a military threat.
This, too, has been accepted reasonably calmly, if not always quietly, by China, and has not undermined the continuing growth in bilateral economic relationships that every country in the region is developing with China.
Finally, there have been multilateral security dialogues – the ASEAN Regional Forum and now the East Asia Summit the most prominent among them – designed to be vehicles for confidence building, and conflict prevention and management.
These mechanisms have so far promised more than they have delivered, though not for want of continuing efforts to give them more clout.
For all of the hype that has accompanied the US “pivot” to Asia – announced by President Barack Obama in the Australian Parliament in November 2011 – the delicate balances involved in this basic architecture have changed little for decades.
But now Japan, with overt support from Australia in particular, seems determined to change the balance by establishing, as a counterweight to China, a much denser alliance-type relationship with selected partners.
Abe spoke repeatedly in the Australian Parliament earlier this month of Japan’s new “special relationship” with Australia – terminology normally associated only with the strongest of alliance partnerships – and followed his address by signing an agreement for the transfer of defense equipment and technology.
Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott, who earlier this year described Japan as both our “best friend in Asia” and a “strong ally,” has warmly embraced the “special relationship” language.
He consummated the love-in by expressing his admiration for “the skill and sense of honor” of the Japanese submariners who died attacking Sydney Harbor in 1942, while saying of Japan’s waging of aggressive war and wartime atrocities only that “we disagreed with what they did.”
We have not yet seen any renewed attempt to re-establish the “Quadrilateral Security Dialogue,” comprising Japan, Australia, the US, and India, which conducted joint military exercises in 2007 and was seen by China as a hostile containment enterprise.
But it is not hard to imagine that this is still very much on Abe’s wish list.
The dangers should not be exaggerated.
But, with strategic competition between the US and China as delicately poised as it is, and with the economic interests of Australia, Japan, and many others in the region bound up just as intensely with China as their security interests are with the US, rocking the boat carries serious risks.
Countries like ours should take a clear stand when China overreaches externally (as it has in the South China Sea with its indefensible “nine-dashed line” asserting historical rights with no known justification in international law).
The same applies when China does not behave like a good international citizen on the UN Security Council, or should it commit egregious human-rights violations at home.
But we should be cautious about moving beyond taking stands to taking sides in the region to a greater extent than has been the norm for decades.
Kishore Mahbubani has argued recently that we need to recognize that in China, as elsewhere, a significant internal contest between hard- and softer-liners is taking place.
To the extent that this is the case, it is smart policy for every state in the region to speak and act in a way that helps the doves and gives no encouragement to the hawks.
MH370’s Beacon of Hope
MELBOURNE – The harrowing mystery of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, which disappeared on March 8 with 239 people aboard, may be at least partly resolved within a matter of days.
Underwater search vehicles are homing in on an area just a few kilometers wide in the vastness of the southern Indian Ocean, some 2,000 kilometers northwest of Perth.
This is where the Boeing 777-200 is likely to have run out of fuel and crashed, according to the analysis by the UK company Inmarsat and British aviation experts of hourly signals sent automatically from the aircraft to Inmarsat’s orbiting space vehicle.
More promising still, it is where signals, assumed to have come from the locator beacons attached to the aircraft’s “black box” flight recorders, were picked up on April 5 and over the following days by an American “pinger locator” being towed by an Australian navy vessel, the Ocean Shield.
The Australian defense authorities now coordinating the search still say that to discover wreckage probably lying 4.5 kilometers (2.8 miles) deep, on so remote a seabed, will be like “finding a needle in a haystack.”
And any subsequent recovery operation will obviously still be a huge challenge.
But officials are confident that they have at least found the haystack.
During the early days of the search, almost everything that could go wrong did – from overlooked or misunderstood data to poor communication and uncoordinated and misallocated resources – as attention remained focused on the aircraft’s scheduled route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing.
And there were huge frustrations even when the search shifted to the Indian Ocean, as massive naval and air resources failed to find any trace of relevant surface debris.
But, whatever the past frustrations, and possibly even bigger disappointments yet to come, the bigger and much more significant story of the search for MH370 is what has gone right.
Simply put, it has been a magnificent demonstration of how response to human tragedy can unite rather than divide, reinforcing the impulse to cooperate rather than confront.
And it has testified to the good sense of those who have been arguing for years, in a variety of Asian and wider global contexts, that maritime search, rescue, and disaster relief is an ideal place to start in creating confidence building mechanisms aimed at laying the foundations for conflict prevention and resolution.
The search has involved unprecedented international cooperation, first in the South China Sea and then in the Indian Ocean, from a total of 26 countries.
What is extraordinary is that many of these countries (like China, Japan, the Philippines, Malaysia, South Korea, and Vietnam) have been at one another’s throats over territorial and other disputes, while others (not least China and the US) are abidingly suspicious of each other’s geopolitical motives and intentions.
Australia’s close cooperation throughout the search with China – whose citizens comprised nearly two-thirds of those aboard the ill-fated flight, and whose naval and air resources have been unceasingly devoted to the common effort – has borne immediate fruit: a highly successful visit earlier this month by Prime Minister Tony Abbott.
An important trade deal advanced, and no issue was made of the new Abbott government’s embarrassingly fulsome embrace of US leadership in the region, and its rookie mistake in describing Japan as “our best friend in Asia” (the right formula in these cases being “We have no better friend than…”).
It’s a reach, but tempting, to suggest that Australia’s long-term security might even be better guaranteed by spending a few million dollars on towed pinger locators and unmanned Bluefin-21 mini-submarines, with their sonars and cameras, and some serious naval infrastructure to support them, rather than the $20-40 billion currently being contemplated to renew and extend Australia’s aging combat-submarine fleet.
It is not quite as naive as it may seem to think that the peace and security of the whole Indo-Pacific region, not to mention other equally volatile parts of the world, might be better advanced by devoting far more resources and effort to common security strategies rather than traditional military ones.
Finding security with others, rather than against them, and concentrating on cooperative approaches to achieving global and regional public goods, seems more productive than giving free rein to crude nationalist sentiment and planning ever more sophisticated and expensive ways to destroy one another.
The search for MH370 has shown in microcosm how much there is to be gained through peaceful cooperation.
It should also help focus our attention on just how much there is to be lost in today’s world – a world that is far more interdependent than the one that exploded in 1914 – if we fail to apply these lessons to our broader international relationships.
The world is a much safer and saner place when states search for and find common ground on which to work together.
Protecting Civilians Responsibly
BEIJING – Would China ever be willing to host an international policy discussion about the conditions that would legitimize invading another country to stop genocide or other mass-atrocity crimes from being committed within its borders?
Given China’s long history of antagonism to “interference in internal affairs” in general, and to “humanitarian intervention” in particular, and in view of its contribution to the UN Security Council’s long paralysis over much less coercive measures in Syria, you would be in good company if you answered, “No.”
But you would be wrong.
I have just been at a two-day meeting in Beijing that wrestled with just this topic.
The meeting, hosted by the foreign ministry’s think tank, the China Institute of International Studies, brought together specialist scholars and practitioners from China and the other BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and South Africa).
And this month, the Russian Foreign Ministry’s Diplomatic Academy will host a conference in Moscow, with local and international experts discussing the same subject.
Both meetings are, to my knowledge, the first of their kind.
The fact that they are happening at all – and, if my Beijing experience is any guide, in a constructive, problem-solving spirit – is an encouraging development.
Although no outcome was formally agreed or made public, several themes emerged from the Beijing meeting.
Taken together, they offer reason for confidence that it may be possible to recreate international consensus, so long missing in Syria, about how to deal with the hardest mass-atrocity cases.
First, there was widespread acceptance that the “Responsibility to Protect” (R2P) doctrine, unanimously agreed by the United Nations General Assembly in 2005, is here to stay.
R2P recognizes that sovereign states have a responsibility to protect their people from genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity, and war crimes; that other states have a responsibility to assist them to do so; and that if a state is “manifestly failing” to protect its people, the wider international community has a responsibility to step in with “timely and decisive action,” which might in an extreme case include military action if approved by the UN Security Council.
True, some Chinese scholars remain inclined to argue that the entire R2P enterprise – particularly its sanction of military action in exceptional cases– is just “old neo-interventionist wine in a new bottle.”
But this did not appear to be a majority sentiment, nor did it stop anyone from engaging in lively discussion of how the R2P doctrine could be most effectively implemented in practice.
Second, there was widespread agreement about what had caused the breakdown of consensus in the Security Council concerning how to respond to events in Syria (at least until the use of chemical weapons in August proved to be a game changer).
The cause was not an attempt by the global South to revive outdated notions of unlimited sovereignty; rather, it was a reaction to the perceived overreach of the NATO-led military intervention in Libya in 2011.
The Security Council’s three Western permanent members – France, the United Kingdom, and the United States (the P3) – had sought and been given a limited mandate to protect civilians, specifically invoking R2P.
But they were perceived as then ruthlessly pursuing full-scale regime change, without securing any further agreement from the Council.
If the P3 (now often privately, and rather more acerbically, described as FUKUS) were going to take a mile after being given an inch, then no more inches would be offered.
Third, and most important, there was widespread agreement about how consensus within the Security Council on the hardest cases might be recreated.
The idea was that R2P should be “enriched” by the acceptance of a complementary principle, called “Responsible Protection.”
Floated by the Chinese scholar Ruan Zongze in a journal article last year, and evidently the subject of much internal discussion since, Responsible Protection builds upon “Responsibility While Protecting,” an approach earlier proposed by Brazil that has already gained some traction at the UN.
The core elements of Responsible Protection, as articulated by Chinese participants in the Beijing debate, won strong support around the table.
Tough criteria – specifically, legitimate intention, last resort, proportionality, and balance of consequences – should be clearly satisfied before any military mandate is granted, with every effort made to exhaust diplomatic solutions before more robust alternatives are embraced.
There should be better methods of supervision and accountability to ensure that the “protection” objective remains at the heart of any response.
And the primary emphasis of the entire R2P enterprise should continue to be prevention of mass-atrocity crimes – both their occurrence and their recurrence.
Some in the P3 and elsewhere will see all of this as a mere spoiling operation with a more sophisticated face.
But they will do so at their peril.
The idea of Responsible Protection – like the Brazilian initiative that preceded it – reflects genuinely and widely felt concerns.
If not addressed, they will make Security Council resolutions in support of military action in R2P cases almost impossible to obtain in the future.
It remains to be seen whether China – and the other BRICS countries – will now move to champion the idea of Responsible Protection in a formal way.
If they do, it should not be viewed as a rearguard action designed to undermine the R2P norm, but rather an effort to assume co-ownership of it.
In terms of getting serious about saying “never again” to mass-atrocity crimes, that is about as positive a development as anyone could hope for.
Mandela for the Ages
MELBOURNE – Without Nelson Mandela, South Africa’s apartheid nightmare eventually would have come to an end.
Its enforcers were beyond the civilized pale, and the world’s patience with them had run out.
But, without Mandela’s towering moral and political leadership, the transition would have been long, ugly, and bloody beyond measure.
One Afrikaner leader, F.W. De Klerk, came to understand – late, but not too late – what the times demanded, and he thoroughly deserved to share the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize with Mandela.
But it was Madiba – the tribal name by which South Africans of every caste and color now affectionately call him – who made the crucial difference.
I was lucky enough, as Australia’s foreign minister at the time, to be one of the first foreign officials to greet him after his release from prison in February 1990 – just a few days later, in Lusaka, where he had flown to meet his African National Congress colleagues in exile.
Approaching the meeting, I was excited but nervous.
Could the reality of the man possibly match my expectations?
Mandela had long been my personal hero, from my student days in the 1960’s, when – like so many others of my generation – I was an anti-apartheid activist.
We knew that the risks we ran of being roughed up or arrested while demonstrating against visiting Springbok rugby teams were entirely trivial compared to the risks that he and his colleagues had been prepared to face.
We could recite by heart the last words of his 1964 Rivonia Trial speech, one of the most thrilling affirmations of the human spirit ever uttered: “a free society…is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve.
But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.”
But how much of that dignity and idealism could possibly have survived the ordeal of 27 years in prison, most of that time on Robben Island in the South Atlantic?
I need not have worried.
Like so many others before and since, I was captivated from the first moment by Mandela’s huge, luminescent smile, by his unending charm and grace, and by the lucid intelligence with which he discussed his country’s transition problems.
But, above all, there was his extraordinary, almost unbelievable, lack of bitterness toward his Afrikaner jailers.
Mandela was, in fact, as keen to talk to me as I was to meet him.
He wanted to thank Australia for the very significant role our country had played in sustaining the pressure for change, particularly under Bob Hawke’s government, and in leading the global charge for financial sanctions on the apartheid regime.
So, sitting face to face across the Zambian president’s dining table, it was just the two of us, for an hour or more, chatting away comfortably about everything from United Nations sanctions to the end of the Cold War to our children’s careers.
Of all the meetings with all the leaders and other international figures around the world that I have had during all my years in public life, there is no question about which one gave me the most joy.
Mandela is simply the most impressive and decent human being I have ever met, or am ever likely to meet.
This was an impression, moreover, that did not fade with familiarity.
We met a number of times in the years that followed, on his visits to Australia and in South Africa – at his home in Soweto – and on one memorable occasion when I accompanied him to the opening match of the 1995 Rugby World Cup, at Newlands Stadium in Cape Town.
More than 50,000 South Africans – Afrikaners almost to a man, with hardly a black face in sight – were there to see their country play mine.
And, as their new president walked out onto the ground to greet the players, every single one of them seemed to bellow in enchanted union “Man-del-a!
Man-del-a!”
If Mandela’s leadership can be argued, as I think it can, to have been of a once-in-a-century quality, the opportunity to experience it first-hand was a once-in-a-lifetime privilege.
When it comes to national leadership at a time of fragility and transition, so much seems to depend on the luck of the draw.
Will a country find itself with a Milošević or a Mugabe; an Atatürk or an Arafat; a Rabin who can see and seize the moment, and change course, or someone who never will?
South Africa was lucky – almost miraculously so – to have had Nelson Mandela.
His memory will be cherished for as long as history continues to be written.
The Limits to Fighting the Islamic State
CANBERRA – There is a long history of misconceived and over-reaching foreign military intervention in the Middle East, and it is to be hoped that US President Barack Obama’s decision to wage war against the Islamic State will not prove to be another.
No terrorist group more richly deserves to be destroyed outright than these marauding, genocidal jihadists.
But as the US-led mission is currently conceived and described, it is not clear whether its objectives are achievable at acceptable costs in terms of time, money, and lives.
The basic problem is that the Islamic State’s territorial gains are being approached from three completely different perspectives, demanding three different types of operational responses.
There is the humanitarian mission to protect civilian populations in Iraq and Syria from mass-atrocity crimes.
There is the need to protect other states’ citizens from Islamic State terrorism.
And there is the desire to restore states’ integrity and stability in the region.
Military intervention may help to hold the line against Iraq’s further disintegration and the spread of the Islamic State cancer into countries like Jordan.
But if 150,000 US troops could not stabilize Iraq in the absence of an inclusive and competent government, the limited measures on offer now simply will not suffice.
And we should know by now that any Western military intervention with overtly political, rather than clearly humanitarian, objectives runs a real risk of inflaming sectarian sentiment.
Things might be different if the US and other key players could simultaneously embark on a broad regional stabilization enterprise, but there are too many competing agendas to make this realistic for the foreseeable future.
The Sunni-Shia rivalry means that Saudi Arabia and the Gulf countries will concede no meaningful role to Iran.
Nor will the West acknowledge Iran’s centrality to any multilateral process, for fear of losing negotiating leverage with respect to Iran’s nuclear program.
Few are willing to accept that Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, despite his abominable record, now almost certainly must be part of the solution.
And the open sore of the Israel-Palestine conflict plays into every other rivalry.
The counter-terrorism objective is more inherently plausible than that of political stabilization, and domestic politics in the US, Australia, and elsewhere probably require the prominence that it has received from Western leaders.
To the extent that their breeding ground can be destroyed, as Al Qaeda’s was in Afghanistan, there will be fewer newly minted terrorists to worry about.
But it is difficult to believe that a military campaign of the kind now contemplated, even with substantial support from Arab countries, can achieve that objective any time soon, or at an acceptable cost, in both Iraq and in the Islamic State’s Syrian havens.
The real burden will have to be borne, as now, by effective international cooperation in intelligence and policing.
The competence of Iraqi and Kurdish ground forces – crucial if territory is to be taken and held – will take time to build up, and may never be achievable with the so-called moderate forces within Syria.
Airstrikes anywhere risk civilian casualties – and thus the possibility of inflaming the very sentiments one is trying to counter.
Moreover, airstrikes in Syria without the government’s consent or Security Council authorization will be manifestly in breach of the United Nations Charter.
The prospect of Islamic State-inspired terrorist attacks in the US are not remotely real or imminent enough to justify reliance on the self-defense exception.
Hearts and minds matter in counterterrorism, and they become harder to win whenever the US and its supporters embark upon military action clearly in breach of international law.
The slow buy-in so far of Arab states to Obama’s campaign attests to the nervousness that many of them feel on all of these grounds.
By far the most defensible rationale for military action is – and has been from the outset – the humanitarian objective: the responsibility to protect populations at risk of genocide, ethnic cleansing, and other major crimes against humanity and war crimes.
I have argued that all of the conditions necessary in this context have been satisfied, and this will continue to be the case so long as the Islamic State maintains its horrifying modus operandi.
Operating within this framework, US and coalition forces would clearly be entitled to disrupt, degrade, and seek to destroy the Islamic State’s capability in a way that would also serve the counter-terrorist objective.
But the primary objective for intervention would remain unequivocally humanitarian, and as such would be much less susceptible to anti-Western blowback than any other mission.