As World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General Margaret Chan has noted, “Not one single country has managed to turn around its obesity epidemic in all age groups.”
According to the OECD, from 2000 to 2013, the prevalence of obesity increased by at least 0.5% per year in 130 of the 196 countries for which data were collected.
This global epidemic is not confined to advanced countries.
As emerging economies climb out of poverty, their citizens are becoming fatter.
More than 60% of the world’s obese people live in developing countries, where rapid industrialization and urbanization are boosting incomes and therefore calorie intake.
In India and China, the prevalence of obesity in cities is 3-4 times the rate in rural areas.
Indeed, the evidence suggests that developing countries are especially vulnerable to the epidemic.
Obesity rates tend to explode in countries where food was once scarce and suddenly becomes plentiful.
In the mid-twentieth century, for example, a boom in phosphate mining transformed the Micronesian island state of Nauru from a land of food shortages and starvation to the world’s leader in obesity and type-2 diabetes.
In 2005, according to the WHO, 94% of men and 93% of women in Nauru were overweight, and more than 70% of the population was obese.
To make matters worse, in countries with limited public-health services, the cost of health care falls directly on the afflicted households.
As a result, obesity can lock in poverty and perpetuate inequality.
Through a review of 500 intervention trials around the world, MGI has identified 74 potential interventions that could be used to address obesity.
These include subsidized school meals, urban design that encourages walking, better nutritional labeling, restrictions on the advertising of high-calorie food and drinks, and fiscal measures.
Education concerning the risks of obesity is important, as is taking personal responsibility for one’s health, fitness, and weight.
But all the evidence shows that relying on knowledge about obesity and willpower is not enough to offset the evolutionary instinct to overeat.
These effects are compounded by lifestyles that require little or no physical activity.
People need help, and that means changing the environmental forces shaping their decisions – by, say, reducing standard portion sizes, altering marketing practices, and designing cities and educational establishments to make it easier for people to exercise or be active.
MGI was able to collect enough data on 44 of the 74 potential interventions to develop an initial assessment of their impact if they were scaled up to a national level.
If the United Kingdom, for example, were to deploy all 44 interventions, it could rein in obesity rates and help roughly 20% of its overweight and obese population return to a healthy weight within 5-10 years.
Over the long term, savings from reduced health-care spending and gains from higher productivity could outweigh the investment needed to deliver interventions.
In the UK, reversing obesity trends could save the National Health Service about $1.2 billion a year.
For many countries, tackling obesity will require a national – if not global – effort.
Only a coherent, sustained portfolio of initiatives, implemented on a large scale, will be effective.
No single entity – government, retailers, consumer-goods companies, restaurants, employers, media organizations, educators, health-care providers, or individuals – can address obesity on its own.
We do not yet have all the answers when it comes to the best way to tackle obesity.
But the rapid rise in obesity rates around the world creates a strong case for experimenting with interventions, to see what works.
Today, investment in obesity research worldwide amounts to some $4 billion a year – just 0.2% of the estimated social costs of obesity.
We can – and must – do more.
Global Risk and Reward in 2011
NEW YORK – The outlook for the global economy in 2011 is, partly, for a persistence of the trends established in 2010. These are: an anemic, below-trend, U-shaped recovery in advanced economies, as firms and households continue to repair their balance sheets; a stronger, V-shaped recovery in emerging-market countries, owing to stronger macroeconomic, financial, and policy fundamentals.
That adds up to close to 4% annual growth for the global economy, with advanced economies growing at around 2% and emerging-market countries growing at about 6%.
But there are downside and upside risks to this scenario.
On the downside, one of the most important risks is further financial contagion in Europe if the eurozone’s problems spread – as seems likely – to Portugal, Spain, and Belgium.
Given the current level of official resources at the disposal of the International Monetary Fund and the European Union, Spain now seems too big to fail yet too big to be bailed out.
The United States represents another downside risk for global growth.
In 2011, the US faces a likely double dip in the housing market, high unemployment and weak job creation, a persistent credit crunch, gaping budgetary holes at the state and local level, and steeper borrowing costs as a result of the federal government’s lack of fiscal consolidation.
Moreover, credit growth on both sides of the Atlantic will be restrained, as many financial institutions in the US and Europe maintain a risk-averse stance toward lending.
In China and other emerging-market economies, delays in policy tightening could fuel a rise in inflation that forces a tougher clampdown later, with China, in particular, risking a hard landing.
There is also a risk that capital inflows to emerging markets will be mismanaged, thus fueling credit and asset bubbles.
Moreover, further increases in oil, energy, and commodity prices could lead to negative terms of trade and a reduction in real disposable income in net commodity-importing countries, while adding to inflationary pressures in emerging markets.
Moreover, currency tensions will remain high.
Countries with large current-account deficits need nominal and real depreciation (to sustain growth via net exports while ongoing private- and public-sector deleveraging keeps domestic demand weak), whereas surplus countries (especially emerging markets) are using currency intervention to resist nominal appreciation and sterilized intervention to combat real appreciation.
This is forcing deficit countries into real exchange-rate adjustments via deflation – and thus a rising burden of public and private debt that may lead to disorderly defaults.
Furthermore, several major geopolitical risks loom, including military confrontation between North and South Korea and the lingering possibility that Israel – or even the US – might use military force to counter Iran’s nuclear weapons program. There are also the political and economic turmoil in Pakistan and the risk of a rise in cyber-attacks – for example, in retaliation for criminal proceedings against WikiLeaks.
In the US, slower private-sector deleveraging – given the fiscal stimulus from the extension of unemployment benefits for 13 months, the payroll-tax cut, and maintenance of current income-tax rates for another two years – could lull policymakers into assuming that relatively large fiscal and current-account imbalances can continue indefinitely.
This could generate financial strains over the medium term – and protectionist pressures in the short term.
Finally, in the face of political opposition to fiscal consolidation, especially in the US, there is a risk that the path of least resistance becomes continued monetization of fiscal deficits.
Eventually (once the slack in goods and labor markets is reduced), this would push inflation expectations – and yield curves – higher.
But there are also several upside risks.
The US corporate sector is strong and very profitable, owing to massive labor shedding, creating scope for increased capital spending and hiring to contribute to more robust and above-trend GDP growth in 2011.
Similarly, the eurozone, driven by Germany, could lurch toward greater economic and political union (especially some form of fiscal union), thus containing the problems of its periphery.
Meanwhile, growth in Germany and the eurozone “core” may further accelerate given the strength of emerging markets, which may show even greater resilience, underpinning more rapid global expansion.
The attenuation of downside risks and pleasant surprises in developed and emerging economies could lead to a further increase in demand for risky assets (equities and credit), which would reinforce economic recovery via wealth effects and lower borrowing costs.
Positive feedback from consumption to production, employment, and income generation – both within countries and across countries via trade channels – could further accelerate the pace of global growth, particularly if monetary policies in most advanced economies remain looser than expected, supporting asset reflation and thus demand and growth.
Indeed, after four years (2007-2010) of either recession or sub-par recovery, the process of balance-sheet repair – while not completed yet – is underway, and may result in less saving and more spending to boost growth in advanced economies.
The damage from the financial crisis is still ongoing, but stronger growth can heal many wounds, especially debt-driven wounds.
So far, the downside and upside risks for the world economy are balanced.
But if sound government policies in advanced and major emerging economies contain the downside risks that are more prevalent in the first half of this year – which derive from political and policy uncertainty – a more resilient global economic recovery could take hold in the second half of 2011 and into 2012.
Technology and the Employment Challenge
MILAN – New technologies of various kinds, together with globalization, are powerfully affecting the range of employment options for individuals in advanced and developing countries alike – and at various levels of education.
Technological innovations are not only reducing the number of routine jobs, but also causing changes in global supply chains and networks that result in the relocation of routine jobs – and, increasingly, non-routine jobs at multiple skill levels – in the tradable sector of many economies.
How, then, should policymakers confront the new and difficult challenges for employment (and, in turn, for the distribution of income and wealth), especially in developed economies?
From recent research, we have learned a number of interesting things about how the evolution of economic structure affects employment.
The tradable side of advanced economies has not generated any real net increases in employment for at least two decades, while the jobs that it has created are concentrated in the upper-income and upper-education ranges, with employment declining in the middle and lower range of income and education.
Growth in high-end services employment is matched by contraction in high-employment components of manufacturing supply chains.
Until the crisis of 2008, middle- and lower-income job growth occurred entirely in the non-tradable sector of the economy, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of advanced countries’ output and employment.
Here, incomes and value added per employee remained largely flat.
Jobs could be eliminated by technology, but not by global competition; and, unsustainable, debt-fueled domestic-demand growth helped to delay the current employment deficits.
As a result, the advanced economies have been shedding routine jobs at a rapid rate, while adding non-routine jobs (for example, those that cannot yet be replaced or reduced by machines and networked computers).
This has fueled a dramatic rise in the return on education and high-level skills, with the share of total income received by owners of capital and high-end employees increasing in advanced countries for more than two decades.
Growth and employment are thus diverging in advanced countries.
The key force driving this trend – technology – is playing multiple roles.
The replacement of routine manual jobs by machines and robots is a powerful, continuing, and perhaps accelerating trend in manufacturing and logistics, while networks of computers are replacing routine white-collar jobs in information processing.
Part of this is pure automation.
Another important part is disintermediation – the elimination of intermediaries in banking, online retail, and a host of government services, to name just a few affected areas.
But technology’s impact does not stop there.
The same class of information technologies that automate, disintermediate, and reduce the costs of remoteness are also enabling the construction of increasingly complex and geographically diverse global supply chains and networks.
Global supply chains – constantly in flux, owing to rising developing-country incomes and shifting comparative advantage – locate productive activities where human and other resources make those activities competitive.
Links in these chains include not only intermediate products and assembly, but also a growing range of services – research and development, design, maintenance and support, customer service, business processes, and more – as transaction, coordination, and communication costs fall.
The result is what is sometimes called the “atomization” of global supply chains: increasingly fine subdivisions are feasible, more efficient, and locatable almost anywhere.
Proximity still matters in terms of transport and logistics costs.
But, with the developing world accounting for the largest new markets and most of the growth in global demand, the logic driving atomization should become even more compelling.
The efficient ongoing decomposition of global supply chains, networks, and services has two related consequences.
First, the tradable part of the global economy – where competition for economic activity and jobs is direct – is becoming a larger share of the whole; the same is true of individual economies.
Second, parts of global supply chains that were not competitive are no longer protected by being adjacent to parts that were.
Adjacency is no longer a requirement.
These dynamics and related challenges are not confined to advanced countries.
Over the next decade, for example, China will replace much of its labor-intensive assembly employment with higher-value-added employment in manufacturing and services, not only in the tradable sector, but also – even more noticeably – in the rapidly growing non-tradable part of its economy.
The expanding scope and diminishing costs of automation and additive manufacturing may affect labor-intensive functions globally, including in earlier-stage developing countries.
A key factor in adapting to these forces is investment.
For individuals, businesses, educational institutions, and governments in advanced countries, broad-based, elevated, and efficient investment in education and skills is critical.
Closing wide information gaps in the market for skills would also increase the efficiency of these investments.
Across-the-board upgrading of human capital will improve income distribution both directly and indirectly (by reducing the supply of lower-skill workers relative to demand).
It will also (partly) mitigate the concentration of wealth that results from a highly skewed income distribution.
On the tradable side, competitiveness depends not only on human capital, but also on a host of other factors: infrastructure, tax systems, regulatory efficiency, policy-induced uncertainty, and energy and health-care costs.
There is no guarantee that taking the right steps in these areas would entirely overcome the employment challenges that individuals and countries face, though doing so would help.
In fact, it is possible that we are entering a period in which major adaptations in employment models, work weeks, contract labor, minimum wages, and the delivery of essential public services will be needed in order to maintain social cohesion and uphold the core values of equity and intergenerational mobility.
Where Has Global Warming Gone?
SEATTLE – For the last quarter of the twentieth century, the average temperature at the surface of the earth edged inexorably upward.
Then, to the surprise even of scientists, it stopped.
The concentration of carbon dioxide in the earth’s atmosphere continued to rise; indeed, it is higher today than it has been for centuries.
And yet, for the last 15 years, according to the conventional way of measuring global warming, the planet does not seem to have become any hotter.
What explains this unexpected turn of events, and what does it mean for future climate policy?
The pause in the rise of surface temperatures is real.
It can be observed in surveys of the surface of the sea and in satellite measurements of the troposphere.
But the reason it has occurred is not that our greenhouse-gas emissions are no longer changing the earth’s climate; it is that surface temperature is a poor metric for human-induced warming.
Indeed, what scientists have figured out is that, instead of warming the surface, the excess heat that is being generated has gone to the deeper oceans.
This calls into question some of the international strategies for combating climate change that are currently being negotiated, such as those aimed at preventing the global temperature at the earth’s surface from rising more than 2º Celsius above the pre-industrial average.
Scientists probably did not adequately convey to the public that their projections for future warming are based on models that account only for the so-called “forced response” in global mean surface temperatures – that is, the change caused by greenhouse-gas emissions.
But what is observed at the surface includes unforced, or natural, variations, such as the El Niño and La Niña fluctuations from year to year, and the 60-70 year cycle from the fluctuations of the Great Ocean Conveyor Belt in the Atlantic.
In fact, this cycle is now thought to bury heat deep in the oceans periodically.
And, because it existed even before humans put significant carbon into the atmosphere, it is likely natural.
Given the oceans’ massive heat-storage capacity, determining how much of the warming remains at the surface over the course of decades is a very difficult task.
Though the challenge is beginning to be appreciated, current projections of the dreaded two-degree warming have yet to take into account variable ocean cycles.
To be sure, surface temperatures remain important.
They are a better measure of the threats posed by climate change than heat sequestered underwater.
But some of the threats that scientists (and economists) deduce from the surface temperature also reflect natural climate change, and thus cannot be mitigated through the reduction of CO2 emissions.
The total amount of heat contained in oceans responds to changes in emissions, and is therefore a better metric for measuring such responses.
Indeed, it has continued to warm as expected, even as the surface temperature has stopped rising.
The oceans’ heat content is measured by a network of more than 3,000 free-drifting robotic floats spread out across the world’s waters, where they routinely dive 2,000 meters beneath the surface.
The temperature they measure is transmitted to orbiting satellites and made available online to anyone in near-real time.
For ease of interpretation, the oceans’ heat content can easily be converted to a mean temperature after dividing by a constant.
In time, models could demonstrate how to relate this new global metric to emissions’ regional climate impact.
The intensive scientific search for an explanation for the pause in global warming at the earth’s surface has led to a better understanding of the complex functioning of the climate.
It confirms the long-held theory that the earth has an energy budget that is affected by radiative perturbations at the top of the atmosphere, though partitioning that energy between the surface and the deeper oceans has been difficult.
Nobody knows how long the current pause will last.
The sloshing back and forth of warm and cold waters – El Niño and La Niña – in the shallow layer of the equatorial Pacific Ocean will continue to produce fluctuations in surface temperatures every year.
Over longer periods, however, the risk that the heat currently stored in the deep ocean will resurface is remote.
One thing is clear.
Monitoring surface temperatures does not give us an accurate enough representation of human-induced global warming.
As long as we lack a clear understanding of the relationship between our cumulative greenhouse-gas emissions and the temperature of the earth, it will remain difficult to assess the potential for damage related to climate change caused by humans – or develop the right strategies to minimize it.
The Post-Crisis Crises
NEW YORK – In the shadow of the euro crisis and America’s fiscal cliff, it is easy to ignore the global economy’s long-term problems.
But, while we focus on immediate concerns, they continue to fester, and we overlook them at our peril.
The most serious is global warming.
While the global economy’s weak performance has led to a corresponding slowdown in the increase in carbon emissions, it amounts to only a short respite.
And we are far behind the curve: Because we have been so slow to respond to climate change, achieving the targeted limit of a two-degree (centigrade) rise in global temperature, will require sharp reductions in emissions in the future.
Some suggest that, given the economic slowdown, we should put global warming on the backburner.
On the contrary, retrofitting the global economy for climate change would help to restore aggregate demand and growth.
At the same time, the pace of technological progress and globalization necessitates rapid structural changes in both developed and developing countries alike.
Such changes can be traumatic, and markets often do not handle them well.
Just as the Great Depression arose in part from the difficulties in moving from a rural, agrarian economy to an urban, manufacturing one, so today’s problems arise partly from the need to move from manufacturing to services.
New firms must be created, and modern financial markets are better at speculation and exploitation than they are at providing funds for new enterprises, especially small and medium-size companies.
Moreover, making the transition requires investments in human capital that individuals often cannot afford.
Among the services that people want are health and education, two sectors in which government naturally plays an important role (owing to inherent market imperfections in these sectors and concerns about equity).
Before the 2008 crisis, there was much talk of global imbalances, and the need for the trade-surplus countries, like Germany and China, to increase their consumption.
That issue has not gone away; indeed, Germany’s failure to address its chronic external surplus is part and parcel of the euro crisis.
China’s surplus, as a percentage of GDP, has fallen, but the long-term implications have yet to play out.
America’s overall trade deficit will not disappear without an increase in domestic savings and a more fundamental change in global monetary arrangements.
The former would exacerbate the country’s slowdown, and neither change is in the cards.
As China increases its consumption, it will not necessarily buy more goods from the United States.
In fact, it is more likely to increase consumption of non-traded goods – like health care and education – resulting in profound disturbances to the global supply chain, especially in countries that had been supplying the inputs to China’s manufacturing exporters.
Finally, there is a worldwide crisis in inequality.
The problem is not only that the top income groups are getting a larger share of the economic pie, but also that those in the middle are not sharing in economic growth, while in many countries poverty is increasing.
In the US, equality of opportunity has been exposed as a myth.
While the Great Recession has exacerbated these trends, they were apparent long before its onset.
Indeed, I (and others) have argued that growing inequality is one of the reasons for the economic slowdown, and is partly a consequence of the global economy’s deep, ongoing structural changes.
An economic and political system that does not deliver for most citizens is one that is not sustainable in the long run.
Eventually, faith in democracy and the market economy will erode, and the legitimacy of existing institutions and arrangements will be called into question.
The good news is that the gap between the emerging and advanced countries has narrowed greatly in the last three decades.
Nonetheless, hundreds of millions of people remain in poverty, and there has been only a little progress in reducing the gap between the least developed countries and the rest.
Here, unfair trade agreements – including the persistence of unjustifiable agricultural subsidies, which depress the prices upon which the income of many of the poorest depend – have played a role.
The developed countries have not lived up to their promise in Doha in November 2001 to create a pro-development trade regime, or to their pledge at the G-8 summit in Gleneagles in 2005 to provide significantly more assistance to the poorest countries.
The market will not, on its own, solve any of these problems.
Global warming is a quintessential “public goods” problem.
To make the structural transitions that the world needs, we need governments to take a more active role – at a time when demands for cutbacks are increasing in Europe and the US.
As we struggle with today’s crises, we should be asking whether we are responding in ways that exacerbate our long-term problems.
The path marked out by the deficit hawks and austerity advocates both weakens the economy today and undermines future prospects.
The irony is that, with insufficient aggregate demand the major source of global weakness today, there is an alternative: invest in our future, in ways that help us to address simultaneously the problems of global warming, global inequality and poverty, and the necessity of structural change.
Berada di Garis Depan Perlawanan terhadap Perubahan Iklim
MANILA/SAN JOSÉ – Pada tanggal 22 April, para pemimpin yang mewakili setidaknya 175 negara peserta menandatangani perjanjian global mengenai perubahan iklim yang disepakati di Paris pada bulan Desember lalu, peristiwa besar yang mencetak rekor dalam proses adopsi perjanjian internasional.
Besarnya dukungan yang diberikan sungguh menggembirakan.
Ini mencerminkan harapan bahwa momentum yang menghasilkan kesepakatan terobosan ini tidak menunjukkan tanda-tanda akan melemah.
Tapi mencapai kesepakatan di Paris hanya langkah pertama dalam perjalanan menuju perlindungan iklim global dan negara-negara paling rentan di dunia.
Upacara penandatangan adalah langkah kedua.
Langkah berikutnya adalah ratifikasi; 55 negara, mewakili setidaknya 55% emisi global, harus melakukan ratifikasi sebagai syarat berlakunya perjanjian.
Kabar baiknya adalah proses ini sudah berjalan.
Pada bulan Februari, Fiji menjadi negara pertama yang meratifikasi diikuti oleh tiga negara kepulauan kecil lainnya.
Empat negara tersebut adalah anggota Climate Vulnerable Forum, kelompok yang beranggotakan 43 negara – termasuk Kosta Rika termasuk Filipina – yang berada di garis terdepan perlawanan terhadap perubahan iklim.
Anggota forum ini berjuang tanpa lelah demi kesepakatan di Paris dan kami akan melakukan segala cara untuk mempercepat keberlakuannya.
Perjanjian Paris menawarkan harapan terbaik bagi dunia untuk memperlambat dan pada akhirnya menghentikan perubahan iklim.
Bila dibiarkan, pemanasan global akan mengancam kesehatan dan keselamatan penduduk dunia, merusak ekosistem tempat kita bersandar, dan – akibat kenaikan permukaan air laut – membahayakan kelangsungan hidup di sejumlah negara.
Namun jika kita ingin memenangkan perubahan iklim, perjanjian Paris tidak akan cukup.
Komitmen penurunan emisi secara sukarela yang temuat dalam rencana aksi setiap negara (dikenal dengan istilah “intended nationally determined contributions” (kontribusi nasional), atau “INDCs”), diserahkan oleh 187 negara di akhir konferensi, tidak akan cukup untuk mencegah ganasnya perubahan iklim.
Bagi negara-negara yang paling rentan terkena dampak buruk pemanasan global, perlu diambil tindakan lebih untuk menghindari kemungkinan terjadinya malapetaka.
Perhitungan awal menunjukkan jika semua rencana aksi dilakukan sepenuhnya, rata-rata suhu global di akhir abad ini masih akan naik 2.7 derajat Celcius di atas tingkat pra-industri.
Ini sudah jauh melampaui ambang batas berbahaya yang ditetapkan di Kopenhagen pada tahun 2009 dan termuat di perjanjian Paris yaitu dua derajat Celcius.
Penelitian terbaru, dilakukan oleh Climate Interactive dan MIT Sloan, menyimpulkan bahwa suhu bisa semakin memanas – hingga 3.5derajat Celsius.
Climate Vulnerable Forum sejak lama berpendapat bahwa kenaikan dua derajat saja berisiko menciptakan kondisi yang amat berat bagi beberapa negara.
Itu sebabnya forum tersebut berupaya menekan kenaikan suhu hingga 1.5 derajat – sebuah ambisi yang termuat dalam perjanjian Paris berkat perjuangan mereka.
Selisih sedikit sangat berarti.
Sebagaimana ditunjukkan dalam penelitian terbaru, kenaikan suhu memiliki dampak signifikan terhadap peristiwa cuaca ekstrem, ketersediaan air, hasil panen, degradasi terumbu karang, dan kenaikan permukaan air laut.
Dan kelompok yang paling berisiko adalah kelompok paling rentan, yaitu kaum perempuan, orang sakit, lansia, dan anak-anak yang tinggal di pedesaan.
Bagi negara-negara paling rentan di dunia, upaya membatasi kenaikan suhu di bawah 1.5 derajat bukan sekedar cita-cita tapi persoalan hidup dan mati.
Sasaran ini memang ambisius. Tapi negara-negara berkembang yang rentan berkomitmen untuk membantu pemenuhannya.
Kelompok V-20 yang beranggotakan para menteri keuangan dari negara-negara rentan baru-baru ini berkomitmen untuk memperkenalkan mekanisme carbon pricing di 43 negara dalam waktu sepuluh tahun.
Kami juga berjanji akan memperbaiki akuntansi keuangan sehingga kerugian akibat perubahan iklim dan keuntungan dari aksi iklim akan dimasukkan ke dalam kebijakan ekonomi.
Kosta Rika baru saja menyetujui undang-undang yang mendorong penggunaan kereta listrik dan para anggota legislatif tengah menggodok RUU untuk memberi insentif bagi kendaraan dan bus listrik.
Inisiatif atau gerakan semacam itu lebih sering dikaitkan dengan negara maju dibandingkan negara berkembang.
Dan negara berpendapatan tinggi memang berkewajiban secara moral untuk mengawali dan memimpin perubahan – kebijakan, teknologi, dan keuangan – untuk menurunkan emisi yang menyebabkan pemanasan global.
Namun kami juga mengakui bahwa negara-negara berkembang juga memiliki tanggung jawab untuk bertindak dan komitmen tersebut dapat menghasilkan keuntungan yang besar di bidang ekonomi, sosial, dan kesehatan bagi warganya.
Kami tidak mungkin berhasil apabila hanya mengandalkan diri sendiri.
Climate Vulnerable Forum hanya bagian kecil dari emiter di dunia.
Kami membutuhkan negara-negara industri dan raksasa di negara berkembang untuk melipatgandakan upayanya untuk menurunkan emisi mereka, agar pemanasan global dapat ditekan menjadi 1.5 derajat.
Ini satu-satunya cara menghindari bencana.
Global Warming’s Cheap, Effective Solution
COPENHAGEN – Global warming will mean that more people die from the heat.
There will be a rise in sea levels, more malaria, starvation, and poverty.
Concern has been great, but humanity has done very little that will actually prevent these outcomes.
Carbon emissions have kept increasing, despite repeated promises of cuts.
We all have a stake in ensuring that climate change is stopped.
We turned to climate scientists to inform us about the problem of global warming.
Now we need to turn to climate economists to enlighten us about the benefits, costs, and possible outcomes from different responses to this challenge.
World leaders are meeting in Copenhagen this December to forge a new pact to tackle global warming.
Should they continue with plans to make carbon-cutting promises that are unlikely to be fulfilled?
Should they instead delay reductions for 20 years?
What could be achieved by planting more trees, cutting methane, or reducing black soot emissions?
Is it sensible to focus on a technological solution to warming?
Or should we just adapt to a warmer world?
Much of the current policy debate remains focused on cutting carbon, but there are many ways to go about repairing the global climate.
Our choices will result in different outcomes and different costs.
The optimal combination of solutions will create the biggest impact for the least money.
A groundbreaking paper by economists Eric Bickel and Lee Lane is one of the first – and certainly the most comprehensive – study of the costs and benefits of climate engineering.
Deliberately manipulating the earth’s climate seems like something from science fiction. But as President Barack Obama’s science adviser, John Holdren, has said it has “got to be looked at,” and many prominent scientists agree.
Bickel and Lane offer compelling evidence that a tiny investment in climate engineering might be able to reduce as much of global warming’s effects as trillions of dollars spent on carbon emission reductions.
Climate engineering has the advantage of speed.
There is a significant delay between carbon cuts and any temperature drop – even halving global emissions by mid-century would barely be measurable by the end of the century.
Making green energy cheap and prevalent will also take a long time. Consider that electrification of the global economy is still incomplete after more than a century of effort.
Many methods of atmospheric engineering have been proposed.
Solar radiation management appears to be one of the most hopeful.
Atmospheric greenhouse gases allow sunlight to pass through but absorb heat and radiate some down to the earth’s surface.
All else being equal, higher concentrations will warm the planet.
Solar radiation management would bounce a little sunlight back into space.
Reflecting just 1-2% of the total sunlight that strikes the earth could offset as much warming as that caused by doubling preindustrial levels of greenhouse gases.
When Mount Pinatubo erupted in 1991, about a million tons of sulfur dioxide was pumped into the stratosphere, reacting with water to form a hazy layer that spread around the globe, and – by scattering and absorbing incoming sunlight – cooled the earth’s surface for almost two years.
We could mimic this effect through stratospheric aerosol insertion – essentially launching material like sulfur dioxide or soot into the stratosphere.
Another promising approach is marine cloud whitening, which sprays seawater droplets into marine clouds to make them reflect more sunlight.
This augments the natural process, where sea salt from the oceans provides water vapor with the cloud condensation nuclei.
It is remarkable to consider that we could cancel out this century’s global warming with 1,900 unmanned ships spraying seawater mist into the air to thicken clouds.
The total cost would be about $9 billion, and the benefits of preventing the temperature increase would add up to about $20 trillion.
That is the equivalent of doing about $2000 worth of good with every dollar spent.
Many of the risks of climate engineering have been overstated.
Marine cloud whitening would not lead to permanent atmospheric changes, and could be used only when needed.
Turning seawater into clouds is a natural process.
The biggest challenge is public perception.
Many environmental lobbyists oppose even researching climate engineering.
This is startling, given the manifold benefits.
If we care most about avoiding warmer temperatures, it seems that we should be elated that this simple, cost-effective approach shows so much promise.
Climate engineering could remain a back-up option in case of necessity. Or we could put it on the agenda today.
In either case, there is a commanding case for its serious consideration.
We are on track to being the generation that wasted decades bickering over carbon-emission cuts and failed to stop the harmful effects of warming.
That would be a shameful legacy – one that could be avoided by re-thinking climate policy.
Global Warming’s Dirty Secret
Last week, the European Union declared that it had practically saved the planet.
With European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso claiming that Europe will lead the way on climate change, the EU has promised to cut CO2 emissions by 20% below 1990-levels by 2020.
Of course, with the EU already having promised an 8% cut by next year in the Kyoto Protocol, this new target seems slightly less ambitious.
Moreover, in continuing the fundamental problems besetting the crippled Kyoto Protocol, the EU has essentially gone and made a worse deal.
Man-made climate change is, of course, real, and constitutes a serious problem.
Yet the current cut-emissions-now-before-it-is-too-late mindset neglects the fact that the world has no sensible short-term solutions.
This seems to be why we focus on feel-good approaches like the Kyoto Protocol, whose fundamental problem has always been that it is simultaneously impossibly ambitious, environmentally inconsequential, and inordinately expensive.
It required such big reductions that only few countries could live up to it.
Some countries, like the United States and Australia, chose to opt out of its stringent demands; others, like Canada, Japan, and a raft of European states, pay lip service to its requirements but will essentially miss its targets.
Yet, even if everyone had participated and continued to stick to Kyoto’s ever more stringent commitments, it would have had virtually no environmental effect.
The treaty’s effect on temperature would be immeasurable by mid-century and only postpone warming by five years in 2100.
Nonetheless, the cost would have been anything but trivial – an estimated $180 billion per year.
With its high-pitched rhetoric, you would be forgiven for believing that the EU has now single-handedly taken the major step towards solving the problem.
Barroso calls the agreement “historic,” Tony Blair extols its “groundbreaking, bold, ambitious targets,” and German Chancellor Angela Merkel even ventured that the promises “can avoid what could well be a human calamity.”
But nobody sees fit to reveal the agreement’s dirty little secret: it will do next to no good, and again at very high cost.
According to one well-established and peer-reviewed model, the effect of the EU cutting emissions by 20% will postpone warming in 2100 by just two years, yet the cost will be about $90 billion annually.
It will be costly, because Europe is a costly place to cut CO2, and it will be inconsequential, because the EU will account for only about 6% of all emissions in the twenty-first century.
So the new treaty will be an even less efficient use of our resources than the old Kyoto Protocol.
It is important to learn from the past.
We have often been promised dramatic cuts in CO2 emissions far into the future, only to see the promises vanish when we got there.
In Rio de Janeiro in 1992, the West promised to stabilize emissions, but overshot by 12%.
In Kyoto, we were promised a 7% reduction in world emissions, but will probably achieve only 0.4%.
Of course, those promises were made by politicians who in all likelihood will no longer be in office when the time comes to fulfil them.
We will not be able to solve global warming over the next decades, but only the next half or full century.
We need to find a viable, long-term strategy that is smart, equitable, and doesn’t require inordinate sacrifice for trivial benefits.
Fortunately, there is such a strategy: research and development.
Investing in R&amp;D of non-carbon-emitting energy technologies would leave future generations able to make serious and yet economically feasible and advantageous cuts.
A new global warming treaty should mandate spending 0.05% of GDP on R&amp;D in the future.
It would be much cheaper, yet do much more good in the long run.
The EU’s new global warming agreement may help win elections for leaders faced with voters scared by the prospect of climate change.
But it will do virtually no good, at high cost, and – as with many other lofty promises from the EU – it will carry a high probability of failure.
Let us hope that the rest of the world will keep its cool and propose a better, cheaper, and more effective solution for the future.
Global Warming’s Misunderstood Victims
BAMAKO, MALI – Media organizations in wealthy countries regularly send forth reporters to find “victims of global warming.”
In dispatches from the Pacific Islands, Bangladesh, or Ethiopia, journalists warn of impending calamity.
Global warming is the most horrific challenge facing these regions, we are told. Its resolution is vital.
But seldom do we hear from the local people who are said to be in danger.
These people are not voiceless; we just pay no attention to what they say.
The Copenhagen Consensus Center set out to ask people in global-warming hot spots about their fears and hopes.
In Mojo, central Ethiopia, our researchers met Tadese Denkue, a 68-year-old former soldier with no regular income.
“I never know when I will be able to buy myself some food,” he said.
“I only know that I suffer a lot.
This is not a decent life.”
Tadese has never heard of global warming.
When it is explained to him, he is dismissive.
He has more immediate concerns: “The first thing I need is food, and then a job.”
Tadese is suffering from his second bout of malaria this year. He has lost count of how many times he has contracted the disease.
Our researcher accompanies him to a free clinic. The electricity is not working.
A doctor admits that most patients are sent home without testing or treatment: the clinic has run out of medicine.
The threat of more malaria has been used to argue for drastic carbon cuts.
Warmer, wetter weather will improve conditions for the malaria parasite.
Most estimates suggest that global warming will put 3% more of the earth’s population at risk of catching malaria by 2100.
The most efficient, global carbon cuts – designed to keep temperature increases under two degrees Celsius – would cost $40 trillion a year by 2100, according to research by Richard Tol for the Copenhagen Consensus Center.
In the best-case scenario, this expenditure would reduce the at-risk population by only 3%.
In comparison, spending $3 billion annually on mosquito nets, environmentally safe indoor DDT sprays, and subsidies for effective new combination therapies could halve the total number of those infected within one decade.
For the money it takes to save one life with carbon cuts, smarter policies could save 78,000 lives.
Of course, malaria is far from the only reason we worry about global warming.
Twenty kilometers from Mojo, our researcher met Desi Koricho and her eight-month-old son, Michel.
Every two weeks, Desi walks four hours to take Michel to the health center.
After two months of malnutrition treatment, Michel has grown a lot but remains half the normal size of a baby his age.
Michel is not Desi’s biological child.
She took him in after his father committed suicide and he was abandoned.
Desi likely suffers from undiagnosed malnutrition herself.
It is rife here.
There are no roads, electricity, or other infrastructure. Conditions are cramped and unhygienic.
“We need everything,” Desi says.
Solving the malnutrition challenge would be a good start.
Campaigners across Europe and the US use the threat of starvation to argue for drastic carbon cuts.
For most regions, weather changes will increase agricultural productivity.
Cruelly, this is not the case for parts of Africa that are already suffering from hunger.
But, as with malaria, all of the evidence shows that direct policies are much more effective than carbon cuts.
One effective, under-appreciated intervention is providing micro-nutrients to those who lack them.
Providing Vitamin A and zinc to 80% of the 140 million or so undernourished children in the world would require a commitment of just $60 million annually.
For $286 million, we could get iron and iodine to more than 2.5 billion people.
The choice is stark: for a few hundred million dollars, we could help almost half of humanity now.
Compare this to the investments to tackle climate change – $40 trillion annually by the end of the century – which would save a hundred times fewer starving people (and in 90 years!).
For every person saved from malnutrition through climate policies, the same money could have saved half a million people from micronutrient malnutrition through direct policies.
Some argue that the choice between spending money on carbon cuts and on direct policies is unfair.
But it is a basic fact that no dollar can be spent twice.
Rich countries and donors have limited budgets and attention spans.
If we spend vast amounts of money on carbon cuts in the mistaken belief that we are stopping malaria and reducing malnutrition, we are less likely to put aside money for the direct policies that would help today.
Indeed, for every dollar spent on strong climate policies, we will likely do about $0.02 of good for the future.
If we spent the same dollar on simple policies to help malnutrition or malaria now, we could do $20 or more good – 1000 times better, when all impacts are taken into account.
On Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania – where the effects of global warming can already be felt – our researcher encountered 28-year-old Rehema Ibrahim.
Rehema was divorced by her husband and disowned by her family after she failed to produce children.
To find out if she was the cause of the infertility, she started sleeping with other men.
She is now HIV-positive, an outcast in a terribly poor society.
Rehema has noticed changes in the weather.
She says that the snow and ice have been melting. She knows what our researcher means by “global warming.”
But, she says: “The issues I am experiencing have greater priority.
The HIV and the problems it is causing are greater than the [receding] ice.”
Campaigners for carbon-emission reductions regularly highlight the melting snow and ice of Mount Kilimanjaro.
But we need to pay as much attention to the people living in the mountain’s shadow.
Global Warming’s Technology Deficit
COPENHAGEN – Our current approach to solving global warming will not work.
It is flawed economically, because carbon taxes will cost a fortune and do little, and it is flawed politically, because negotiations to reduce CO2 emissions will become ever more fraught and divisive.
And even if you disagree on both counts, the current approach is also flawed technologically.
Many countries are now setting ambitious carbon-cutting goals ahead of global negotiations in Copenhagen this December to replace the Kyoto Protocol.
Let us imagine that the world ultimately agrees on an ambitious target.
Say we decide to reduce CO2 emissions by three-quarters by 2100 while maintaining reasonable growth.
Herein lies the technological problem: to meet this goal, non-carbon-based sources of energy would have to be an astounding 2.5 times greater in 2100 than the level of total global energy consumption was in 2000.
These figures were calculated by economists Chris Green and Isabel Galiana of McGill University.
Their research shows that confronting global warming effectively requires nothing short of a technological revolution.
We are not taking this challenge seriously.
If we continue on our current path, technological development will be nowhere near significant enough to make non-carbon-based energy sources competitive with fossil fuels on price and effectiveness.
In Copenhagen this December, the focus will be on how much carbon to cut, rather than on how to do so.
Little or no consideration will be given to whether the means of cutting emissions are sufficient to achieve the goals.
Politicians will base their decisions on global warming models that simply assume that technological breakthroughs will happen by themselves.
This faith is sadly – and dangerously – misplaced.
Green and Galiana examine the state of non-carbon-based energy today – nuclear, wind, solar, geothermal, etc. – and find that, taken together, alternative energy sources would get us less than halfway toward a path of stable carbon emissions by 2050, and only a tiny fraction of the way toward stabilization by 2100.
We need many, many times more non-carbon-based energy than is currently produced.
Yet the needed technology will not be ready in terms of scalability or stability.
In many cases, there is still a need for the most basic research and development.
We are not even close to getting this revolution started.
Current technology is so inefficient that – to take just one example – if we were serious about wind power, we would have to blanket most countries with wind turbines to generate enough energy for everybody, and we would still have the massive problem of storage: we don’t know what to do when the wind doesn’t blow.
Policymakers should abandon fraught carbon-reduction negotiations, and instead make agreements to invest in research and development to get this technology to the level where it needs to be.
Not only would this have a much greater chance of actually addressing climate change, but it would also have a much greater chance of political success.
The biggest emitters of the twenty-first century, including India and China, are unwilling to sign up to tough, costly emission targets.
They would be much more likely to embrace a cheaper, smarter, and more beneficial path of innovation.
Today’s politicians focus narrowly on how high a carbon tax should be to stop people from using fossil fuels.
That is the wrong question.
The market alone is an ineffective way to stimulate research and development into uncertain technology, and a high carbon tax will simply hurt growth if alternatives are not ready.
In other words, we will all be worse off.
Green and Galiana propose limiting carbon pricing initially to a low tax (say, $5.00 a ton) to finance energy research and development.
Over time, they argue, the tax should be allowed to rise slowly to encourage the deployment of effective, affordable technology alternatives.
Investing about $100 billion annually in non-carbon-based energy research would mean that we could essentially fix climate change on the century scale.
Green and Galiana calculate the benefits – from reduced warming and greater prosperity – and conservatively conclude that for every dollar spent this approach would avoid about $11 of climate damage.
Compare this to other analyses showing that strong and immediate carbon cuts would be expensive, yet achieve as little as $0.02 of avoided climate damage.
If we continue implementing policies to reduce emissions in the short term without any focus on developing the technology to achieve this, there is only one possible outcome: virtually no climate impact, but a significant dent in global economic growth, with more people in poverty, and the planet in a worse place than it could be. 
Global Warnings
You know how you are told to give your kids organic food because pesticides will give them cancer?
Well, it’s technically true that there is a link between the chemicals and illness, but the risk is miniscule in any well-regulated country.
There is another threat that you haven’t been told much about.
One of the best ways to avoid cancer is to eat lots of fruit and vegetables.
Organic items are 10% or 20% more expensive than regular produce, so most of us naturally buy less when we “go organic.”
If you reduce your child’s intake of fruits and vegetables by just 0.03 grams a day (that’s the equivalent of half a grain of rice) when you opt for more expensive organic produce, the total risk of cancer goes up, not down.
Omit buying just one apple every 20 years because you have gone organic, and your child is worse off.
My intention isn’t to scare people away from organic food.
But we should hear both sides of any story.
Consider a tale that has made the covers of some of the world’s biggest magazines and newspapers: the plight of the polar bear.
We are told that global warming will wipe out this majestic creature.
We are not told, however, that over the past 40 years – while temperatures have risen – the global polar bear population has increased from 5,000 to 25,000.
Campaigners and the media claim that we should cut our CO2 emissions to save the polar bear.
Well, then, let’s do the math.
Let’s imagine that every country in the world – including the United States and Australia – were to sign the Kyoto Protocol and cut its CO2 emissions for the rest of this century.
Looking at the best-studied polar bear population of 1,000 bears, in the West Hudson Bay, how many polar bears would we save in a year?
Ten?
Twenty?
A hundred?
Actually, we would save less than one-tenth of a polar bear.
If we really do care about saving polar bears, we could do something much simpler and more effective: ban hunting them.
Each year, 49 bears are shot in the West Hudson Bay alone.
So why don’t we stop killing 49 bears a year before we commit trillions of dollars to do hundreds of times less good?
From the promotion of organic food to declarations of the polar bear’s imminent demise, the media pelt us with a constant barrage of one-sided warnings.
The list of urgent concerns is topped by global warming, but also includes terrorism, pesticides, and the loss of biodiversity – and seems to have virtually no end.
All the while, we know of the terrible conditions that still face the majority of the world’s population, with more than a billion poor, two billion without electricity, and three billion without clean drinking water and sanitation.
Much of my work is to make sense of all these global warnings.
I try to put them in perspective and figure out which ones really should concern us, and when we should act on them.
Perhaps surprisingly, not everything of concern should be dealt with immediately.
If we don’t have a good way to fix a problem, it might be better to focus on something else first.
After all, when you don’t know where your next meal is coming from, it’s hard to worry about what global temperatures will be 100 years from now.
Things have improved immensely in both the developing and developed worlds.
In the last 100 years, scientists have won many of the most important battles against infectious diseases, to the extent that poverty is now the main reason for a lack of treatment.
Global average life expectancy in 1900 was 30 years; today, it is 68 years.
Food has become more plentiful and affordable, especially in the developing world, where calorie availability has increased by 40% per person over the past 40 years, while food prices have more than halved.
Consequently, the proportion of hungry in the Third World has dropped from 50% in 1950 to less than 17% today, while worldwide incomes have increased more than three-fold.
Perhaps most importantly, all of these positive trends are expected to continue.
The United Nations estimates that average life expectancy will reach 75 years by the middle of the century, and that the proportion of those going hungry will drop below 4%.
By the close of the century, incomes will have increased six-fold in industrialized countries and 12-fold in developing countries, making the average person in the developing world richer in 2100 than the average American or European is today.
The number of poor will drop from a billion to less than five million.
None of this means we should stop worrying about the future.
But it does mean that we can quit panicking and start thinking calmly to ensure that we focus on the right issues.
Global alarm bells might cause pangs of guilt for wealthy Westerners, but they don’t give us an adequate understanding of what’s going on.
We all need to hear both sides of the story.
GMOs and Junk Science
STANFORD – In today’s media landscape, where unfounded opinions, hype, and rumors are rife, the scientific method – the means by which we determine, based on empirical and measurable evidence, what is true – should serve as a touchstone of reality.
Science enables us to gauge what we think we know and to identify what we do not.
Most important, it discredits false claims made for personal or political reasons – at least it should.
(“GMOs” are “genetically modified organisms,” itself a misleading and often unfairly stigmatized non-category, circumscribing a universe of organisms modified with the most modern and precise techniques of genetic engineering.)
Although the article supposedly passed the peer-review process, a key component of legitimate science, it appeared in a low-impact “pay-for-play” journal, Agricultural Sciences, which is produced by a “predatory” publisher.
Within days of publication, anti-biotechnology organizations like the Organic Consumers Association and GMO Inside were reporting on Ayyadurai’s “findings” with frightening headlines – “Formaldehyde in GMO Soy?” and “New Study Shows GMO Soy Accumulates Cancer Causing Chemical Formaldehyde” – accompanied by scary graphics.
But the problems with Ayyadurai’s paper are legion.
Its title alone is enough to show that something is amiss.
If you think that GMOs might “accumulate formaldehyde” – a chemical that is probably carcinogenic at high levels but is present in most living cells and found widely in our environment – the obvious response would be to measure its levels in the organisms.
Ayyadurai, however, chose to make guesses based on modeling via “systems biology.”
“Systems biology” enables only a prediction, not an experimental conclusion.
Rather than actually testing the levels of any chemicals in plants, Ayyadurai plugged data into a computer algorithm to predict the levels of two chemicals, formaldehyde and glutathione.
This is akin to a meteorologist predicting from his models that it will be sunny all day, instead of looking out the window to see whether rain is falling.
To be sure, as Kevin Folta, the head of the horticultural sciences department at the University of Florida, explained, systems biology can be a useful approach if employed properly.
As he put it, systems biology “is a way to make predictions based on integrating existing data, and then statistically deriving a likelihood that the predictions may be correct.”
But, he emphasizes, the predictions are then to be tested, “and the systems approach validated.”
Like all predictive studies based on computer modeling, the validity of the results depends on the integrity of the data and the algorithm.
If the data are cherry-picked to support the modeler’s desired conclusions, or if the algorithm is flawed, the results will be inaccurate.
But it is unclear from Ayyadurai’s article which data were used, and there is no validation of the model.
Folta offers a brilliant send-up of Ayyadurai’s work.
“If you developed a computer program that integrated Internet data to predict the location of Munich, and the program told you it was squarely in the Gulf of Mexico, right off Florida, it does not mean that Munich is in the Gulf of Mexico, right off of Florida.”
Instead, it means that you have made a mistake, in your program, assumptions, or input data – all of which are testable.
To decide not to challenge those data, Folta continues, and instead to “publish a map showing that Munich is squarely in the Gulf of Mexico, opposing all other data and the claims of millions of rather dry Germans, does not mean that you are brilliant.
It means you have absolutely no clue, or more likely, have some reason you want a major German metropolis to be a two-hour boat ride from Tampa.”
Folta also has something to say about Ayyadurai’s publisher.
If you print the deceptive map showing the location of Munich, “what does that say about your integrity as a reliable information source?”
In the spirit of scientific cooperation, Folta offered to collaborate with Ayyadurai on university-based testing of genetically engineered corn and soy samples (along with appropriate controls), with analysis by an independent lab.
Ayyadurai declined, so Folta will proceed himself.
The experimental data is forthcoming.
In the meantime, if you get a hankering for sauerbraten and spaetzle, head for Central Europe, not the Gulf of Mexico.
Godless Morality
Is religion necessary for morality?
Many people consider it outrageous, even blasphemous, to deny the divine origin of morality.
Either some divine being crafted our moral sense, or we picked it up from the teachings of organized religion.
Either way, we need religion to curb nature’s vices.
Paraphrasing Katherine Hepburn in the movie The African Queen, religion allows us to rise above wicked old Mother Nature, handing us a moral compass.
Yet problems abound for the view that morality comes from God.
One problem is that we cannot, without lapsing into tautology, simultaneously say that God is good, and that he gave us our sense of good and bad.
For then we are simply saying that God meets God’s standards.
A second problem is that there are no moral principles that are shared by all religious people, regardless of their specific beliefs, but by no agnostics and atheists.
Indeed, atheists and agnostics do not behave less morally than religious believers, even if their virtuous acts rest on different principles.
Non-believers often have as strong and sound a sense of right and wrong as anyone, and have worked to abolish slavery and contributed to other efforts to alleviate human suffering.
The opposite is also true.
Religion has led people to commit a long litany of horrendous crimes, from God’s command to Moses to slaughter the Midianites – men, women, boys, and non-virginal girls – through the Crusades, the Inquisition, innumerable conflicts between Sunni and Shiite Muslims, and suicide bombers convinced that martyrdom will lead them to paradise.
The third difficulty for the view that morality is rooted in religion is that some elements of morality seem to be universal, despite sharp doctrinal differences among the world’s major religions.
In fact, these elements extend even to cultures like China, where religion is less significant than philosophical outlooks like Confucianism.
Perhaps a divine creator handed us these universal elements at the moment of creation.
But an alternative explanation, consistent with the facts of biology and geology, is that over millions of years we have evolved a moral faculty that generates intuitions about right and wrong.
For the first time, research in the cognitive sciences, building on theoretical arguments emerging from moral philosophy, has made it possible to resolve the ancient dispute about the origin and nature of morality.
Consider the following three scenarios.
For each, fill in the blank space with “obligatory,” “permissible,” or “forbidden.”
1.
A runaway boxcar is about to run over five people walking on the tracks.
A railroad worker is standing next to a switch that can turn the boxcar onto a side track, killing one person, but allowing the five to survive.
Flipping the switch is ______.
2.
You pass by a small child drowning in a shallow pond, and you are the only one around.
If you pick up the child, she will survive and your pants will be ruined.
Picking up the child is _______.
3.
Five people have just been rushed into a hospital in critical condition, each requiring an organ to survive.
There is not enough time to request organs from outside the hospital, but there is a healthy person in the hospital’s waiting room.
If morality is God’s word, atheists should judge these cases differently from religious people, and their responses should rely on different justifications.
For example, because atheists supposedly lack a moral compass, they should be guided by pure self-interest and walk by the drowning child.
But there were no statistically significant differences between subjects with or without religious backgrounds, with approximately 90% of subjects saying that it is permissible to flip the switch on the boxcar, 97% saying that it is obligatory to rescue the baby, and 97% saying that is forbidden to remove the healthy man’s organs.
When asked to justify why some cases are permissible and others forbidden, subjects are either clueless or offer explanations that cannot account for the relevant differences.
Importantly, those with a religious background are as clueless or incoherent as atheists.
These studies provide empirical support for the idea that, like other psychological faculties of the mind, including language and mathematics, we are endowed with a moral faculty that guides our intuitive judgments of right and wrong.
These intuitions reflect the outcome of millions of years in which our ancestors have lived as social mammals, and are part of our common inheritance.
Our evolved intuitions do not necessarily give us the right or consistent answers to moral dilemmas.
What was good for our ancestors may not be good today.