This idea brings to mind Philip Roth’s The Human Stain, published a year after the Senate acquitted her husband of perjury and obstruction-of-justice charges, with its searing portrait of how indelible even an undeserved blot on one’s reputation can be.
She will strive to enter the Oval Office – the theater of her inner, outer, and planetary misery – on her own terms.
And the most likely outcome, my article will conclude, is that she will succeed.
Fast forward to Paris in May 2011.
The senator from New York has become President Barack Obama’s secretary of state.
Her aura dominated the just-concluded G-8 summit hosted by France.
It is ten in the evening, and I am waiting at the elevators in the lobby of the Hotel Westin with Mahmoud Jibril, one of the leaders of the Libyan insurrection.
Jibril has made a special trip to plead on behalf of the civilians whom Colonel Muammar Qaddafi and his sons have promised to drown in rivers of blood.
“I thought you were in Libya!” she exclaims when she sees me.
“I’ve just returned,” I respond, gesturing toward Jibril.
“Really, hidden in a vegetable truck with him?”
That triggers one of those great bursts of laughter that, as I noticed in Boston, raise her high cheekbones still higher.
Then, suddenly serious, and accompanied by a man whom I notice for the first time and who turns out to be J. Christopher Stevens, the young US ambassador to Libya who will be murdered a little more than a year later, she leads Jibril to her suite for an interview.
When, after nearly an hour, Jibril reemerges, he is convinced that the conversation went badly.
He grumbles that Clinton hardly opened her mouth, which he interprets to mean that his plea was not well received.
In fact, Clinton was deeply moved by Jibril’s testimony, riveted by the horror of the regime’s tanks grinding toward Benghazi at that very moment.
In the hours that follow, she convinces Obama not to bow to his anti-interventionist secretary of defense, Robert Gates.
She displays emotion and composure, I note.
Her humanity and compassion are coupled with an acute sense of the iron discipline required for effective governance.
These are the reflexes of an impeccable stateswoman.
By February 2012, the war in Libya is over, and I am wrapping up my documentary film about the conflict.
I am in Washington, DC, in a wood-paneled conference room on the seventh floor of the Department of State’s headquarters, to gather Clinton’s recollections, as I had already done with French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Prime Minister David Cameron.
This is the moment for conclusions and perspective, the always-fascinating moment when the actors in the drama, who have sometimes operated in secret, turn up their last cards.
Clinton lends herself graciously to the exercise.
She evokes her interview with Jibril, a conversation at the White House or the Elysée Palace.
She remembers everything and regrets nothing.
She feels that, in acting as she did, she was faithful to her most cherished values and beliefs.
And she has no doubt that the West, in responding to the Arab League’s entreaty to intervene, avoided a replay of Srebrenica in North Africa.
What strikes me the most is that she sees, even then, the beginnings of the tribal conflicts and the coming contest among Islamists to outdo one another in fundamentalist purity.
She worries about the early violations of human rights, particularly women’s rights, which she fears will multiply.
She has no illusions that history turns out the way reason tells you it should.
Time is needed, she says, to build a state and construct a democracy – time and a mixture of pragmatism and faith, of patience and audacity, of respect for others and regard for oneself.
Was this concern about “nation building” a warning?
Was it her ideological contribution to an administration that, though she did not know it at the time, would continue without her?
Was she laying down the broad strokes and ambition of her own presidency?
One thing is certain: Of my three encounters with Hillary Clinton, this third was the one where I found her the strongest and most passionate, thoroughly imbued with the meaning and pitch of the great American pastoral.
If we meet again, I will not be surprised if I am addressing her as Madam President.
Hillary Clinton’s Asian Adventure
NEW DELHI – On her recent trip to China, Bangladesh, and India, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was eager to trumpet America’s “New Silk Road” strategy, which she unveiled last September.
But the Silk Road was a trade route, whereas knife-edge diplomacy dominated Clinton’s Asian tour.
Nothing about Clinton’s trip was as path-breaking as her visit earlier this spring to Myanmar, where she met with opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and President Thein Sein to lend her support to their delicate political dance, which may yet bring the country into the global democratic fold.
Her trip opened with the always-tense annual US-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue, which was threatened at the start by the plight of the blind human-rights activist Chen Guangcheng, who had taken refuge in the United States’ embassy in Beijing.
But Chen was not the only one to upstage Clinton; her boss, President Barack Obama, did so as well, landing at midnight in Kabul, where he executed a strategic pact with Afghanistan, flying back to the US before dawn.
Was this – a negotiation without her participation – the defining event of Clinton’s Asian fortnight?
Afghanistan’s national security adviser, Rangin Dadfar Spanta, describes the pact as “providing a strong foundation for the security of Afghanistan, (and) a document for the development of the region.”
But, while the new pact does clarify America’s post-2014 posture toward Afghanistan, and to some extent has assuaged India’s concerns about that troubled land’s future, anxiety in Pakistan has only deepened.
Only time will tell whether the pact boosts stability in the region.
Twice upstaged, Clinton’s discussions with China’s leaders took place under the shadow not only of the Chen affair, but also of the recent purge of Bo Xilai from the Communist Party’s senior leadership.
Bo’s ouster, the source of the greatest intra-Party ruckus since the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989, is the sort of dirty linen that China’s leaders never air in public.
So, instead, they “ripped into” the US delegation, in the words of a senior American official, over the Chen affair.
At first, with Chen in the US embassy, the Chinese began to suggest canceling the Strategic and Economic Dialogue, scheduled to begin with the arrival of Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner.
The Americans also appeared willing to walk away.
In the end, both sides blinked: the Americans accepted a deal for Chen to leave the embassy that could not be enforced, and the Chinese ultimately agreed to allow Chen to go to the US to study, just like many thousands of other Chinese do nowadays.
The China leg of Clinton’s Asia tour was salvaged – so much so that, at the end of her stay in Beijing, she indulged in the type of diplomatic hyperbole that few would have expected three days earlier: “Our countries are thoroughly, inescapably interdependent,” she said, adding that “a thriving China is good for America…” That may or may not be true; but both countries seem to have reached the conclusion that no human-rights dispute is worth sabotaging the entire bilateral relationship.
So it was on to Bangladesh for Clinton.
But here the American propensity for gratuitous preaching led to unnecessary strain in her talks with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s government.
This time, the issue was Hasina’s treatment of the Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus, the microcredit pioneer and founder of the Grameen Bank.
Unlike the testy Chinese, Hasina’s spokesperson offered only a gentle rejoinder, rejecting Clinton’s suggestions about alleged mistreatment of Yunus.
From Dhaka, Clinton made the short journey to India’s West Bengal, where her host was the diminutive Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, whose election ended 34 years of Communist rule in the state.
Assurances of US investment in Bengal’s development flowed; whether funds will actually follow remains to be seen.
Then it was on to India’s capital, New Delhi, for what many took to be Clinton’s farewell visit (assuming, that is, that she steps down at the end of this year as planned) – a visit marred by awkward coincidences and untidy scheduling.
Even as Clinton was cautioning Indian officials about contacts with Iran (demanding, in particular, a reduction in imports of Iranian oil), India was hosting a high-level Iranian trade mission aimed at boosting bilateral economic ties.
Finally, Clinton, speaking from Delhi, warned Pakistan not to allow its territory to be used as a “launching pad” by terrorist groups, asserting that al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri was hiding in the country.
True to form, Pakistani officials were outraged at the charge, which they promptly refuted with roughly the same vehemence with which they once denied Osama Bin Laden’s presence.
The US responded by announcing that its drone attacks on Pakistan’s North Waziristan region will continue.
Was this the long-awaited signal that the US was about to squeeze Pakistan on the issue of terrorism?
With the US blueprint for its withdrawal from Afghanistan completed by Obama earlier on Clinton’s journey, one might think so.
In any case, Clinton’s tour appears to confirm the central fact of US diplomacy nowadays: the Asia pivot is complete.
The region is now America’s top foreign-policy priority.
The Agony of Hillary Clinton
WASHINGTON, DC – Being Hillary Clinton, one of the most celebrated women in the world, holder of some of the highest offices in American politics, and possibly the next president of the United States, has had more than its share of agony.
Widely regarded a year ago as a shoo-in for the Democratic Party’s nomination, she has faced a far more difficult slog than anyone, including her, ever contemplated.
Yet most of the problems Clinton is encountering were predictable and foreshadowed in 2008, when she ran against Barack Obama.
Others she has brought on herself.
For one thing, she’s simply not a very good politician.
Clinton is the only person known to have launched her campaign twice.
(The first attempt, in Iowa, where she talked to about eight people in closed meetings, didn’t work out very well.)
This impressive, remarkably intelligent woman just doesn’t have the feel for politics that is demanded at the highest levels.
Success in US presidential politics requires superb intuition, being quick on one’s feet, and, above all, a compelling rationale for running.
True, Clinton offers numerous programs that she would push as president; but, to borrow from Winston Churchill, there is no theme to her pudding.
The closest she comes to a message is a less-than-soaring “I’m a progressive who can get things done.”
By contrast, her rival, Bernie Sanders, has become a serious contender because he brilliantly composed a persuasive message for his campaign: The system is rigged and a corrupt campaign-finance regime is holding it in place.
The sweeping programs Sanders is pushing – a single-payer health-care system and free tuition at public colleges – however impracticable, are popular, especially among younger people, who overwhelmingly favor him over Clinton.
Her message is one of incrementalism: Don’t dare to dream big.
Meanwhile, Sanders is preaching a political revolution.
Then there’s the issue of trustworthiness.
Sanders’s integrity comes across as unimpeachable, while Clinton continues to provide reasons for questioning hers.
She and her advisers are clearly stunned by the force of the challenge she’s facing.
Sanders appears authentic; Clinton seems programmed.
She sometimes seems to be tone-deaf, particularly out of tune with the public mood on the subject of money.
Anger at the growing gap between the very rich and everyone else has been brewing for years.
Shortly before she began her campaign, Hillary Clinton said that when they left the White House she and her husband were “dead broke.”
If so, they recovered quickly: Bill and Hillary Clinton are believed to be worth well over $100 million, all of it made since they left the White House and most of it through astronomical speaking fees.
Not unlike other former US presidents – Jimmy Carter is a notable exception – the Clintons exploited their fame and influence to build up a fortune.
It’s not so much how they made most of their money as who paid them.
While Bill made business deals with some shady international figures, Hillary made a lot of her fortune by giving speeches to Wall Street firms, the main target of public wrath for causing the Great Recession of 2008.
How could she not know that a Secretary of State will receive and may respond to classified information?
After the server became public knowledge, Clinton, as her husband has also done, resorted to legalisms: She hadn’t received or sent information on her server that was “marked classified at the time.”
Students of Hillary-speak immediately sensed something fishy.
The State Department, it turns out, has two email systems: one classified and one unclassified; and one kind of material can’t be sent on the other.
To avoid sending her classified information on her private server, her aides delivered it by other means – orally or in written summaries.
Thus, they weren’t “marked classified at the time.”
Yet State Department inspectors have found hundreds of emails that had been sent to her server that should have been classified.
An FBI investigation is underway.
Finally, what was supposed to be a huge asset for her candidacy – the prospect of making history as the first woman president – isn’t working out as she and her campaign had expected.
As in 2008, large numbers of women don’t want to be told that they must support Clinton simply because she’s a woman.
They find that an insult to their intelligence, and young women in particular are largely supporting Sanders; they prefer his platform and are troubled by questions about her integrity.
The only group of women that Clinton carried in New Hampshire, where Sanders beat her by 22 percentage points, was those over 65.
In the latest caucus, in Nevada, Clinton’s presumed advantage among non-white voters, who are a far greater factor in Nevada than in Iowa or New Hampshire, seems to have served her well, with Sanders failing to win enough African-American voters, in particular, to defeat her.
This augurs well for future nominating contests.
But the general election could be something else.
Hillary in Asia, Round Two
SINGAPORE – US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is scheduled to travel to Asia again in July to meet foreign ministers at the ASEAN Regional Forum, and to visit India.
On her first Asian trip in February, she provided a welcome contrast to the past with her openness to others’ views, her willingness to cooperate, and her star power.
She made Asians look at America anew.
But this trip will be trickier.
One challenge is that part of the plot for the US and Clinton is being written by others.
North Korea will be on the agenda after its missile tests, as will Myanmar, since its generals persist in prosecuting Aung San Suu Kyi, the world’s most famous political detainee, on trivial charges.
After all that has happened in recent weeks, the definition of “success” must be set low.
Nothing positive will come from the US condemning these two difficult regimes unilaterally.
So a key goal of Clinton’s visit must be to pull together with the Asian leaders present at the ASEAN Regional Forum.
As for Myanmar, its neighbors and fellow ASEAN members – Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, and Thailand – are also concerned about Suu Kyi’s continued prosecution.
The US should begin to work with these countries not only on this matter, but also on the elections that Myanmar military junta has promised for 2010.
Together, they should press for assurances of a free and fair process, with the aim of avoiding the kind of mess that followed the Iranian elections.
Indonesia can be one ally.
After decades of autocracy, this vast archipelago of a country just concluded a presidential election that has solidified its transition to democracy.
India, proud of its long-standing democracy and fresh from its own elections, shares a border with Myanmar and can also assist efforts there.
The approach to North Korea is similar.
Kim Jong-il is a naughty boy who wants attention and incentives to behave decently.
Rather than debate with her counterparts, Clinton needs to ensure that other countries in the six-party framework, especially China and South Korea, are on the same page as the US.
On both issues, there is little capacity to exert force or sufficient pressure for solutions any time soon.
So diplomatic efforts must instead aim to join Americans and like-minded Asians in common cause, to push for steps forward in the medium to longer term.
Others must be brought on board, especially the Regional Forum hosts, ASEAN and Thailand.
A moral community should form in Asia, one that displaces its leaders’ usual cynical calculations of power in order to jump on the right bandwagon.
In all this, China is the 800-pound dragon in the room.
China is already closer to ASEAN and a key player with respect to Myanmar, North Korea, and other sticky issues.
A “bamboo” economic zone appears to be emerging, perhaps to replace today’s weakening US-centric trans-Pacific ties.
This is the context for Clinton’s visit to India, as well.
George W. Bush’s administration should be credited for giving overdue recognition to India, but this was done primarily on a bilateral basis.
The US should now leverage that relationship to work on regional and even global issues.
Besides her own work, Clinton is likely to also be inundated during this visit with requests concerning President Barack Obama.
There is still no confirmation concerning when Obama will visit Asia, though many expect that he will attend the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Summit, to be held in Singapore in November.
China, Japan, and Indonesia must be among Obama’s priorities, but many others will clamor for him to visit their capitals.
Clinton and the US administration would do well to decide which requests are merely photo ops and confine these to meetings at the sidelines of APEC.
The US should insist on a substantive agenda as a precondition for any Obama visit.
In China, for example, Clinton successfully established an agenda for the two countries to work together on climate change.
Plans and resources now must be prepared.
Clinton has reopened the doors for Obama in Asia with charm and confidence.
Obama will eventually come to Asia with many high expectations and star billing.
While his charisma and openness to dialog will be sought after, substance will also be measured and much needed.
By November, after all, it will be more than a year since the global crisis began in the US, and Obama and his team must show tangible prospects for recovery.
American leadership – globally and in Asia – can no longer be presumed. It must be earned.
A Tale of Two Atomic Cities
HIROSHIMA/NAGASAKI – On April 27, representatives of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty’s 190 member countries will meet in New York for a four-week review of the 45-year-old pact.
The attendees would be wise to consider an important fact: Although the NPT requires its members to “pursue negotiations in good faith” on nuclear disarmament, a wide legal gap still remains when it comes to eliminating nuclear weapons.
It is time for the NPT’s signatories to initiate disarmament negotiations.
This year also marks the 70th anniversary of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, on August 6 and 9, when citizens everywhere will have an opportunity to pay their respects to the hundreds of thousands of people who were killed or wounded on those tragic days.
This is also an occasion to honor the survivors, by supporting their call to eliminate all nuclear weapons, thereby ensuring that no one will ever suffer as they have.
We, the mayors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, are but two voices among representatives from more than 6,600 cities in 160 countries and regions worldwide who support this historic goal.
Our organization, Mayors for Peace, was created in 1982 as a way to transcend national borders and work together toward the abolition of nuclear weapons.
More mayors are joining our cause every year, and our determination to pursue nuclear disarmament will only deepen in the years ahead.
It is fitting that mayors, driven by their sense of responsibility to protect their citizens’ safety and welfare, take a keen interest in this cause.
The horrific, indiscriminate, and long-term consequences of nuclear weapons for humanity and the environment cannot be overstated – especially when they target densely populated areas.
The danger that nuclear weapons will be used again, either intentionally or accidentally, will exist for as long as they remain available, a conclusion reached at three major international humanitarian conferences and strongly affirmed by the United Nations.
And it is scandalous that vast sums are being devoted to maintaining and modernizing these weapons at a time when budget constraints undermine efforts to address pressing human needs around the world.
The number of nuclear near-misses – accidents and miscalculations that have almost led to disaster – is shocking.
Moreover, such weapons and their related facilities and components are attractive targets for terrorists.
It is a matter of no small public concern that international security still depends on “nuclear deterrence” – a doctrine based on mutual distrust that aims to keep the peace through the threat of mass killings.
Worse, there have been suggestions of their actual use.
Military planners who consider the use of nuclear weapons have probably given scant thought to those living in the cities on their target lists.
For too long, the residents of cities have been used as pawns on a global nuclear chessboard, with little concern for the full implications of playing the game.
But, as the public is educated about the specific threats that nuclear weapons continue to pose to the cities in which they live, that stance will be increasingly difficult to maintain.
At the same time, people worldwide must stop regarding one another as untrustworthy enemies.
That is why Mayors for Peace, together with a wide range of civil-society groups, is striving not only for the abolition of nuclear weapons, but also to cultivate a shared sense of belonging to a single human family, regardless of our cultural, religious, or ethnic differences.
Until now, nuclear-weapon states’ national governments and bureaucracies have preferred to limit the disarmament debate to symbolic measures that imply no deadlines or additional legally binding obligations.
They claim that the security environment is not mature enough to take bold steps toward nuclear disarmament.
We disagree.
Concerted efforts – involving national and local governments, universities, workers’ unions, political parties, environmental groups, young people, women’s groups, lawyers, and the business community – can change the world.
But it is world leaders – in particular, those whose countries maintain nuclear weapons – who must take the first step toward building confidence and initiating meaningful cooperation on disarmament.
Along the way, they can lay the groundwork for a new kind of security system – one that does not rely on nuclear deterrence.
It is crucial that representatives at the NPT review conference work together to bring the rule of law to nuclear disarmament and close the gap in the NPT that has permitted the most inhumane of all weapons of mass destruction to continue to exist.
Mayors for Peace and its civil-society partners will do everything we can do to support them.
The tragic tale of our two cities should never become the tale of your city.
Historical Memory and Engineering Failures
George Santayana, the Spanish-American poet and philosopher, once warned that "Those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it."
This is especially true in the field of bridge building, where over the past 150 years dramatic failures have occurred at surprisingly regular intervals.
In 1847, the first major structural failure on Britain's expanding railway network occurred at Chester, England.
The Dee Bridge, whose cast- and wrought-iron design followed common practice for the period, collapsed under a passing train, killing everyone aboard.
Subsequent investigation revealed that the structure, the longest of its kind, simply pushed the limits of railroad-bridge engineering too far.
In 1879, the longest bridge in the world spanned the River Tay at Dundee, Scotland.
Composed of many modest spans, the structure involved no radically new design concepts and seemed to be a mere application of proven technology.
However, the force of the wind was grossly underestimated and worksmanship was inferior.
As a result, the Tay Bridge, vulnerable in a gale, was blown off its supports.
In 1907, the longest span in the world was being constructed over the St. Lawrence River near Quebec, Canada.
The bridge was of a relatively new type, known as a cantilever, which had become quite fashionable.
Although it was only slightly longer than the highly successful cantilever bridge over the Forth River near Edinburgh, Scotland, the Quebec Bridge was so inadequately designed that it collapsed before it was completed.
In 1940, the third longest suspension bridge in the world was opened in Washington State.
The Tacoma Narrows Bridge was designed as state of the art, which included a strong aesthetic preference for slender structures.
Within four months of its opening, the bridge was destroyed by winds in a manner totally unanticipated by its engineers.
In 1970, steel box-girder bridges in Milford Haven, Wales, and in Melbourne, Australia, failed spontaneously while under construction.
Both were among the longest structures of their kind and were thought to be just natural applications of existing technology. 
In 2000, the much-anticipated opening of London's Millennium Bridge over the River Thames was followed only three days later by its closure.
The sleek footbridge swayed unexpectedly and excessively under the feet of pedestrians, and it was deemed too dangerous to use.
What should have been a mere extension of the millennia-old art of building pedestrian bridges, proved to be a modern engineering embarrassment.
In every case, engineers believed that they were just building incrementally on successful practice.
Failures always reveal weaknesses and provide incontrovertible evidence of our incomplete understanding of how things work.
When the failures described above occurred, engineers were sensitized to their own limitations and so approached subsequent designs - no matter of what kind of bridge - with renewed respect for the laws and forces of nature.
Unfortunately, human memory fades with time, and new generations of engineers with no vivid experience of past failures can proceed with hubris to design again beyond wise limits.
The history of engineering is no mere adjunct to technical know-how.
A historical perspective on bridge building or any other engineering specialty provides a caveat about how our humanity affects our thinking.
Building a new bridge following a familiar model can lead to complacency. Building a novel bridge, especially in the wake of a spectacular failure, forces engineers to think from scratch and also to think more deeply and critically.
Hence, the paradox that success leads to failure, and failure leads to success.
The cable-stayed bridge is a form that is currently being pushed to limits and beyond those originally imagined to apply to it.
Widespread successes with cable-stayed structures have made the type almost commonplace.
As such, its development into ever longer spans is following the historic pattern that in the past has led to failures.
Whether there will be a major cable-stayed bridge failure soon - or around the year 2030 - will most likely depend not so much on computer analyses as on how well engineers know their history and are determined not to repeat it.
Historic Election in Egypt?
Egyptians go to the polls on September 7th to elect a president from among ten contenders, including the incumbent of 24 years, Hosni Mubarak.
While few doubt the outcome will be his re-election, many are intensely following the process.
Some 6000 domestic election monitors have been training for the event, while hundreds of foreign reporters are converging on the country this week.
Although all the formal trappings of a true electoral contest are in place, important aspects of authenticity are glaringly absent.
Despite promises to the contrary, this is far from a level playing field.
Mubarak still commands disproportionate assets: name recognition, a virtual monopoly on state-controlled electronic media and some 85% of the print media.
One week before the poll, some opposition candidates have yet to air even one campaign ad on Egyptian television.
All members of the presidential election commission are Mubarak appointees, and the new election rules eliminated any independent challengers.
Since the year 2000, Egypt’s 8000 judges must supervise and certify election results, by ruling of the High Court.
This was a major step toward fairer elections, as the judges’ professional union has remained fairly independent over the past half-century of executive power grabs.
So the Mubarak regime has had to use various ploys to neutralize the judge’s union.
One was to stretch the definition of ‘the judiciary’ to include thousands of loyal government employees who have law degrees but no experience on the bench.  This boxes in the true judges, for if they protest by boycotting their supervisory duties, the task will fall once more to police from the infamous Ministry of the Interior.
Thus, in the past, the judges’ union tended to go along, with predictable results.
In the 2000 parliamentary elections, while Mubarak’s ruling party received roughly 38% of the popular vote in districts supervised by true judges, that percent somehow jumped to 86% where the quasi-judges were in charge.
This year promises to be very different.
In the spring the judges held a nation-wide assembly and resolved that unless the regime granted them full independence, and exclusive oversight of the voting process they would not supervise the upcoming presidential (or parliamentary) races.
On September 2nd they made their final demands: allow civil society groups to observe the voting process, stop interfering in the definition of legitimate judges for purposes of the election, and agree that no ballot box will leave the presence of a legitimate judge until its contents are counted, certified and reported.
Thus far, a standoff looks likely, as the head of the presidential election commission has stated publicly on Egyptian television that he refuses all citizen monitoring of the election process.  
Other interesting developments on the eve of the election include a fierce public debate over whether to vote or to boycott the presidential race.
Several opposition parties have called on their members to stay away in protest over restrictive election rules that strongly favor Mubarak.
On the other hand, the Muslim Brotherhood, thought to be the single strongest opposition group in Egypt, are urging their followers to caste ballots and vote their conscience but not to give support to any ‘despotic, corrupt rulers.’
This is a clear if implicit repudiation of Mubarak, the sole ruler for 24 years.
Some 34 civil society organizations are preparing thousands of young Egyptians to monitor the elections despite repeated governmental objections.
These groups argue that if the regime is not planning to rig the vote, then domestic as well as foreign observation of the polling process should not be a problem.
The regime response is to say that any outside monitoring is an infringement on Egyptian sovereignty, and that domestic monitors are an affront to the integrity of the judges.
That argument was quickly undermined when the judges’ union announced their support for civil society monitors.
Whether the Mubarak regime is running scared because of the mounting challenges from within and without to hold a free and fair election, or is simply incapable of ridding the party of cheating as a way of life, the present signs do not bode well for next Wednesday’s polls.
Meanwhile, Egyptians for the first time are experiencing the thrilling taste of defying tyranny, and enjoying some newly-found space for freedom.     
The Use and Abuse of Monetary History
BERKELEY – Imagine two central banks.
One is hyperactive, responding aggressively to events.
While it certainly cannot be accused of ignoring current developments, its policies are widely criticized as storing up problems for the future.
The other central bank is unflappable.
It remains calm in the face of events, seeking at all cost to avoid doing anything that might be construed as encouraging excessive risk-taking or creating even a whiff of inflation.
What I have just described is no mere hypothetical, of course.
It is, in fact, a capsule depiction of the United States Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank.
One popular explanation for the two banks’ different approaches is that they stem from their societies’ respective historical experiences.
The banks’ institutional personalities reflect the role of collective memory in shaping how officials conceptualize the problems that they face.
The Great Depression of the 1930’s, when the Fed stood idly by as the economy collapsed, is the molding event seared into the consciousness of every American central banker.
As a result, the Fed responds aggressively when it perceives even a limited risk of another depression.
By contrast, the defining event shaping European monetary policy is the hyperinflation of the 1920’s, filtered through the experience of the 1970’s and 1980’s, when central banks were enlisted once again to finance budget deficits – and again with inflationary consequences.
Indeed, delegating national monetary policies to a Europe-wide central bank was intended to solve precisely this problem.
It is not only in central banking, of course, that we see the role of historical experience in shaping policymaking.
President Lyndon Johnson, when deciding to escalate US intervention in Vietnam, drew an analogy with Munich, when the failure to respond to Hitler’s aggression had catastrophic consequences.
A quarter-century later, President George H.W. Bush, considering how best to roll back Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, drew an analogy with Vietnam, where the absence of an exit strategy had caused US forces to get bogged down.
But a key conclusion of research on foreign policy is that decision-makers all too often fail to test their analogies for “fitness.”
They fail to ask whether there is, in fact, a close correspondence between historical circumstances and current facts.
They invoke specific analogies not so much because they resemble current conditions, but because they are seared into the public’s consciousness.
As a result, analogical reasoning both shapes and distorts policy.
It misleads decision-makers, as it did both Johnson and Bush.
The same dangers arise for monetary policy.
For the Fed, it is important to ask whether the 1930’s, when its premature policy tightening precipitated a double-dip recession, really is the best historical analogy to consider when contemplating how to time the exit from its current accommodating stance.
Certainly, the Great Depression is not the only alternative on offer.
The Fed might also consider policy in 1924-1927, when low interest rates fueled stock-market and real-estate bubbles, or 2003-2005, when interest rates were held down in the face of serious financial imbalances.
At a minimum, the Fed might develop a “portfolio” of analogies, test them for fitness, and distill their lessons, as President John F. Kennedy famously did when weighing his options during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
Similarly, the ECB might consider not only how monetary accommodation allowed governments to run large budget deficits in the 1920’s, but also how central bankers’ failure to respond to the financial crisis of the 1930’s fed political extremism and undermined support for responsible government.
Again, rigorous analysis requires testing these historical analogies for fitness with current circumstances.
Anyone who does so will find it hard to defend the ECB and its stubborn inaction in the face of events.
There is exactly zero evidence in Europe today that inflation is just around the corner.
And, if current European governments are not committed to austerity and fiscal consolidation, then which governments are?
When I consider the European economy, the ECB’s failure to provide more monetary support for economic growth appears to be directly analogous to Europe’s disastrous monetary policies in the 1930’s.
The political consequences could be similarly devastating.
Europeans should ponder why the inflationary 1920’s, rather than the politically catastrophic 1930’s, have become the historical lodestar for current monetary policy.
On the other hand, when I contemplate the US economy, I conclude that recovery from the Great Depression, and not 1924-1927 or 2003-2005, is the episode that most closely resembles current circumstances.
Only in the 1930’s were interest rates near zero.
Only in the 1930’s was the economy digging itself out from a major financial crisis.
Then again, perhaps it is to be expected that I find the analogy with the 1930’s compelling.
That was the defining episode for American monetary policy.
And I am, after all, an American.
A Brief History of (In)equality
BERKELEY – The Berkeley economist Barry Eichengreen recently gave a talk in Lisbon about inequality that demonstrated one of the virtues of being a scholar of economic history.
Eichengreen, like me, glories in the complexities of every situation, avoiding oversimplification in the pursuit of conceptual clarity.
This disposition stays the impulse to try to explain more about the world than we can possibly know with one simple model.
For his part, with respect to inequality, Eichengreen has identified six first-order processes at work over the past 250 years.
The first is the widening of Britain’s income distribution between 1750 and 1850, as the gains from the British Industrial Revolution went to the urban and rural middle class, but not to the urban and rural poor.
Second, between 1750 and 1975, income distribution also widened globally, as some parts of the world realized gains from industrial and post-industrial technologies, while others did not.
For example, in 1800, American purchasing power parity was twice that of China; by 1975 it was 30 times that of China.
The third process is what is known as the First Age of Globalization, between 1850 and 1914, when living standards and labor productivity levels converged in the global north.
During this time, 50 million people left an overcrowded agricultural Europe for resource-rich new settlements.
They brought their institutions, technologies, and capital with them, and the wage differential between Europe and these new economies shrank from roughly 100% to 25%.
This mostly coincided with the Gilded Age between 1870 and 1914, when domestic inequality rose in the global north as entrepreneurship, industrialization, and financial manipulation channeled new gains mostly to the wealthiest families.
Gilded Age inequality was significantly reversed during the period of social democracy in the global north, between 1930 and 1980, when higher taxes on the wealthy helped pay for new government benefits and programs.
But the subsequent and last stage brings us to the current moment, when economic policy choices have again resulted in a widening of the distribution of gains in the global north, ushering in a new Gilded Age.
Eichengreen’s six processes affecting inequality are a good starting point.
But I would go further and add six more.
First, there is the stubborn persistence of absolute poverty in some places, despite the extraordinary overall reduction since 1980.
As the UCLA scholar Ananya Roy points out, people in absolute poverty are deprived of both the opportunities and the means to change their status.
They lack what the philosopher Isaiah Berlin called “positive liberty” – empowerment for self-actualization – as well as “negative liberty,” or freedom from obstacles in one’s path of action.
Seen in this light, inequality is an uneven distribution not only of wealth, but also of liberty.
Second is the abolition of slavery in many parts of the world during the nineteenth century, followed by, third, the global loosening over time of other caste constraints – race, ethnicity, gender – which deprived even some people with wealth of the opportunities to use it.
The fourth process consists of two recent high-growth generations in China and one high-growth generation in India, which has been a significant factor underlying global wealth convergence since 1975.
Fifth is the dynamic of compound interest, which through favorable political arrangements allows the wealthy to profit from the economy without actually creating any new wealth.
As the French economist Thomas Piketty has observed, this process may have played some role in our past, and will surely play an even bigger role in our future.
At this point, it should be clear why I began by noting the complexity of economic history.
This complexity implies that any adjustments to our political economy should be based on sound social science and directed by elected leaders who are genuinely acting in the interest of the people.
Emphasizing complexity brings me to a final factor affecting inequality – perhaps the most important of all: populist mobilizations.
Democracies are prone to populist uprisings, especially when inequality is on the rise.
But the track record of such uprisings should give us pause.
In France, populist mobilizations installed an emperor – Napoleon III, who led a coup in 1851 – and overthrew democratically elected governments during the Second Republic.
In the United States, they underpinned discrimination against immigrants and sustained the Jim Crow era of legal racial segregation.
In Central Europe, populist mobilizations have driven imperial conquests under the banner of proletarian internationalism.
In the Soviet Union, they helped Vladimir Lenin consolidate power, with disastrous consequences that were surpassed only by the horrors of Nazism, which also came to power on a populist wave.
History teaches us that these latter responses to inequality have made the world a better place.
Unfortunately – and at the risk of oversimplification – we usually fail to heed history’s lessons.
History’s Ghosts in Iran
Using historical analogies to interpret the present is both tempting and dangerous, for history never truly repeats itself.
Yet, to understand the difficulty of responding to the problems that Iran’s nuclear ambition and anti-Israel obsession now pose, it might be helpful to analyze the three analogies that are most commonly used.
Some compare the Iranian regime to Nazi Germany.
Others believe that the only useful analogy is to Europe’s old balance-of-power games.
And still others combine the two, pointing to the “balance of terror” during the Cold War.
In other words: is Iran to be treated as Hitler’s Germany in 1938, Prussia in 1756, or Stalin’s Soviet Union?
Each analogy contains an element of truth, but none, of course, corresponds to the realities of the challenges Iran represents.
Above all, each analogy, if taken seriously, should lead to a specific course of action, and this is far from being the case today.
Let us start with the analogy between Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Hitler.
Ahmedinejad pursues a dual objective with his anti-Zionist obsession: to de-legitimize Israel and to re-legitimize Iran’s claim to speak for Muslims over the heads of their more cautious governments.
He very probably means what he says about Jews and Israel, but is he a latter-day Hitler, and is today’s Iran the equivalent of Germany in the 1930’s?
Hitler came close to developing the nuclear bomb, but never had it, whereas Iran very well might.
But Hitler’s power over Germany was much more absolute than Ahmadinejad’s power over Iran.
The results of Iran’s recent municipal elections were humiliating for Ahmadinejad and his supporters.
Those elections would have been unthinkable in Nazi Germany.
Although the Iranian regime’s rhetoric may be totalitarian, political power there is much more diffused.
The analogy with Hitler’s Germany is also problematic because, if it were regarded as true, the only sensible course of action would be a preventive strike on Iran and the removal of Ahmadinejad.
Given the evolution of American strategic thinking after Iraq (and now Afghanistan), and of Israel’s strategic thinking after Lebanon, a preventive strike is highly unlikely.
The second analogy, to the old balance-of-power system in Europe, is especially popular among Israeli and American diplomats.
According to this view, if Iran wants to de-legitimize Israel and ultimately unite Moslems against the West, the only answer is to isolate Iran in the Middle East, and to create alliances against Iran with moderate Sunni Arab regimes.
Before the 1979 Iranian revolution, some in Israel advocated an alliance between Israel, Turkey, and Iran, the Middle East’s three non-Arab powers.
Today, many in the United States and Israel dream of a moderate Arab front, with countries such as Saudi Arabia and Egypt containing and isolating “radical” Iran.
That diplomatic project is far from absurd.
The rise of Hamas in Palestine and Hezbollah in Lebanon as instruments of Iranian ambitions can only worry moderate Arab regimes.
But such an alliance has a price: the resumption of negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, with serious territorial concessions on Israel’s part to match the Palestinians’ absolute recognition of Israel.
Moderate Arab regimes will not dare to engage in an open and serious process of rapprochement with Israel in the absence of real progress over the Palestinian issue.
But are the two parties ready for it?
Could the US, a wounded power mired in Iraq, implement the part of the Baker report that suggests “Peace in Baghdad goes through Jerusalem”?
While Israel’s non-victory in Lebanon and the Palestinians’ bloody divisions mean that both sides have been humbled, a breakthrough, though possible, remains unlikely.
The third analogy is reflected in Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s recent references to Israel’s nuclear deterrent, which may have been a mistake, but probably indicate the evolution of Israeli strategic thinking.
Olmert seemed to be reminding the Iranians of the hard realities of nuclear deterrence: Iran may join the nuclear club someday, but it will return to the Stone Age if it uses those weapons against a country that has a far more advanced nuclear arsenal.
The comparison here is to the Cold War period.
But can today’s Iran be compared to the Soviet Union?
The success of the “balance of terror” presupposed a mixture of confrontation and dialogue between two “rational actors.”
Can Iran under Ahmadinejad be considered a rational actor?
The dilemma concerning Iran is whether a power imbued with an “absolute” ideology can be allowed to be in control of an “absolute” weapon.
Since a military solution is highly improbable, what are the serious alternatives? Can we have a productive dialogue with Iran while rejecting the mad ideology of its president?
As the shortcomings of the three most popular historical analogies suggest, the answer is far from obvious.
History, Used and Abused
LONDON – In her brilliant book, “The Uses and Abuses of History” the historian Margaret Macmillan tells a story about two Americans discussing the atrocities of September 11, 2001. One draws an analogy with Pearl Harbor, Japan’s attack on the US in 1941.
His friend has no idea as to what this means.  “You know,” the first man replies, “It was when the Vietnamese bombed the American fleet and started the Vietnam War.”
Historical memory is not always quite as bad as this.  But international politics and diplomacy are riddled with examples of bad and ill-considered precedents being used to justify foreign policy decisions, invariably leading to catastrophe.
Munich – the 1938 meeting between Adolf Hitler, Édouard Daladier, Neville Chamberlain, and Benito Mussolini – is a frequent witness summoned to court by politicians trying to argue the case for foreign adventures.
Britain’s disastrous 1956 invasion of Egypt was talked about as though Gamal Nasser was a throw-back to the fascist dictators of the 1930’s. If he were to be appeased as they had been, the results would be catastrophic in the Middle East.  
Munich was also produced as a justification for the Vietnam War and President Bush’s war of choice in Iraq.
1930’s appeasement – a word that elides diplomatic engagement and the rejection of military options – was said to remind us of what would happen if South Vietnam was not defended and Iraq not invaded.  We know what happened in both countries.
But analogies are not always wrong, and those that were wrong in the past could prove correct today.  One of the arguments for the Vietnam War was the so-called domino theory.  If South Vietnam was to fall to the Communists, other countries in South-East Asia would tumble before Communist insurgency.  
Things turned out very different.
Vietnam proved to be the end not the beginning of the line.
Pol Pot’s wicked regime murdered millions in Cambodia until Vietnam intervened.  
Elsewhere in the region capitalism, promoted by the opening of markets, triggered growth and promoted stability.
Globalisation produced its own domino effect.  The dominoes toppled; GDP rose; millions were lifted out of poverty; literacy rates soared; child mortality figures fell.
Maybe, if not there and if not then, dominoes are more relevant to foreign and security policy today.
In America and Europe at the moment, many people are calling for the withdrawal of NATO forces from Afghanistan. We are told that NATO and the West cannot build a nation there and that the goals that have been set for establishing democracy and prosperity are unattainable. 
NATO soldiers die in vain.
Sooner or later the Taliban will sweep to power again, at liberty as happened before to throw acid in women’s faces.
It is vanity to think that anything can be done to prevent this. Better to cut and run than stay and die, and who is to say that the result will embolden Taliban terrorists?
They do not necessarily share the same aims as Al Qaeda.    
There have certainly been mistakes in Afghanistan.
After the overthrow of the Taliban regime, the West did not commit enough troops to extend the national government in Kabul’s authority over the whole country.
The Bush administration had turned its attention to the preparations for the Iraq war. 
Development has been slow. The build-up of the Afghan army and police has lagged.  The poppy crop has grown.
Sometimes the military response to insurgency has been too tough; sometimes too light.
The West has courted trouble in appearing to isolate the Pashtun.
So the West can do better. There is no doubt about that.
But the case for quitting is bad and touches on Pakistan’s future as well as Afghanistan’s.
Leave Afghanistan to the Taliban, hoping against hope that they will become better-behaved global citizens, and what is the effect likely to be on Pakistan?
Here come the dominoes – wrong in Vietnam but not necessarily in the South Asian sub-continent.
Afghanistan is NATO’s great test.
The Alliance has promised to see the job through.  So if it abandons the job now, leaving the country to poverty, prejudice, and poppies, what then will happen? 
Why should anyone in Pakistan believe that the West is serious in wanting to sustain that country as a Muslim democratic state?
Would such a decision help turn the tide against the Taliban?
Would it encourage the middle-class professional and urban workers in Pakistan, disgusted by the excesses of the extremists, to dig in and see off fundamentalism?
Would it strengthen the more moderate elements in politics and the military?
You can count on us, the West would be saying, but don’t look next door to Afghanistan, where you will see that you can’t rely on us.
If Pakistan, nuclear weapons and all, was to fall to the extremists, the consequences in terms of encouraging the export of terrorism would be dire.
Think about Kashmir.  Think about India.
How would India’s government view the future if Pakistan falls into the hands of fundamentalists?
So the West should see the job through in Afghanistan – do it better but do it.  Sometimes the dominoes do topple over, one by one.
That is not a prospect that anyone should welcome in South Asia.
Holding Charities Accountable
Suppose you are concerned about children in Africa dying from preventable diseases.
You want to donate money to a charity that is working to reduce the toll.
But there are many charities doing that.
How do you choose?
The first thing that many people ask about charities is, “How much of my donation is spent on administration?”
In the United States, that figure is readily available from Charity Navigator, a Web site that has five million users.
But the information is taken from forms that the charities themselves complete and send to the tax authorities.
No one checks the forms, and the proportions allocated to administration and program expenses are easily massaged with a little creative accounting. 
Worse still, that figure, even if accurate, tells you nothing about the charity’s impact.
The pressure to keep administrative expenses low can make an organization less effective.
If, for example, an agency working to reduce poverty in Africa cuts staff with expert knowledge, it is more likely to end up funding projects that fail.
It may not even know which of its projects fail, because evaluating them, and learning from mistakes, requires staff – and that adds to administrative costs.
In 2006, Holden Karnofsky and Elie Hassenfeld faced the question of which charity would make the best use of their money.
They were in their mid-twenties, earning six-figure incomes at an investment company – more than they needed – and were thinking about donating money to help make the world a better place.
As investment advisers, they would never recommend investing in a company without detailed information about how well it was achieving its goals.
They wanted to make similarly well-informed choices about the charities to which they contributed.
So Karnofsky and Hassenfeld got together with six friends who also worked in finance and divided up the field to find out which charities could be shown to be effective.
They contacted organizations and received lots of attractive marketing material, but nothing that answered basic questions: what do the charities do with their money, and what evidence do they have that their activities help?
They called many charities, but eventually realized something that seemed extraordinary: the information was just not there. 
Some foundations said that information on their work’s effectiveness was confidential.
This, Karnofsky and Hassenfeld thought, is not a good way to go about charitable work.
Why should information about how to help people be secret?
The fact that charities were unprepared for such questions indicated to Karnofsky and Hassenfeld that other donors and foundations give more or less blindly, without the information needed to make sound decisions about whom to support. 
Karnofsky and Hassenfeld now had a new goal: to obtain and publicize the information.
To that end, they founded an organization called GiveWell so that other donors would not have as hard a time extracting it as they had had.
However, it soon became apparent that the task required more than part-time attention, and the following year, after raising $300,000 from their colleagues, Karnofsky and Hassenfeld left their jobs and began working full-time for GiveWell and its associated grant-making body, The Clear Fund.
They invited charities to apply for grants of $25,000 in five broad humanitarian categories, with the application process demanding the kind of information that they had been seeking.
In this way, a substantial part of the money they had raised would go to the most effective charity in each category, while simultaneously encouraging transparency and rigorous evaluation.
The first report on which organizations are most effective at saving or transforming lives in Africa is now available on GiveWell’s Web site, www.givewell.net .
Population Services International, which promotes and sells items like condoms, to prevent HIV infection, and bed nets, to prevent malaria, came out on top, followed by Partners in Health, an organization that provides health care to poor rural populations.
The third-ranked organization was Interplast, which is more narrowly focused on correcting deformities like cleft palate.
Evaluating charities can be more difficult than making investment decisions.
Investors are interested in financial returns, so there is no problem about measuring distinct values – in the end it all comes down to money.
It is more difficult to compare the reduction of suffering brought about by correcting a facial deformity with saving a life.
There is no single unit of value. 
In other ways, too, evaluating charities takes time, and can be expensive.
Perhaps for this reason, many organizations, including some of the best-known anti-poverty organizations working in Africa, did not respond to GiveWell’s request for information.
No doubt they calculated that a chance to get a $25,000 grant wasn’t worth it.
But if donors start to follow GiveWell’s recommendations, then a high ranking from GiveWell could be worth far more than the value of the grant.
This is why the potential of GiveWell is revolutionary.
In the US, individual donors give about $200 billion to charities each year.
No one knows how effective that vast sum is in achieving the goals that donors intend to support.
By giving charities an incentive to become more transparent and more focused on being demonstrably effective, GiveWell could make our charitable donations do much more good than ever before.
Holland After van Gogh
The murder of filmmaker Theo van Gogh and the ensuing arson attacks against mosques, churches, and Islamic schools have caused more soul-searching in Dutch homes in the last week than in the past two decades.
The old Netherlands, it seems, has ceased to be, never to return.
The goal now must be to unite the Dutch people. This will require much work on the part of both immigrants and native Dutch.
As long as moderates keep their heads, a new Netherlands may be born out of the terrible events of the past weeks.
It is often said of the various immigrant groups in the Netherlands that they lack the ability to "cleanse themselves" through honest self-appraisal and criticism.
There are many who acknowledge this and want to change.
Non-committal multiculturalism has long kept the conservatism of Dutch Moroccans and Dutch Turks hidden from the public eye.
Among immigrants, soul-searching is closely related to belonging and commitment, which in practice boils down to feeling part of society and feeling responsible for the city, neighborhood, and street where you live.
We native Dutch also find it hard to hold a mirror to ourselves.
We are bad listeners and air our views whether or not we have thought deeply about them.
There is a lack of self-examination.
As a result, many people no longer understand themselves, which makes it hard for them to understand others.
Freedom of expression is becoming a caricature.
When asked what it was like to be interviewed by Theo van Gogh, European Commissioner Frits Bolkestein said, "He was impertinent, and that is a good thing; he was offensive, and that is not."
It is as simple as that.
In today's Netherlands, assertiveness is seen as a good thing, modesty as a form of self-chastisement.
Respect is for wimps!
Moral relativism has damaged public life.
Many youngsters now see politics as a kind of computer game.
It is no longer about message or content - it is just one more form of entertainment, and what matters is who wins and who loses.
Context has been lost.
Extreme ideas offer an alternative compass to disoriented souls like Mohammed Bouyeri, van Gogh's suspected murderer.
He is not so much a product of zealous imams from rural Morocco as of the West's information society.
The gospel of Muslim extremism has found a global market through the Internet.
Something similar is happening on the extreme right, with "white power" offering an apparent certainty to youngsters who are adrift.
The real struggle is about ideas.
Indeed, what is most ominous is that extremists realize this more clearly than the moderate, silent majority, who find the noise irritating but do not know how to start a serious dialogue.
Meanwhile, tolerance degenerates into multicultural segregation.
We do not live together, but in isolation from each other.
The Turkish-Dutch headmaster of the Muslim school in Uden that was burned down after van Gogh's murder voiced the inhibitions we all feel when he asked, rhetorically, "Is the enemy not within us?"
A revived permissive society is not the answer.
The state must battle terrorism, public space must not be abandoned to extremists, and Islam in Europe must adapt to Europe.
People who live in a society they hate, amidst people they despise, cannot contribute to a shared future.
Life in Europe will only remain worth living if all cultures and religions accept the laws that represent the common interest.
So a European Islam is needed urgently.
It can be given shape by, for example, training imams in Europe, by encouraging mosques to promote social cohesion in their neighborhoods, and by more active participation by Muslims in the public debate.
At the same time, native Europeans must learn to accept that Islam may offer new vantage points on such moral issues as euthanasia, abortion, individuality, and solidarity.
This way Islam could really become a source of inspiration for the European community of values.
If we want to build something better on the ruins of multicultural indifference, our dialogue must become more profound.
Prejudice must make way for empathy, and alienation for respect.
Essentially, this is all about giving a new meaning to solidarity, beyond the left-right dichotomy.
It is time for a civilizing mission that will emerge from society itself and bring people together.
This mission must also reflect a new politics that does not accentuate differences, but helps shape a new sense of who "we" are.
The Netherlands need not be the focus of international religious conflict. What is precious must be preserved, and what enriches must be absorbed.
This process must begin in school.
Children must learn that they do not live in a monoculture, but in a pluralist society bound together by universal values and common laws.
They must learn that critical thought is valuable, and that doubt is healthy.
Restoring the past is not an option.
Rudderless societies are easy prey for bigotry.
This is not just a matter for politicians.
All of us must help turn Europe's motto "unity in diversity" into a genuine guiding principle.
François Hollande’s Tartuffe Syndrome
LONDON – In his classic comedy “Tartuffe, or The Impostor,” Molière shows that allowing pride, rather than reason, to dictate one’s actions invariably ends badly.