Both decisions will have serious consequences for the EU’s long-term political and economic stability.
The judgment by the German court is the less spectacular of the two, but it addresses the heart of the ECB’s interpretation of the Maastricht Treaty.
The plaintiffs, who include members of the Bundestag, have questioned whether the Bundesbank should be allowed to participate in the ECB’s outright monetary transactions (OMT) program, arguing that it violates Articles 123 and 125 of the EU Treaty, which they claim forbids government bailouts with the printing press.
In particular, they have objected to the ECB’s unlimited commitment (“whatever it takes,” in ECB President Mario Draghi’s famous phrase) to the purchase of crisis-hit countries’ government securities.
Under the OMT program, investors who buy such securities no longer need to worry about a potential default.
Before the risk of bankruptcy presents itself, the ECB will be available to buy the endangered securities off investors’ portfolios.
All that is required is an application to the European Stability Mechanism, a fund capable of providing rapid financial assistance to all members of the eurozone.
As a result, the risk of bankruptcy is transferred from the bondholders to taxpayers in economically healthy eurozone countries, who would permanently lose interest income on the government bonds.
The question before Germany’s Constitutional Court is whether that arrangement, which has already received the blessing of the European Court of Justice, is compatible with the country’s Basic Law – specifically, whether OMT undermines the Bundestag’s budgetary authority.
This is not a question that the ECJ can decide.
There are two reasons why the court is likely to impose conditions on the Bundesbank’s participation in the OMT program.
The Bundesbank is said to have consulted the court already regarding the ECB’s program of quantitative easing, and the court is reported to have called for the effective exclusion of joint liability of central banks for government-bond purchases under that program.
Furthermore, the court’s preliminary opinion expressed suspicion that the ECB might be overstretching its mandate.
If the court follows this line of reasoning and rules against the Bundesbank’s participation in the OMT program, the decision would cause the interest-rate spread between healthy and crisis-hit economies to widen, reflecting the true risk to investors.
That would put an end to some pipe dreams, but it would also mean taking a step toward strengthening accountability and put the eurozone back on the path to hard budget constraints, without which no economic system can survive.
The second decision, regarding the UK’s membership in the EU, could be even more consequential.
The vote is one more convulsion in a long history of tumultuous relations between the UK and the rest of Europe.
The UK joined the European Economic Community, the predecessor to the EU, in 1973, on its third attempt, after French President Charles de Gaulle vetoed its applications in 1963 and 1967.
But the relationship was strained from the outset.
Powerful resistance in Britain to the conditions for joining led to a referendum on membership in 1975.
The majority of UK voters opted for staying in.
After Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979, she appeased skeptics by negotiating special conditions for Britain.
But the euro crisis in recent years has revived skepticism about Europe.
The UK may have been only marginally involved in financing the EU’s response to the crisis, but fears are mounting in the UK that the country and its taxpayers will one day have to bail out southern European countries and EU banks.
At the same time, the European refugee crisis has begun to fray British nerves.
Under Thatcher, and Prime Minister Edward Heath before her, the UK put a stop to easy immigration from the Commonwealth.
Today, the fear is that the country is at risk of a new wave of immigration from the EU.
Undecided voters worried about the risks of “Brexit” are likely to provide the margin needed to keep the UK from leaving.
But the referendum nonetheless has exposed the EU’s serious shortcomings and its leaders’ inability to present a credible and convincing strategy for addressing the challenges facing the continent.
Whatever the outcome of the two decisions in June, one thing is clear: The era of unconditional trust in the EU and its institutions has come to an end.
Burma’s Agony
As the death toll mounts from the cyclone that struck a densely populated area of Burma stretching from the Irrawaddy Delta to the capital city of Rangoon continues to soar, the country’s military dictatorship is pressing ahead with efforts to consolidate its power.
The junta leaders have done little to facilitate recovery efforts in the wake of the disaster.
Indeed, they have announced their intentions to move forward with conducting a national referendum scheduled for Saturday to approve a new constitution, which they hope will entrench their power for decades to come.
Burma’s rulers have said that the vote will be delayed in the areas hardest hit by the cyclone until May 24, but the referendum will still go ahead as planned in other parts of the country.
With this move, the military leaders are putting their sham vote aimed at tightening their repressive grip on power ahead of the well being of the Burmese people.
This should be no surprise.
For nearly five decades, Burma’s military rulers have systematically undermined the interests of their own citizens.
In this latest case, the junta-controlled news media failed to announce warnings about the approaching cyclone.
The entry of United Nations humanitarian personnel, has been delayed due to the government’s refusal to allow aid workers into the country without first applying for visas.
Moreover, the military leaders are dragging their feet on easing restrictions on the import of humanitarian supplies and allowing a UN assessment team into the country.
Some have urged focusing attention on bringing relief efforts to Burma instead of criticizing its government.
But the reality is that the two issues are connected and the magnitude of the disaster has been made worse by the junta’s single-minded objective of preserving its power.
The military leaders have shown that they can mobilize their forces in short order when they want, as evidenced by their violent crack down on thousands of monks and political activists last year.
More than seven months on from this brutal suppression, political activists continue to be imprisoned and tortured.
Human rights groups report that opponents of the junta's proposed constitution have been beaten and intimidated in advance of the vote.
The current pro-military constitution lacks credibility because Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate who has spent 12 of the past 18 years under house arrest or in prison, and other democratic and ethnic minority leaders have not been allowed to participate in the drafting process.
Additionally, the new constitution would effectively bar Suu Kyi, from running for president because she was married to a foreigner.
As the only international actor in direct dialogue with both Burma's generals and Suu Kyi, the UN is in a position to press for a genuine process of national reconciliation.
But it’s current approach is not working.
To date, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has been addressing the crisis through the use of his &quot;good offices,&quot; with Ibrahim Gambari serving as his representative to Burma’s rulers.
In his March 2008 briefing to the UN Security Council, Gambari reported that his most recent visit to the country was &quot;frustrating&quot; and acknowledged that no tangible progress was made.
He was denied meetings with senior government leaders, representatives of ethnic minorities and political opposition groups.
The outcome was a major step backward.
This lack of progress is less a reflection of Gambari's capabilities  than of the fact that he has not been empowered by the countries that  hold the most leverage over Burma’s rulers, including China, India, and  Burma's ASEAN neighbors.
The &quot;good offices&quot; approach is effective when  the weight of the world is behind it and, put simply, Gambari has not  been given the clout he needs.
Since the countries that carry the  most sway with the junta also have strong commercial interests in Burma,  we should not expect any of them to step up and take the lead on their own.
As Secretary-General, Ban has lived up to his self-styled vision of being the consummate diplomat, and has made some important gains in tackling the UN's bureaucratic bloat as well as dealing with the Middle East.
But on other issues, Ban has failed to live up to the critically important precedent set by his predecessor as Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, who transformed the position to promote human rights and assumed the role of the &quot;world's conscience&quot; when necessary.
Burma’s deterioration demands that Ban stop managing and begin to lead.
He should begin by demanding that  Burma's government fulfill its responsibility  to protect the country’s citizens and condemn the use of violence and repressive tactics.
Given the Burmese generals' hard line stance to date, it will likely prove to be necessary for Ban to go to Burma to meet face-to-face with its leaders.
One idea is to pressure the generals to agree to multiparty talks based on the North Korean model-an, approach that Ban helped to forge from his days as South Korea’s Foreign Minister.
While the world watches, Burma's generals are consolidating their tyrannical rule as hundreds of thousands of the cyclone’s survivors remain in desperate need of shelter, clean drinking water and medical care.
The situation demands the Secretary-General’s direct involvement.
Without it, the junta will continue to have a free hand to act against the human rights of the Burmese people.
Burma’s Drug Lord Generals
The news blackout imposed by Burma’s military junta on its decision to forego its turn as chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) next year shows that it has received a severe blow to its prestige.
Indeed, the decision was far from voluntary.
Junta leader Senior General Than Shwe “lost face” and promptly disappeared from public view so completely that some Burmese thought he had died.
The protagonists that pressured the regime into relinquishing the ASEAN chair were not the usual Western human rights campaigners, but Burma’s closest ASEAN neighbors.
This must have made the retreat doubly painful for the generals, as ASEAN was previously one of the junta’s strongest shields against international pressure.
For ASEAN, the episode was a lesson in assertiveness.
It showed that persistent pressure works better than the “constructive engagement” that it had pursued, to no avail, for the eight years since Burma joined the organization.
We know that Burma’s political destiny is inextricably linked to that of our own countries.
When Burma joined ASEAN in 1997, there were only 210,000 Burmese refugees and asylum seekers throughout the region.
Now, nearly one million people have fled Burma’s political and economic chaos for neighboring countries, and another million people remain internally displaced.
Our youth are at an all-time high risk of drug addiction from the massive flow of narcotics, particularly amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS), from Burma, while the generals there maintain congenial ties with notorious drug lords.
In mid-September, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime admitted that Burma and China were the world’s top producers of ATS.
Amphetamine drugs produced in eastern Burma seem to be transported with such ease that significant quantities have been found in northeast India, on Burma’s western border.
That, together with the heroin that is trafficked from Burma to India, China, Thailand, and other countries in the region, poses a serious threat to our political and economic security.
It is both tragic and inevitable that the areas of India and China bordering Burma now suffer from those countries’ highest concentration of drug addiction and HIV infection., My own country, Thailand, receives up to 900 million amphetamine pills from Burma every year, and about a third of our regular drug users are below the age of 16.
If this is the impact on Thailand, what about the young people and children of Burma, who have been restricted from access to education, information, and health care?
It is scandalous that drug lords enjoy more freedom to operate than aid agencies, while basic access to food, education, and health care suffers many restrictions, with up to 70% of Burma’s children are chronically malnourished in some border areas.
Indeed, in August, World Food Program Executive Director James Morris revealed that the WFP had delivered only 430 tons of the 5,500 tons of rice earmarked for vulnerable people in Burma’s northern Arakan State because of restrictions imposed by the regime.
Two weeks later, the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria pulled its funding for programs in Burma, citing government restrictions that had created “an impossibly difficult environment.”
Preventing aid from reaching those in need is bad enough.
But Burma’s regime actually perpetuates conditions that sustain and worsen the HIV/AIDS epidemic by restricting access to counseling, medication, and other support services.
In order for HIV/AIDS programs to be effective and sustainable, affected communities must have the freedom to organize and empower themselves.
Only then can they be assured access to the resources essential for treatment options.
Aung San Suu Kyi’s eloquent plea, “Please use your liberty to promote ours,” has special resonance for us in AIPMC, who enjoy the benefits of representative democracy.
This is why we feel obligated to call on the highest levels of the international community – including the UN Security Council – to address the question of Burma, for we must show that we are serious about peace, democracy, and human rights.
The courageous people of Burma, like people everywhere around the world, deserve what far too many of us take for granted.
Burma’s Turn
YANGON – Here in Myanmar (Burma), where political change has been numbingly slow for a half-century, a new leadership is trying to embrace rapid transition from within.
The government has freed political prisoners, held elections (with more on the way), begun economic reform, and is intensively courting foreign investment.
Understandably, the international community, which has long punished Myanmar’s authoritarian regime with sanctions, remains cautious.
Reforms are being introduced so fast that even renowned experts on the country are uncertain about what to make of them.
But it is clear to me that this moment in Myanmar’s history represents a real opportunity for permanent change – an opportunity that the international community must not miss.
It is time for the world to move the agenda for Myanmar forward, not just by offering assistance, but by removing the sanctions that have now become an impediment to the country’s transformation.
So far, that transformation, initiated following legislative elections in November 2010, has been breathtaking.
With the military, which had held exclusive power from 1962, retaining some 25% of the seats, there were fears that the election would be a façade.
But the government that emerged has turned out to reflect fundamental concerns of Myanmar’s citizens far better than was anticipated.
Under the leadership of the new president, Thein Sein, the authorities have responded to calls for a political and economic opening.
Progress has been made on peace agreements with ethnic-minority insurgents – conflicts rooted in the divide-and-rule strategy of colonialism, which the country’s post-independence rulers maintained for more than six decades.
The Nobel laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was not only released from house arrest, but is now campaigning hard for a parliamentary seat in April’s by-elections.
On the economic front, unprecedented transparency has been introduced into the budgetary process.
Expenditures on health care and education have been doubled, albeit from a low base.
Licensing restrictions in a number of key areas have been loosened.
The government has even committed itself to moving towards unifying its complicated exchange-rate system.
The spirit of hope in the country is palpable, though some older people, who saw earlier moments of apparent relaxation of authoritarian rule come and go, remain cautious.
Perhaps that is why some in the international community are similarly hesitant about easing Myanmar’s isolation.
But most Burmese sense that if changes are managed well, the country will have embarked on an irreversible course.
In February, I participated in seminars in Yangon (Rangoon) and the recently constructed capital, Naypyidaw, organized by one of the country’s leading economists, U Myint.
The events were momentous, owing both to large and actively engaged audiences (more than a thousand in Yangon), and to the thoughtful and moving presentations by two world-famous Burmese economists who had left the country in the 1960’s and were back for their first visit in more than four decades.
My Columbia University colleague Ronald Findlay pointed out that one of them, 91-year-old Hla Myint, who had held a professorship at the London School of Economics, was the father of the most successful development strategy ever devised, that of an open economy and export-led growth.
That blueprint has been used throughout Asia in recent decades, most notably in China.
Now, perhaps, it has finally come home.
I delivered a lecture in Myanmar in December 2009.
At that time, one had to be careful, given the government’s sensitivities, even about how one framed the country’s problems – its poverty, lack of rural productivity, and unskilled workforce.
Now caution has been replaced by a sense of urgency in dealing with these and other challenges, and by awareness of the need for technical and other forms of assistance.
(Relative to its population and income, Myanmar is one of the world’s smallest recipients of international assistance.)
There is much debate about what explains the rapidity of Myanmar’s current pace of change.
Perhaps its leaders recognized that the country, once the world’s largest rice exporter, was falling far behind its neighbors.
Perhaps they heard the message of the Arab Spring, or simply understood that, with more than three million Burmese living abroad, it was impossible to isolate the country from the rest of the world or prevent ideas from seeping in from its neighbors.
Whatever the reason, change is occurring, and the opportunity that it represents is undeniable.
But many of the international sanctions, whatever their role in the past, now seem counterproductive.
Financial sanctions, for instance, discourage the development of a modern and transparent financial system, integrated with the rest of the world.
The resulting cash-based economy is an invitation to corruption.
Likewise, restrictions that prevent socially responsible companies based in advanced industrial countries from doing business in Myanmar have left the field open to less scrupulous firms.
We should welcome Myanmar’s desire for guidance and advice from multilateral institutions and the United Nations Development Program; instead, we continue to limit the role that these institutions can play in the country’s transition.
Whenever we withhold assistance or impose sanctions, we need to think carefully about who bears the burden in bringing about the changes that we seek.
Opening up trade in agriculture and textiles – and even providing preferences of the kind that are offered to other poor countries – would likely benefit directly the poor farmers who make up 70% of the population, as well as create new jobs.
The wealthy and powerful can circumvent financial sanctions, though at a cost; ordinary citizens cannot so easily escape the impact of international-pariah status.
We have seen the Arab Spring blossom haltingly in a few countries; in others, it is still uncertain whether it will bear fruit.
Myanmar’s transition is in some ways quieter, without the fanfare of Twitter and Facebook, but it is no less real – and no less deserving of support.
Bush Inherits the Wind
The most shocking statement in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was President George W. Bush’s remark that “I don’t think anybody anticipated the breach of the levees” that protect New Orleans from flooding.
New Orleans is a city mostly below sea level, and must be protected by levees to keep water out.
Concern that the levees might break in the midst of a powerful hurricane was widespread among scientists, engineers, and emergency-preparedness experts.
Yet Bush apparently did not know of these concerns, even days after the hurricane destroyed the levees and flooded the city. 
There is a simple fact on display here, one that goes well beyond this particular hurricane, and even this particular president.
There is a deep disconnect in American politics between scientific knowledge and political decisions.
Bush bears much responsibility for this.
He has proven to be one of America’s least knowledgeable presidents when it comes to science – and one of the most ready to turn science into a political issue. 
In recent months, Bush undermined biological theories of evolution in favor of Christian fundamentalist dogmas.
He disdains climate science and public health science when it conflicts with the beliefs – and interests – of his core supporters.
Simply put, Bush’s record on science policy is miserable.
Climate scientists have warned for years that global warming caused by manmade emissions of greenhouse gases will generate more extreme storms.
While there is no scientific way to link a particular hurricane such as Katrina to the long-term trend – in the sense that Katrina might have been bad luck rather than a sign of manmade climate change – the energy of hurricanes throughout the world has been rising markedly.
Bush, alas, led an aggressive effort to discredit climate science rather than to respond to its findings.
He called for delays in reducing greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming, which in turn causes the energy of hurricanes to rise.
According to the underlying science that Bush ignores, hurricanes take their energy from the warmth of seawater. That is why hurricanes occur in hot tropical regions, and at the end of the summer months, when the sea surface temperatures are at their annual maximum.
Manmade global warming raises not only air temperatures, but sea-surface temperatures as well.
Higher sea-surface temperatures translate into more powerful storms in the world’s oceans.
Hurricanes are measured according to three dimensions: frequency, intensity, and duration.
The frequency of hurricanes has not changed much, if at all.
The big changes are in hurricanes’ intensity and duration.
Intensity measures a hurricane’s force, which includes wind speeds, and there has been some recorded increase.
The biggest change, however, has been in the duration of hurricanes: how many days each hurricane lasts.
Duration has risen markedly around the world.
The total energy of a hurricane is found by multiplying the intensity of the hurricane by its duration.
This, too, has risen sharply, and more is in store as temperatures rise.
Scientists and engineers who work on climate change stress that governments need to adopt two main responses.
The first, called “mitigation,” means reducing the amount of manmade climate change.
This can be done by changing the world’s energy system to limit emissions of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere – the main driver of manmade climate change.
One option is a shift to non-carbon energy sources, such as renewable energy (solar and wind power) and nuclear energy.
Another option is to combine carbon-based energy (coal, oil, and gas) with new technologies that prevent the emission of airborne carbon. 
The second response to climate change, called “adaptation,” requires that we ready ourselves for the climate change now underway and the increased climate change to come in future years.
This means preparing for hurricanes that are more powerful in both intensity and duration.
An attentive national government would surely have realized that the Gulf region of the United States is more vulnerable to high-energy hurricanes.
Indeed, Hurricane Katrina was the third most intense hurricane ever to make landfall in the US.
Such a government would have taken more action to strengthen levees.
The Bush administration’s negligence is especially shocking given the remarkable amount of scientific expertise that exists in the US.
Somehow, scientists have been pushed aside by political operators.
But the US government’s failings are matched in many parts of the world, and certainly in the poorest countries, where scientific expertise is scarce, and where many governments do not have scientific advisory councils to turn to for guidance.
Hurricane Katrina is a wakeup call, not only for the US but for the world.
We are entering a period when good science is vital for our survival.
On a crowded planet with threats to our climate, oceans, forests, food production, and water supply, and with global travel and high population densities increasing the risk of worldwide disease epidemics, we must turn to the best of our scientific and engineering knowledge to find a safe passage.
Bush Loses in the Supreme Court and America Wins
Two rulings of the United States Supreme Court this week rejected the sweeping wartime powers claimed by President Bush.
In the case of Yaser Hamdi, the court renounced the Administration's claim that military authorities could indefinitely hold a U.S. citizen as an "enemy combatant" without ever providing him with an opportunity to contest the basis for his detention before a neutral decision maker.
And in a case brought by fourteen foreign nationals, the court cast aside the government's argument that because the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is nominally under Cuban sovereignty, American courts lack jurisdiction to entertain legal claims brought by persons who had no say in where the U.S. military chose to detain them.
Although nowhere mentioned in either case, the scandalous treatment of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib and the revelations that high-level government lawyers prepared confidential memoranda authorizing torture, likely played a part in the Justices' reasoning.
The Administration essentially said, "trust us to do what's right."
Clearly, the court thought that such trust had not been earned.
Another unspoken consideration may have been at work in the Guantanamo Bay case, which has garnered considerable international attention.
In recent years, a majority of the Justices of the Supreme Court have articulated a multilateralist view of American law that stands in marked contrast to the unilateralism of the Bush Administration.
For example, in a 2002 Virginia case, the high court ruled that the execution of the mentally retarded is forbidden by the American Constitution as "cruel and unusual punishment."
While most of the Court's analysis focused on domestic considerations, the Justices also invoked a legal brief filed by the European Union that described the overwhelming disapproval of the practice in the world community.
Likewise, in last year's ruling striking down a Texas prohibition on same-sex sodomy, the Court cited a 1967 Act of the English Parliament and a 1981 ruling of the European Court of Human Rights.
Significantly, the six Justices in the majority in the Virginia and Texas cases also constituted the majority in the Guantanamo Bay case: the four dissenters from Bush v. Gore plus Ronald Reagan's two relatively moderate appointees, Sandra Day O'Connor and Anthony Kennedy.
These Justices regularly travel to colloquia on comparative constitutional law and see themselves as part of an international community of high court judges.
It cannot have escaped their notice that to uphold indefinite detention of foreign nationals without judicial process would have made them virtual pariahs on the conference circuit.
I do not mean to suggest that the Justices decided the Guantanamo Bay case as they did so that they would be toasted at their international cocktail parties.
I contend that their concern for world opinion-if that concern played the role I am suggesting it did-was for their country, not for themselves.
In less than four years, President Bush and his advisers have cast aside much of the longstanding bipartisan consensus under which the United States works through and with multilateral institutions like the United Nations.
Alarmed by this dramatic volte-face, the majority Justices in the Guantanamo Bay case may be trying to send assurances to the rest of the world that President Bush does not speak for all Americans, not even the ones who put him in office in the first place.
Of course, neoconservative critics of the high court will see in this explanation the confirmation of their worst fears.
Here are judges, they will say, who do not understand that they have no legitimate qualifications to act as agents of American foreign policy, a job committed by the Constitution to the President and (they may grudgingly admit) Congress.
Yet the high court has considered foreign policy implications before.
In the most celebrated American case of the twentieth century, Brown v. Board of Education, the Justices were probably influenced by a government brief explaining how racial segregation in the southern United States undermined American efforts to compete with the Soviet Union for the hearts and minds of people in developing countries.
By holding that American apartheid violated the constitutional command of "equal protection of the laws," the court struck a blow for justice at home and American strategic interests abroad.
To be sure, the Brown precedent is not entirely analogous, for there the Supreme Court gave weight to foreign policy considerations in just the way that the federal executive had urged.
In the Guantanamo Bay case, by contrast, the Bush Administration argued that a ruling for the detainees would undermine the war effort by diverting manpower and material from the battlefield to the courtroom.
But the majority opinion of Justice John Paul Stevens paid little heed to the Administration's parade of horribles.
A decorated World War II veteran, Justice Stevens may well have thought that he was at least as qualified as the civilians in the Bush Justice Department to forecast the impact of the court's ruling on military efficiency.
Or perhaps the Justices were simply reacting to the Administration's constant overreaching.
Yes, the existence of religious fanatics eager to kill large numbers of innocent American civilians warrants strong measures in response.
But the Supreme Court's rulings affirm the fundamental principle that even grave dangers do not warrant the sort of blanket deference to which the Bush Administration believes it is entitled whenever it utters the words "war" and "terrorism."
Bush’s Bad-Faith Energy Policy
One of the more surreal sessions at this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos had oil industry experts explaining how the melting of the polar ice cap – which is occurring faster than anyone anticipated ­– represents not only a problem, but also an opportunity: vast amounts of oil may now be accessible.
Similarly, these experts concede that the fact that the United States has not signed the Law of the Sea, the international convention determining who has access to offshore oil and other maritime mineral rights, presents a risk of international conflict.
But they also point to the upside: the oil industry, in its never-ending search for more reserves, need not beg Congress for the right to despoil Alaska.
President George W. Bush has an uncanny ability not to see the big message.
For years, it has become increasingly clear that much is amiss with his energy policy.
Scripted by the oil industry, even members of his own party referred to an earlier energy bill as one that “left no lobbyist behind.”
While praising the virtues of the free market, Bush has been only too willing to give huge handouts to the energy industry, even as the country faces soaring deficits.
There is a market failure when it comes to energy, but government intervention should run in precisely the opposite direction from what the Bush administration has proposed.
The fact that Americans do not pay the full price for the pollution – especially enormous contributions to greenhouse gases – that results from their profligate energy use means that energy is under-priced, in turn sustaining excessive consumption.
The government needs to encourage conservation, and intervening in the price system ­­– namely, through taxes on energy – is an efficient way to do it.
But, rather than encouraging conservation, Bush has pursued a policy of “drain America first,” leaving America more dependent on external oil in the future.
Never mind that high demand drives up oil prices, creating a windfall for many in the Middle East who are not among America’s friends.
Now, more than four years after the terrorist attacks of September 2001, Bush appears to have finally woken up to the reality of America’s increasing dependence; with soaring oil prices, it was hard for him not to note the consequences.
But, again, his administration’s faltering moves will almost surely make matters worse in the immediate future.
Bush still refuses to do anything about conservation, and he has put very little money behind his continuing prayer than technology will save us.
What, then, to make of Bush’s recent declaration of a commitment to make America 75% free of dependence on Middle East oil within 25 years.
For investors, the message is clear: do not invest more in developing reserves in the Middle East, which is by far the lowest-cost source of oil in the world.
But, without new investment in developing Middle East reserves, unbridled growth of energy consumption in the US, China, and elsewhere implies that demand will outpace supply.
If that were not enough, Bush’s threat of sanctions against Iran poses the risks of interruptions of supplies from one of the world’s largest producers.
With world oil production close to full capacity and prices already more than double their pre-Iraq War level, this portends still higher prices, and still higher profits for the oil industry – the only clear winner in Bush’s Middle East policy.
To be sure, one shouldn’t begrudge Bush for having at last recognized that there is a problem.
But, as always, a closer look at what he is proposing suggests another sleight of hand by his administration.
Aside from refusing to recognize the importance of global warming, encourage conservation, or devote enough funds to research to make a real difference, Bush’s grandiose promise of a reduction of dependence on Middle East oil means less than it appears.
With only 20% of US oil coming from the Middle East, his goal could be achieved by a modest shift of sourcing elsewhere.
But surely, one would think, the Bush administration must realize that oil trades on a global market.
Even if America were 100% independent of Middle East oil, a reduction in supply of Middle East oil could have devastating effects on the world price – and on the American economy.
As is too often the case with the Bush administration, there is no flattering explanation of official policy.
Is Bush playing politics by pandering to anti-Arab and anti-Iranian sentiment in America? Or is this just another example of incompetence and muddle?
From what we have seen over the past five years, the correct answer probably contains more than a little bad faith and sheer ineptitude.
Bush’s Crash Test Economics
Fifteen years ago, the United States was in the midst of what you could call its “Age of Diminished Expectations.”
Productivity gains had stalled, energy prices were high, the backlog of potential technologies that originated in the Great Depression had been exhausted, and waning benefits from economies of scale led nearly every economist to project that economic growth would be slower in the future than it had been in the past.
With productivity growth stagnating for almost two decades, it made sense back then to argue that the US government’s social-insurance commitments (Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid) were excessive and so had to be scaled back.
That was then, this is now.
The intervening years have seen an explosion of technological innovation that has carried America’s general productivity growth back up to its pre-slowdown levels.
Indeed, today the US economy is standing on the brink of biotechnological and, perhaps, nanotechnological revolutions of vast scale and scope.
Yet the same calls to scale back America’s social commitments are heard.
Social Security’s actuaries may not have fully recognized the impact of today’s technological revolutions, but they have markedly boosted the scale of the system that the US government can afford.
Fifteen years ago, the consensus was that America's Social Security System was in huge trouble, that it needed the equivalent of an engine rebuild.
Today its problems look, as the Brookings Institution economist Peter Orszag says, much more like the equivalent of a slow tire leak: you have to fix it eventually, but it isn’t very hard to do and repair it isn’t terribly urgent.
So why is the Bush administration spending time and energy proposing radical changes to the Social Security System as its signature domestic policy initiative – indeed, as virtually its only policy initiative?
Everyone who worries about America’s weak fiscal position puts Social Security’s relatively small funding imbalance far down the list of priorities.
The highest priority problem is the overall budget’s medium-run outlook, as the Bush tax cuts have opened Reagan-size deficits that threaten to cripple US economic growth.
The second highest priority problem is figuring out what to do in the long term with Medicare and Medicaid.
America must decide the size of its public health programs and how to finance them.
In reality, this is more of an opportunity than a problem: if we did not expect that doctors and nurses will be able to do marvelous things in a generation or two that they cannot do now, we would not be projecting serious fiscal deficits arising from the health programs.
The third most serious problem is to put the US government’s General Fund budget on a sustainable basis, so that the non-Social Security government can finance itself and meet its commitments after the date – around 2020 – when it can no longer borrow from the Social Security Trust Fund.
The bottom line is that Social Security’s long-term funding difficulty, while real, is projected to be much smaller and much further in the future than any of the nearer, larger, and more significant fiscal problems currently facing the US government. If Social Security is a slow tire leak, then the post-2020 General Fund is an urgent brake job, Medicare and Medicaid are a melted transmission, and the budget deficit is the equivalent of having just crashed into a tree.
What kind of driver, owning a car that has just crashed into a tree, has a burned-out transmission, and needs a brake job, says, “The most important thing is to fix this slow leak in the right rear tire?”
George W. Bush is that type of driver.
There are three theories as to why the Bush administration is focusing on Social Security.
The first is simple incompetence: Bush and his inner circle simply do not understand the magnitude and importance of the federal government’s other fiscal problems.
The second is ideology. For some reason Bush and his people think it is important to undermine the successes of the New Deal institutions established under Franklin Roosevelt.
The third reason is bureaucratic capture: just as the principal aim of Bush’s Medicare Drug Benefit bill of 2003 was to boost pharmaceutical company profits, so the Bush administration’s Social Security proposal will most likely be tailored to the interests of Wall Street.
I don’t see any other, more pressing, reforms – such as raising income taxes to pay for national security – gaining any traction in the Bush regime.
If I had to bet on a cause, I would put my money on sheer incompetence. After all, that seems to be the common denominator of every policy controlled by his White House.
Bush’s Dying Days in Gaza
PARIS – During a visit to the Middle East, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates warned that enemies of the United States should not use the power vacuum there to try to alter the status quo or to undermine the new American president’s objectives.
But the major challenge in this respect is now coming, ironically enough, from America’s main ally in the region, Israel.
Hardliners in Israel naturally regret the end of the Bush administration, for they know that, even if President Barack Obama does not dramatically change US policy toward Israel once he assumes power, he will not repeat Bush’s unconditional support.
Israeli hardliners saw the “war on terror” and the war in Iraq as their wars, supported Bush’s war-like rhetoric and isolation of Iran, and considered the neo-conservatives their ideological kin. In particular, they shared the neo-cons’ conviction that military intervention is a legitimate and effective way of achieving political change.
This is what the Israeli government tried to achieve in Lebanon by “smashing Hezbollah” in 2006.
Now it is trying to do the same in Gaza.
In response to Hamas rockets, Israel is now using disproportionate force, just as it did in Lebanon.
The result will probably be the same: at the end of the campaign, Hamas will have increased its popularity in Palestine and in the Arab world.
Indeed, the current military operation follows Israel’s two-year blockade of Gaza, which was supposed to have damaged Hamas, but failed to do so.
It is likely that Obama will consider a Palestinian state to be in America’s fundamental interest.
He will see it as a precondition for altering perceptions of the US in the Arab and Muslim worlds, since restoring America’s credibility will be a major objective of the incoming administration.
Israeli hardliners cannot be sure that, at the end of the day, Obama will not find it necessary to change policies toward Israel in order to achieve this objective, for he considers it to be a strategic concern.
They also know, of course, that any serious engagement with the Palestinian question must imply engaging Hamas in the search for a two-state solution.
The Israeli government is, in short, using the Bush administration’s dying days to implement its military-first policy.
At the same time, it is trying to create a situation that will, in effect, make it more difficult for the new president to achieve his policies in the region.
News reports show that revulsion is spreading through the Arab world, where American and Israeli flags are burned side-by-side.
This war, therefore, will simply make it more difficult to engage with those countries at the very moment such talks are absolutely necessary.
One reason for international suspicion of Hamas has been the support that it receives from Iran.
Obama has vowed to change American policy toward Iran, opening diplomatic channels rather than merely issuing military threats.
Such a change would make it easier to end the isolation of Hamas as well.
America’s renewed engagement with Iran is clearly a policy that will have a far-reaching impact in the Middle East.
Although that strategic change in US policy is also in Israel’s best interests, most Israelis will not see it that way.
An American dialogue with Iran will be a serious blow to the interests of Israeli hardliners, and some of them dream of making it impossible.
Constraining American policy may, therefore, be one of the motivations behind Israel’s incursion into Gaza.
Yet it is a grave challenge to international peace and could spread instability throughout the region.
Were that to occur, Obama’s planned rapprochement with Iran would be strangled in the cradle.
In the days before Obama takes office, while a power vacuum persists in the US, the European Union has a unique role to play in international initiatives to end the violence and the unfolding humanitarian crisis.
For the EU to succeed, it must pursue the policy launched by the French Presidency, giving priority to stopping the war and distancing itself from Israel’s disproportionate use of force.
Negotiating a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas could be the first step toward a permanent end to hostilities and to the blockade of Gaza.
It could, in effect, pave the way for the new Obama administration to convene an international conference to implement the two-state solution for Palestine, which should follow the ceasefire.
Such initiatives should not become bogged down in tortuous negotiations, but should focus on implementing the basic principles for a two-state solution, along the lines proposed by the Clinton administration before it left office eight years ago.
Hamas has already engaged in ceasefire negotiations and should now be brought fully into the peace process, alongside Fatah, but it will, of course, have to abandon its own strategy of force, as expressed through the rockets it has rained down on Israel.
It is a policy that has proved to be ineffective, and that is illegal under international law because it targets Israeli civilians.
Israel, for its part, needs to recognize that, if it wants to act in ways that are consistent with its own democratic values, it must abandon its strategy of violence and disrespect for the basic human rights of the Palestinians, as well as the idea of “Great Israel.”
In short, it must accept a Palestinian state, through deeds as well as words.
Until this happens, dangerous days lie ahead until Obama’s inauguration, and the international community will need strong, level-headed politicians to see it through.
Bush’s Gambling Debts
George W. Bush’s economic policies have been based on an extraordinarily reckless gamble that reflects a political coalition of two major forces: the super-rich and evangelical Christians.
As those policies fail, global financial markets are reacting negatively, adding uncertainty to the world economy, and there is little relief in sight, because America is entering a period of prolonged political infighting and stalemate.
The super-rich had one over-riding objective in joining the Bush coalition: tax cuts that overwhelmingly benefited the wealthiest households.
Evangelicals were brought in on the basis of so-called “family values,” meaning opposition to abortion and gay marriage, and promises of active government support for religious activities, including direct payments to religious groups for social services that they provide locally and internationally.
The Bush team believed that they would eventually balance the tax cuts for the rich with reductions in government spending, but they never explained this to the public.
Instead, for four years they pretended that budget deficits were of little concern.
Only after being re-elected did they begin to explain that large budget deficits, caused mainly by lower tax revenues, would require sharp cuts in social security, health care spending, and other areas.
But the majority of Americans, having supported the tax cuts in Bush’s first term because it gave them a little extra cash, do not support the attack on basic government services that has followed.
This opposition extends to Christian evangelicals voters, who tend to live in working-class and middle-class households that depend on many kinds of government social services.
Despite the avowedly “free-market” beliefs of many Christian fundamentalists, as voters they support government-financed pensions, health care, and other public services.
Bush’s tax cutting was irresponsible from the start, but became much more so after September 11, 2001.
The Bush administration raised military spending sharply as it went to war in Afghanistan and Iraq, and as it increased spending on national security at home, without ever explaining to the American people how this would be financed.
The military-plus-security budget soared by more than 2% of GNP, while tax revenues fell by much more.
At the same time, Bush supported expenditure increases for popular items like education and prescription drug benefits, but paid for these services by borrowing the money rather than ensuring sufficient tax revenues.
No sooner did this strategy pay off with a narrow re-election victory – one that strengthened Republican control of Congress – than the dark realities of Bush’s fiscal recklessness started to be recognized.
The annual US budget deficit reached 5% of GNP, with an enormous part of the gap financed each year by Asian central banks, which now hold about $2 trillion in claims against America.
The problem is that Bush’s reckless gamble has now built up considerable political momentum.
As soon as he was re-elected, Bush started to propose cuts in popular government programs, but his own party is rejecting those cuts.
With the Republican-controlled Congress seeking to make the tax cuts for the rich permanent, the world is beginning to realize that America’s budget deficits are now entrenched, with no end in sight.
Because America’s economy is so large, and the dollar so central to global finance, chronic US budget deficits mean huge global repercussions.
The dollar is weakening, as financial markets understand that the US will need to borrow huge sums from abroad for years to come.
More ominously, the willingness of foreign central banks to lend to the US also looks likely to end.
After all, why should the central banks of China, Japan, South Korea, and other Asian countries accumulate vast holdings of US Treasury bills if the dollar is likely to lose value in the years ahead?
In a bizarre, but not unexpected way, America is lashing out at others for its problems.
Huge tax cuts and rising military spending have fueled an enormous rise in imports, and therefore a yawning trade deficit now accompanies America’s weak fiscal position.
But US politicians are blaming China and other countries for “unfair trade,” even threatening them with sanctions.
This response to homegrown problems plays well with voters, but it is ridiculous and ignorant, especially since the US has been depending on China to help finance the fiscal deficits.
In essence, the US is lashing out at its own banker, even as it asks the banker for yet more loans!
When Bush asked for spending cuts at the beginning of the year – including a social security reform that includes cuts in future benefits – world financiers expected that Bush would get his way, or most of it.
Little did they appreciate that American voters, having never actually supported spending cuts, would resist.
As that reality sinks in, economic prospects darken.
Foreigners will become less enthusiastic about continued lending to the US, weakening the dollar further, forcing up US interest rates, and threatening to undermine America’s stock market and consumer spending.
But as the storm clouds gather in the coming year, the political coalition that put Bush in power will stifle progress in undoing the fiscal mess.
Bush’s gamble was a loser from the start, generating costly results – mainly for the US, but for the rest of the world, too – for years to come.
Bush’s Intellectual Torturers
Paris – The top-secret memoranda released by the Obama administration concerning torture practices in CIA prisons shed new light on a fundamental question: how is it that people acting in the name of the United States government could so easily accept the idea of torturing the detainees in their charge?
The newly published documents do not disclose the very facts of torture, which were already well known by whomever wanted to know them.
But they do reveal a great deal of information about how the torture sessions unfolded and how the agents involved perceived them.
What is most striking is the discovery of niggling little rules, outlined in CIA manuals and co-opted by the government’s legal executives.
One would have thought that torture was the result of blunders or unintentional excesses committed on the spur of the moment.
On the contrary, these memos make clear that torture was a tactic formulated in minute detail.
In the Bush administration’s “guidelines,” torture can be divided into three categories, of varying levels of intensity: “baseline” (nudity, dietary manipulation, sleep deprivation); “corrective” (hitting); and “coercive” (water-dousing, box confinement, water-boarding).
For a facial slap, the interrogator was supposed to hit with fingers slightly spread, at equal length between the tip of the chin and the bottom of the corresponding earlobe.
Dousing a naked detainee with water was to last 20 minutes if the water’s temperature measured 5 °C, 40 minutes at 10 °C, and up to 60 minutes at 15 °C. Sleep deprivation could not exceed 180 hours, but could start over again after eight hours rest.
Water immersion in a tub could last up to 12 seconds, no more than two hours a day, for up to thirty days in a row.
Waterboarding could last 40 seconds at most, though two prisoners were subjected to this torment a combined total of 286 times in a single month.
Confinement in a small box could not exceed two hours, but if the prisoner could stand in the box, it could continue up to eight hours at a time, 18 hours a day.
If an insect was introduced into the box, rules governed that, too.
How the torturers were trained is also disclosed.
Most methods were reverse-engineered from the training given to US soldiers preparing to face “long and extreme” situations (which somehow enabled executives to conclude that these ordeals are perfectly bearable).
In other words, the torturers had been tortured themselves.
An intense crash course lasting four weeks followed, enough to instruct them in their new jobs.
The Bush lawyers were the torturers’ necessary partners, whose work was intended to ensure legal impunity.
This was also a novelty: torture does not appear as a breach of a common standard, unfortunate but justifiable.
Instead, it has a legal standard.
Here, lawyers fell back on another series of techniques.
In order to circumvent the law, interrogation had to be conducted outside the US, even if that place was an overseas American military base.
The legal definition of torture implies the intentional infliction of severe suffering.
Torturers are thus advised to deny such an intention.
As a result, the goal of a facial slap is not to inflict physical pain, but to induce surprise and humiliation.
The purpose of confinement in a box is not to disorient someone, but to give the detainee a feeling of discomfort.
The torturer must always emphasize his “good faith,” “honest beliefs,” and the reasonable premise for them.
So euphemisms were systematically used: “enhanced techniques” for torture, “interrogation expert” for torturer.
Leaving material imprints is contra-indicated.
To that end, mental damage is preferable to physical injury.
Any video recordings of these sessions, not surprisingly, would be destroyed afterwards.
Various professional groups were involved with torture practices.
Thus, the contagion went well beyond the torturers’ limited circle.
Besides the lawyers legitimating the deeds, psychologists, psychiatrists, doctors (whose presence was mandatory at any session), and scholars also regularly provided moral, legal, or philosophical justifications.
And, while males inflicted torture, degradation in the presence of women enhanced the humiliation.
Who is to be held legally liable for this perversion of the law and basic moral principles?
The volunteer who carries out the task of torture is less liable than the high-ranking civil servant who justified and nurtured it. And the latter is less liable than the political decision-maker who asked for it.
Friendly foreign governments, especially in Europe, can also be held responsible: although they knew about the torture, and took advantage of the information thus obtained, at no point have they expressed the slightest protest, or even signal their disapproval.
Their silence was tantamount to consent.
Should we therefore prosecute them?
The best democratic punishment for politicians is not to re-elect them.
As for unelected collaborators and enablers, we can hope that they will be sanctioned by their peers: who would like to study with a professor who advocated torture?
Who wants justice done by a judge who authorized brutality?
Who wants to be treated by a doctor who oversaw it?
If we are to understand why some Americans accepted administering torture so easily, we need not look for some ancestral hatred or fear of Muslims and Arabs.
No, the cause is far worse.
The memos that the Obama administration has disclosed teach us that anyone who complies with seemingly noble principles dictated by a “sense of duty” or by the necessary “defense of the homeland,” or who is urged by a basic fear for his own life and welfare, or the lives and welfare of his kin, can become a torturer.
Bush’s Last Chance
Though triggered by the need to devise an exit strategy from the Iraqi quagmire, the Iraq Study Group’s grim report is a devastating indictment of the Bush administration’s entire foreign policy.
The report challenges the core principles of a faith-driven administration and of a president whose political gospel led him to a sharp departure from the culture of conflict resolution in favor of a crusade based on raw power.
A war that cannot be ended is sometimes worse than a war that is lost.
Therefore, the Iraq report is more than a plan to rescue Iraq; it is a road map for extricating America from the mayhem of an unwinnable war.
However much the study group shunned recommendations for a precipitous withdrawal, and avoided strict timetables for disengagement, their report is not only an unequivocal repudiation of Bush’s “stay the course” obsession, but also a counsel to cut and run.
Indeed, there is no realistic chance that the Iraqi army and police will be able to take over combat responsibilities and effective policing any time soon.
The entire security apparatus in Iraq is corrupt and infiltrated by insurgents.
Nor is it at all clear to what degree the Iraqis retain a stake in the idea of a united Iraqi state worth fighting for.
The report practically calls for ending all support to the Iraqi government if it fails to assume its responsibilities.
None of the Middle East’s problems has a military solution, and none can be solved through unilateral action.
The report is therefore right to challenge Bush’s insistence on discarding both Iran and Syria as interlocutors for a more stable regional order.
Iran has the most leverage inside Iraq, and Syria has become a vital crossing point for weapons and insurgents into the Iraqi battlefield.
There is simply no way that Iraq can be stabilized without America moving from a policy of disengagement to one of engagement with these two major regional spoilers.
The report thus stands as a rebuke to Bush’s entire “axis of evil” philosophy.
It refuses to ascribe to Iran’s secretive state an ideological rigidity that might not exist.
Indeed, Iran has shown its ability to behave with startling pragmatism more than once, not least in its links to Israel and the United States during its war against Iraq in the 1980’s, and in its assistance to the Americans in the war against the Taliban in Afghanistan.
But it is not only Iraq that requires regional support groups to reach a modicum of stability.
All the problems of the Middle East – Iraq, the Arab-Israeli dispute, the need for political reforms, and Islamic terrorism – are interconnected.
The interconnectedness of the problems in the outer circle of the region and those pertaining to the Arab-Israeli conflict in the inner circle was shown by the first Bush administration, which, in October 1991, following the first Gulf War, organized a major international conference aimed at securing an Arab-Israeli peace.
Neither the Israeli government nor its intimate ally in the White House can be expected to applaud the Iraq Study Group’s call for a repetition of that logic, for it contradicts everything the Bush administration has championed.
The report’s recommendation for an international conference in the style of the Madrid peace conference is not only a timely indication of the linkage between the Israeli-Arab conflict and the region’s other troubles; it is also a long overdue reminder that bilateral negotiations between the parties can not produce an agreement.
That realization prompted the all-Arab peace initiative of 2002, which established the conditions for an Israeli-Arab comprehensive settlement.
Alas, however bipartisan the Iraq Study Group’s report may be, it is too much to expect that Bush will endorse all of its recommendations and admit the bankruptcy of his entire foreign policy.
In fact, Bush has already expressed his objection to unconditional direct talks with Iran and Syria.
Nor does he seem eager to open a rift with Israel by dragging its government to an international conference, the way his father did with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir in 1991.
Bush will find it especially difficult to change his policy with respect to Iran.
In order to ensure that the US is too harassed to be able to threaten it, Iran has consistently obstructed Bush’s mission of regional transformation.
The report urges the president to understand that the spoilers will not cease to be spoilers as a precondition of negotiations, but only as a result of them.
At stake is a painful choice for Bush: to lead America into coexistence with what he considers a repugnant Islamic theocracy.
But Bush does not have many choices if he is to save his presidency from going down in history as an utter failure.
His was a suicidal brand of statecraft from the outset.
If he does not change course in Iraq and beyond, his presidency might draw the curtain on long decades of American hegemony in the Middle East – to the detriment of its closest allies in the region.
Bush’s New Middle East
As Iraqi Colonel Omar Ali, the Iraqi battalion commander in Mosul, the main focus of the insurgency today, recently put it, “Without the Americans, it would be impossible for us to control Iraq.”
Wars, as Winston Churchill defined them, are always “a catalogue of blunders.”
History’s judgment of the Iraq war will therefore certainly dwell more on whether it has accomplished its strategic objectives of “reconstructing” a highly dysfunctional Middle East in America’s democratic image and consolidating America’s hegemonic position in the region than on its price in blood and money.
Strategically, the war was an utter failure.
A clear case of imperial overstretch, the war strained America’s military, undermined the America’s moral standing worldwide and its reputation in the Middle East, severely threatened its economy, and showed to both friends and foes the limits of American power.
The most serious unintended consequence of the war is the emergence of a powerful Shia challenge to the West’s Sunni allies in the Middle East.
America’s destruction of Iraq as a regional power handed hegemony in the Persian Gulf – whose centrality to Western interests cannot be overstated – to Iran’s Shia Islamist regime on a silver platter.
On the rubble of Saddam Hussein’s dictatorship, the Americans helped create in Iraq the first Shia-dominated Arab state, which may well become subservient to Iran’s regional ambitions – a calamity of historic dimensions for America’s Sunni allies.
President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad’s recent state visit to Iraq conveyed to the Americans an unequivocal message: the prospects of the United States ever reaching a modicum of stability in Iraq have become dependent on Iran-aligned forces.
America’s difficulties in Iraq and beyond contributed decisively to Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
The Iranians now see themselves as immune from an American attack on their nuclear installations, for America’s troubles in Iraq and the growing opposition to the war in the US are a signal to them that America’s strategy of pre-emptive wars has failed.
But, however radical the Iranian regime might be, it is not suicidal.
Hence, the threat of a nuclear Iran might consist less in its propensity to start a nuclear war with Israel than in its capacity to project its regional power effectively.
A nuclear Iran might even threaten America’s capacity to project conventional military force in the Gulf in times of crisis.
Nor should the possibility be ruled out that Iran might be tempted to back its regional ambitions by supplying nuclear material to proxy terrorist groups.
If anything, America’s debacle in Iraq has only emboldened the challengers of the status quo in the region.
That has also been the result of Bush’s ill-conceived democracy crusade in the Arab world.
Bush discovered to his dismay that any exercise in Arab democracy is bound to usher in anti-Western Islamists, be it the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, Shia parties in Iraq, or Hamas in Palestine.
The US eventually had to abandon its fantasies about Western-style Arab democracy, but it ironically left the Iranians carrying the torch of democracy in the region.
After all, Iran was quick to recognize that free elections are the safest way to undermine the Middle East’s pro-American regimes.
The Iraq war also meant that America ignored the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
The chances that the Bush administration might be able to rally America’s Sunni “moderate” allies in the region to help salvage an Israeli-Palestinian peace are now hostage to an Iranian-led regional axis that includes Hamas, Hezbollah, and Syria.
All are united in their rejection of a Pax Americana in the Middle East, and all have so far shown remarkable resilience in ignoring America’s pre-conditions for a dialogue.
America’s inability to inspire the peoples of the Middle East, all ruled by US-backed autocracies, is not exactly stunning news.
What is news is that American power might also be losing its ability to intimidate them.
Bush’s Old New Plan for Iraq
Last November’s Congressional elections dealt President George W. Bush a sharp rebuff over his Iraq policy.
Shortly after the election, the Iraq Study Group offered a bipartisan formula for the gradual withdrawal of United States troops.
But Bush rejected this, and persists in speaking of victory in Iraq – though it is unclear what that now means.
Perhaps because Iraq will define his legacy, he has proven reluctant to let go at a point when his policy appears to be a disaster.
Now Bush will increase the number of American troops in Baghdad and Anbar Province and try to stabilize both the rising sectarian civil war and the Sunni insurgency.
He has removed generals John Abizaid and George Casey, who were skeptical of a troop “surge,” and moved Ambassador Zalmay Khalizad, who was supposed to negotiate a political agreement in Iraq.
A number of the Democratic lawmakers who control the new Congress disagree with this approach.
Some Democratic activists seek an immediate withdrawal and are pressing for Congress to cut off funding for the war, but that is unlikely.
Congress is reluctant to be portrayed as failing to support troops in the field; while they will criticize, they will not block Bush’s plan.
Bush has long claimed that the number of troops in Iraq was a military decision and that he simply followed the advice of his generals, but now this is clearly not the case.
Ironically, there may once have been a point at which a large increase in troops might have made a difference.
In April and May 2003, polls showed a majority of Iraqis welcoming the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.
But the Bush administration failed to control rioting, disbanded the Iraqi army, and allowed the security situation to deteriorate.
In such chaos, it was difficult to do the reconstruction and development work that could have made Iraqi lives better and attracted support.
It is not easy for a marine or soldier to construct a school or clinic when he is being fired upon, or for Iraqi moderates to risk their lives by being supportive when they have no protection against insurgents.
Many military professionals foresaw this problem.
US Army Chief of Staff Eric Shinseki warned that although it would be possible to win the war with the 160,000 troops that Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld used, it would take double that number to win the peace.
But because Rumsfeld wanted to prove a point about transforming American military strategy, and his neo-conservative advisors had ideological blinders that distorted their appraisal of Iraqi reality, Shinseki’s advice was rejected.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz testified to Congress that Shinseki’s estimate of the number of troops required was “wildly off the mark.”
In fact, it turned out that Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz were the ones wildly off the mark.
Now both are gone, and Bush is turning to troop increases.
Too little, too late.
Is there any reason to believe that an additional five brigades will succeed in stabilizing Baghdad now when similar efforts have failed in the past?
The new American operational commander in Iraq, Lt. General Raymond Odierno, says that the new efforts will be more evenhanded among Sunni and Shiite neighborhoods, and American troops will stay alongside Iraqi troops in areas that have been cleared.
He hopes that with a few months, he can then withdraw American troops to the periphery of Baghdad and leave the policing of the capital to Iraqi forces.
But this assumes that Iraqi forces are up to the task, and that Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s government, which rests upon Shiite militia support, can play a competent and evenhanded role.
Bush administration officials argue that the new plan is “not an open-ended commitment: we are putting real, specific requirements and expectations on the Iraqi government.”
Among the political benchmarks are provincial elections, enactment of an oil law that distributes oil wealth in a way that benefits the Sunnis, and reform of the de-Baathifcation policy, which has been so costly to those who worked in the Iraqi government under Saddam.
But it may be too late for political compromise, and the Maliki government may not be capable of a broad non-sectarian policy.
If Bush’s new military plan is a temporary step to buy time to move in the direction of the Iraq Study Group’s proposals of training Iraqi forces and gradually withdrawing American forces, there may be something to be said for it as one last chance, but only if it is accompanied by the diplomatic advice that the study group also suggested.
It is too late to create a democracy in Iraq.
At best, the overthrow of Saddam removed a threatening dictator, and substituted a tyranny of the majority for the tyranny of a minority.
But the price has been high in terms of Iraqi lives lost in sectarian fighting.
The goal now is regional stability.
Each of Iraq’s neighbors has its own interests, but none will benefit from chaotic violence there, which would increase Iran’s influence, encourage Kurdish separatism to the worry of Turkey, and support Sunni terrorist movements that could spill back into Jordan, Kuwait, Syria, and Saudi Arabia.
The US cannot leave Iraq precipitously, but neither can it solve the problem on its own.
Establishing a contact group of Iraq’s neighbors to help set rules of the road for stabilization and containment will be an important step.
Iraq is not susceptible to a military solution.
Only more politics and diplomacy can salvage US policy.
Bush’s Road Map to Failure in the Middle East
Six long years of failed Middle East policies have finally brought President George W. Bush to recognize that the alliance of moderates in the region that he covets can only be forged through an Arab-Israeli peace.
Indeed, only by effectively addressing the Israeli-Arab dispute can he possibly salvage America’s standing in the region.
But the round of peacemaking that America has recently embarked upon not only comes too late in the political life of a lame-duck president who has been defeated at home and abroad; it is also ill-conceived and unconvincing.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s adamant resistance to engage the Syrians is not exactly wise policy.
The stakes for a peaceful regional order are too high for Israel and the United States to persist in refusing to put Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s current peace offensive to the test.
The bones of contention that wrecked previous attempts to reach an Israeli-Syrian peace have realistic solutions, as was shown by the back-channel peace talks recently held between an Israeli ex-official and a Syrian with close connections to the regime.
Nor is Rice’s insistence on sticking to the failed “road map” for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement promising.
Susceptible to procrastination and evasion by both sides, the road map was stillborn.
Almost four years after it was first launched, neither of the parties has managed to muster the political will necessary to implement its primary provisions.
Not even the bizarre idea, reserved for the second stage, of a Palestinian state with “temporary borders” is enticing for the Palestinians.
This Gordian knot needs to be cut, not untied.
The concept of interim agreements has now become utterly obsolete, if only because the parties are incapable of paying the political price inherent in an open-ended, piecemeal process.
Instead, what is called for is a sweeping solution to all the core issues.