Successive Japanese governments have hidden behind the Yushukan museum’s operation by a private religious organization to deny responsibility for the views expressed there.
That is an unconvincing stance.
In fact, unlike Germany, Japan has never come to terms with its own responsibility for the Pacific War.
Although socialist Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama officially apologized to China in 1995 for the war, Japan has never had a genuine internal debate over its degree of responsibility, and has never made a determined effort to propagate an alternative account to that of Yushukan.
My exposure to the Japanese right came in the early 1990’s, when I was on a couple of panels in Japan with Watanabe Soichi, who was selected by my Japanese publisher (unbeknownst to me) to translate my book The End of History and the Last Man into Japanese.
Watanabe, a professor at Sophia University, was a collaborator of Shintaro Ishihara, the nationalist politician who wrote The Japan That Can Say No and is now the governor of Tokyo.
In the course of a couple of encounters, I heard him explain in front of large public audiences how the people of Manchuria had tears in their eyes when the occupying Kwantung Army left China, so grateful were they to Japan.
According to Watanabe, the Pacific War boiled down to race, as the US was determined to keep a non-white people down.
Watanabe is thus the equivalent of a Holocaust denier, but, unlike his German counterparts, he easily draws large and sympathetic audiences.
(I am regularly sent books by Japanese writers that “explain” how the Nanjing Massacre was a big fraud.)
Moreover, there have been several disturbing recent incidents in which physical intimidation has been used by nationalists against critics of Koizumi’s Yasukuni visits, such as the firebombing of former prime ministerial candidate Kato Koichi’s home.
(On the other hand, the publisher of the normally conservative Yomiuri Shimbun attacked Koizumi’s Yasukuni visits and published a fascinating series of articles on responsibility for the war.)
This leaves the US in a difficult position.
A number of American strategists are eager to ring China with a NATO-like defensive barrier, building outward from the US-Japan Security Treaty.
Since the final days of the Cold War, the US has been pushing Japan to rearm, and has officially supported a proposed revision of Article 9 of the postwar constitution, which bans Japan from having a military or waging war.
But America should be careful about what it wishes for.
The legitimacy of the entire American military position in the Far East is built around the US exercising Japan’s sovereign function of self-defense.
Japan’s unilateral revision of Article 9, viewed against the backdrop of its new nationalism, would isolate Japan from virtually the whole of Asia.
Revising Article 9 has long been part of Abe’s agenda, but whether he pushes ahead with it will depend in large part on the kind of advice he gets from close friends in the US.
President Bush was unwilling to say anything about Japan’s new nationalism to his “good friend Junichiro” out of gratitude for Japanese support in Iraq.
Now that Japan has withdrawn its small contingent of troops, perhaps Bush will speak plainly to Abe.
The Trouble with Libertarian Paternalism
CHICAGO – There are many arguments against government paternalism: apart from limiting individual choice (for example, the choice to remain uninsured in the current health-care debate in the United States) and preventing individuals from learning, history suggests time and again that the conventional wisdom prevalent in society is wrong.
And, since governments typically try to enforce the conventional wisdom, the consequences could be disastrous, because they are magnified by the state’s coordinating – and coercive – power.
A clear example is financial regulation, which in many ways is a form of paternalism.
In the US, the low risk assigned to senior tranches of mortgage-backed securities made them attractive instruments for banks to hold, given the relatively high return they offered.
But they proved far from safe, despite the prior conventional wisdom.
And, because the regulator had pronounced them safe, far too many banks overloaded on them, rendering them even more risky when the banks tried to sell them at the same time.
Other examples of the danger of the coordinating power of government paternalism abound.
As I drive to downtown Chicago, I pass a series of high-rise housing projects, meant in their time to be the miracle cure for homelessness, poverty, unemployment, and crime.
Today, they are seen as the best way to concentrate and perpetuate many of those ills.
Not only were the housing projects kept a safe distance from areas that had good jobs, but, with few residents experiencing stable families and livelihoods, there were not enough local examples of success to guide young people.
As a result, many went astray.
The fashion today is to integrate poor households into flourishing communities.
No doubt we will discover some unintended consequences in the future, and the power of government coordination will ensure that those consequences are widespread.
But some amount of paternalism is necessary in civilized societies.
Social security is a paternalistic form of forced savings for old age, preventing individuals from consuming and saving as they please.
It exists, in part, because individuals know that civilized societies will never stand by and watch the elderly starve.
So individuals are forced to save in order to prevent them from gaming the system – not saving when young, knowing that they will be assured a minimum level of support by a humane society when old.
Similarly, the mandated purchase of insurance in the Obama administration’s health-care bill is an attempt to prevent the young and the healthy from remaining uninsured and turning to the government for support only when they discover that they need it.
So, if paternalism has benefits as well as costs, how do we get the former without the latter?
My colleague, Richard Thaler, along with Cass Sunstein, who currently serves in the Obama administration, wrote a best-selling book, Nudge, in which they suggest a way to reduce our uneasiness with paternalism.
Essentially, by exploiting behavioral quirks, they would nudge people into making decisions that are good for them, even while individuals have complete freedom to change their mind.
So libertarian paternalism, in their view, eliminates one of the main objections to paternalism – that it constrains individual choice.
For example, in deciding how their pension savings will be allocated, most people simply choose the default option in their employer-offered plan.
Often, the default option is unsuitable for most individuals – for instance, it typically allocates all savings to low-return money-market funds.
Sunstein and Thaler would have the employer choose a default option that works for most people, such as 60% in equities, 30% in bonds, and 10% in money-market funds.
That is the paternalistic part.
The libertarian part is that the employee has the right to opt out of the default option.
Because people rarely move away from the default option, the employer’s paternalistic choice prevails, and we get libertarian paternalism.
What is not to like?
The problem is that the semblance of choice in libertarian paternalism is an illusion.
Choice remains unexercised, because individuals do not consciously think through their decision.
If their choices can be directed, is this not paternalism plain and simple, rendered more sinister because individuals are unaware that they are being nudged, and cannot raise their guard?
One response is to point out that most plans already have a default option that determines savings allocations.
Sunstein and Thaler merely say that the default option should be set in a way that is good for people, and clearly they have an idea of what is good.
This, then, is the nub of the problem.
In choosing the default option, the government or the employer nudges all employees into prevailing fads such as “buy equity for the long run.”
This, they believe, is better than the current typical default option of putting individuals’ money into money-market funds.
But it may be worse: coordinating everyone into risky asset investments may be more dangerous than coordinating them into boring investments like money-market funds.
Could there be a better alternative?
What if there were no default option, and individuals were sent repeated, and increasingly urgent, reminders to choose an allocation if they did not choose one already.
The conventional wisdom could be offered as a recommendation, along with explanations of why it makes sense, but it would not be the default.
This would force people to exercise choice.
Some people would differ from the conventional wisdom, benefiting the system by introducing some variety and resilience.
More generally, the flaw in some forms of libertarian paternalism is that the free choice that it appears to offer leaves the paternalism largely unconstrained.
Would it not be far better to force conscious choice in order to limit the consequences of paternalistic mistakes?
The True Costs of the Iraq War
The most important things in life ­ like life itself ­ are priceless.
But that doesn’t mean that issues involving the preservation of life (or a way of life), like defense, should not be subjected to cool, hard economic analysis.
Shortly before the current Iraq war, when Bush administration economist Larry Lindsey suggested that the costs might range between $100 and $200 billion, other officials quickly demurred.
For example, Office of Management and Budget Director Mitch Daniels put the number at $60 billion.
It now appears that Lindsey’s numbers were a gross underestimate.
Concerned that the Bush administration might be misleading everyone about the Iraq war’s costs, just as it had about Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction and connection with Al Qaida, I teamed up with Linda Bilmes, a budget expert at Harvard, to examine the issue.
Even we, as opponents of the war, were staggered by what we found, with conservative to moderate estimates ranging from slightly less than a trillion dollars to more than $2 trillion.
Our analysis starts with the $500 billion that the Congressional Budget Office openly talks about, which is still ten times higher than what the administration said the war would cost.
Its estimate falls so far short because the reported numbers do not even include the full budgetary costs to the government. And the budgetary costs are but a fraction of the costs to the economy as a whole.
For example, the Bush administration has been doing everything it can to hide the huge number of returning veterans who are severely wounded – 16,000 so far, including roughly 20% with serious brain and head injuries.
So it is no surprise that its figure of $500 billion ignores the lifetime disability and healthcare costs that the government will have to pay for years to come.
Nor does the administration want to face up to the military’s recruiting and retention problems.
The result is large re-enlistment bonuses, improved benefits, and higher recruiting costs – up 20% just from 2003 to 2005.
Moreover, the war is extremely wearing on equipment, some of which will have to be replaced.
These budgetary costs (exclusive of interest) amount to $652 billion in our conservative estimate and $799 billion in our moderate estimate.
Arguably, since the government has not reined in other expenditures or increased taxes, the expenditures have been debt financed, and the interest costs on this debt add another $98 billion (conservative) to $385 billion (moderate) to the budgetary costs.
Of course, the brunt of the costs of injury and death is borne by soldiers and their families.
But the military pays disability benefits that are markedly lower than the value of lost earnings.
Similarly, payments for those who are killed amount to only $500,000, which is far less than standard estimates of the lifetime economic cost of a death, sometimes referred to as the statistical value of a life ($6.1 to $6.5 million).
But the costs don’t stop there.
The Bush administration once claimed that the Iraq war would be good for the economy, with one spokesperson even suggesting that it was the best way to ensure low oil prices.
As in so many other ways, things have turned out differently: the oil companies are the big winners, while the American and global economies are losers.
Being extremely conservative, we estimate the overall effect on the economy if only $5 or $10 of the increase is attributed to the war.
At the same time, money spent on the war could have been spent elsewhere.
We estimate that if a proportion of that money had been allocated to domestic investment in roads, schools, and research, the American economy would have been stimulated more in the short run, and its growth would have been enhanced in the long run.
There are a number of other costs, some potentially quite large, although quantifying them is problematic.
For instance, Americans pay some $300 billion annually for the “option value” of military preparedness – being able to fight wherever needed.
That Americans are willing to pay this suggests that the option value exceeds the costs.
But there is little doubt that the option value has been greatly impaired and will likely remain so for several years.
In short, even our “moderate” estimate may significantly underestimate the cost of America’s involvement in Iraq.
And our estimate does not include any of the costs implied by the enormous loss of life and property in Iraq itself.
We do not attempt to explain whether the American people were deliberately misled regarding the war’s costs, or whether the Bush administration’s gross underestimate should be attributed to incompetence, as it vehemently argues is true in the case of weapons of mass destruction.
Nor do we attempt to assess whether there were more cost-effective ways of waging the war.
Recent evidence that deaths and injuries would have been greatly reduced had better body armor been provided to troops suggests how short-run frugality can lead to long-run costs.
Certainly, when a war’s timing is a matter of choice, as in this case, inadequate preparation is even less justifiable.
But such considerations appear to be beyond the Bush administration’s reckoning.
Elaborate cost-benefit analyses of major projects have been standard practice in the defense department and elsewhere in government for almost a half-century.
The Iraq war was an immense “project,” yet it now appears that the analysis of its benefits was greatly flawed and that of its costs virtually absent.
One cannot help but wonder: were there alternative ways of spending a fraction of the war’s $1-$2 trillion in costs that would have better strengthened security, boosted prosperity, and promoted democracy?
The Global Trust Deficit
NEW YORK – In their preoccupation with fiscal deficits, developed-country policymakers continue to neglect a different, yet equally critical, shortfall: the trust deficit between advanced and emerging economies when it comes to global governance.
America’s unwillingness or inability to ratify the package – which includes doubling the IMF’s funding quota and shifting 6% of the new total, together with two directorships, to developing countries – undoubtedly contributed to the decision by the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) to establish their own development bank.
In fact, a backlash against Western hegemony in global governance has been brewing for years, with developing countries increasingly turning away from the IMF in favor of creating alternative, regional sources of funding.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), together with China, Japan, and South Korea, established the Chiang Mai Initiative in 2000, and Latin American countries launched negotiations on the Banco del Sur in 2006.
The accelerating erosion of emerging economies’ trust in the Bretton Woods institutions is particularly problematic now, given slow growth and continued economic weakness in advanced countries.
While the world economy is expected to grow by 3.3% this year, average annual growth in the advanced countries is projected to be just 1.2%.
Developed and developing countries alike would benefit from greater economic-policy coordination.
While regional groups may obtain some short-run benefits by pursuing narrower interests outside of multilateral channels, neither emerging nor advanced economies can fulfill their long-run potential in an environment characterized by isolationism and a zero-sum mentality in areas like trade and exchange-rate policy.
Policy coordination, however, depends on trust, and building trust requires advanced-country leaders to keep their promises and offer their developing-country counterparts opportunities for leadership.
Instead, developed countries have been taking actions that compromise their legitimacy.
For example, after spending decades encouraging developing countries to integrate their economies into the global market, advanced countries now balk at trade openness.
Indeed, despite pledges not to erect trade barriers after the global economic crisis, more than 800 new protectionist measures were introduced from late 2008 through 2010.
G-8 countries, the supposed champions of the global free-trade agenda that dominates the World Trade Organization, accounted for the lion’s share of these measures.
Some question the leadership ability of the BRICS.
But many emerging markets are already leading by example on important issues like the need to shift global financial flows from debt toward equity.
Mexico, for example, recently adopted – ahead of schedule – the changes in capital requirements for banks recommended by the Third Basel Accord (Basel III), in order to reduce leverage and increase stability.
For too long, developed countries have clung to their outsize influence in the international financial institutions, even as their fiscal fitness has dwindled.
By ignoring the advice that they so vehemently dispensed to the developing world, they brought the world economy to its knees.
Now, they refuse to fulfill their promises of global cooperation.
Leaders in developed and developing countries alike must deepen their commitment to economic reform and integration.
But only by giving emerging economies a real voice in global governance – thereby reducing the trust deficit and restoring legitimacy to multilateral institutions – can the global economy reach its potential.
The Truth About Climate Change
EXETER – Many people ask how sure we are about the science of climate change.
The most definitive examination of the scientific evidence is to be found in the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and its last major report published in 2007.
I had the privilege of being chairman or co-chairman of the Panel’s scientific assessments from 1988 to 2002.
Many hundreds of scientists from different countries were involved as contributors and reviewers for these reports, which are probably the most comprehensive and thorough international assessments on any scientific subject ever carried out.
In June 1995, just before the G-8 summit in Scotland, the Academies of Science of the world’s 11 largest economies (the G-8 plus India, China, and Brazil) issued a statement endorsing the IPCC’s conclusions and urging world governments to take urgent action to address climate change.
The world’s top scientists could not have spoken more strongly.
Unfortunately, strong vested interests have spent millions of dollars on spreading misinformation about climate change.
First, they tried to deny the existence of any scientific evidence for global warming.
More recently, they have largely accepted the fact of anthropogenic (man-made) climate change but argue that its impacts will not be great, that we can “wait and see,” and that in any case we can always fix the problem if it turns out to be substantial.
The scientific evidence does not support such arguments.
Therefore it is necessary that very strong efforts be made to hold the average global temperature rise below 2º Celsius relative to its preindustrial level.
If we are to have a good chance of achieving that target, the concentration of CO2 must not be allowed to exceed 450 parts per million (it is now nearly 390 ppm).
This implies that before 2050 global emissions of CO2 must be reduced to below 50% of the 1990 level (they are currently 15% above that level), and that average emissions in developed countries must be reduced by at least 80% of the 1990 level.
The United Kingdom has already committed itself to a binding target to reduce emissions by that amount, and President Barack Obama has expressed intention that the United States should also set that target.
One clear requirement is that tropical deforestation, which is responsible for 20% of greenhouse gas emissions, be halted within the next decade or two.
Regarding emissions from the burning of fossil fuels, the International Energy Agency (IEA) in its “Energy Technology Perspectives” has set out in detail the technologies and actions that are needed in different countries and sectors to meet these targets.
For the short term, the IEA points out that very strong and determined action will be necessary to ensure that global CO2 emissions stop rising (the current increase is more than 3% per year), reach a peak by about 2015, and then decline steadily toward the 2050 target.
The IEA also points out that the targets can be achieved without unacceptable economic damage.
In fact, the IEA lists many benefits that will be realized if its recommendations are followed.
What is required now is recognition that anthropogenic climate change will severely affect our children, grandchildren, the world’s ecosystems, and the world’s poorer communities, and that the severity of the impact can be substantially alleviated by taking action now.
The Truth about NATO Burden-Sharing
BRUSSELS – When discussing Afghanistan, many newspapers continue to suggest that some of Europe’s NATO allies are under-performing in Afghanistan, and are either unable or unwilling to make a greater effort.
Naturally, these allies feel that their efforts are under-valued.
What is a fair and equitable burden?
First of all, the debate about burden-sharing should not be reduced solely to today’s force levels in Afghanistan, because, however important these force levels are, they tell only part of the story.
So let me broaden the debate and offer a more holistic perspective by covering three interconnected elements: defense transformation, operations, and the wider context of the international community’s efforts.
Defense transformation is a key aspect of burden-sharing.
It is a golden rule within the alliance that the bulk of NATO’s forces and capabilities are owned by individual nations – the alliance’s fleet of Airborne Warning and Command System (AWACS) aircraft is a rare exception.
As I don’t expect nations to abandon this principle, NATO will continue to depend on individual allies and their willingness to commit resources.
Contrary to popular opinion, the type of forces and capabilities needed by NATO are not as widely available in national inventories as one might think.
Large proportions of NATO allies’ armed forces are still better suited for static territorial defense than for the expeditionary type of operation needed in Afghanistan.
And, when the right type of forces and capabilities do exist, operations led by the United Nations, the European Union, or ad hoc coalitions, as well as national requirements, place additional demands on these assets.
Developing the necessary expeditionary capabilities is a major feature of NATO’s transformation process.
But it is not possible to convert territorial forces into expeditionary forces overnight, and the costs of transformation often must compete with the costs of deploying forces for operations.
Many allies face the dilemma of either spending money on operations or investing in new acquisition programs.
Moreover, many allies’ failure to respect the 2%-of-GDP target for their defense budgets exacerbates this dilemma, and also widens the capability gap with those allies that are investing in usable and deployable forces.
But, while there is no substitute for appropriate defense budgets, we could get more from current spending levels, especially through a smarter approach to defense acquisition.
Unfortunately, despite the efforts of NATO and the EU, Europe’s defense sector remains fragmented, which leads to duplication, unhelpful competition from too many rival systems, and, significant capability gaps or incompatibilities.
In Afghanistan, for example, national systems for friendly-force tracking, which are vital to preventing accidental attacks on one’s own forces or allies, are not compatible.
Extra time and money has therefore had to be invested in the acquisition of these capabilities.
In Europe, many national defense budgets can no longer sustain both fully-fledged national forces and a national defense industry.
Only smarter multinational and transatlantic cooperation will give us forces that are capable of dealing with today’s security challenges.
In an alliance founded on the principle of “all for one, and one for all,” it is vital that all nations are seen to contribute fairly to operations.
Thus, NATO, developed a burden-sharing mechanism to assess members’ manning commitments for critical operational activities relative to their gross national income.
This sort of arithmetic has the merit of giving some indications about burden-sharing, but it has also been shown that burden-sharing cannot be fully captured in graphs and spreadsheets.
How does one decide what is a fair contribution from a country of 50 million people compared to a country with only four million?
How can you evaluate a contribution of light infantry against the provision of critical enablers such as helicopters or air-to-air refueling tankers?
Over what time period do you make your calculations?
Common funding, with all members paying a share according to their GDP, is one instrument that can be used to achieve more equitable burden-sharing.
Traditionally, NATO applied a policy of “costs lie where they fall”: each member picked up all the costs for the operational contribution that it made to an Alliance operation.
During the past couple of years, NATO’s funding policy has been updated to allow common funding to be used as an incentive for the provision of certain theater-level enabling capabilities, like medical facilities, airports handling troops and supplies, or intelligence.
Burden-sharing is a sensitive issue, for both NATO and the international community, and passions sometimes run high.
The sense of keeping one’s obligations and commitments to other allies, upon whom one’s own security ultimately depends, is a powerful motive for equitable burden-sharing.
Totally fair burden-sharing may not be possible, but a security organization like NATO undoubtedly allows us to come closer to it than any other approach.
The Truth about Negotiations
ATHENS – When people and countries negotiate, they often talk about their interests as though they were the only matters that could elicit agreement.
In casting his veto at the European Union’s December summit in Brussels, British Prime Minister David Cameron said, “What is on offer isn’t in Britain’s interests, so I didn’t agree to it,” as if agreement solely depended upon whether or not interests were satisfied.
Then again, reaching an agreement might never have been Cameron’s goal.
While so-called “win-win” outcomes are increasingly considered to be the ultimate purpose of every negotiation, what if the negotiating parties contemplate a win-win outcome that actually harms non-participants to the talks, or is against the law?
What if the outcome is beneficial but contrary to the principles of the negotiating parties?
Imagine that you are at a negotiating table and want the other party to agree with you.
A strategy that could work would be to stress how the outcome is beneficial to everyone involved.
But the outcome you propose might not be fair, or realistic, or you might be consciously lying.
So, although based on interests, such a proposal will not be easily accepted.
Indeed, when one ponders how many issues there are to consider, it becomes obvious that negotiation is a type of communication that involves far more than interests.
Principles, morality, and simple respect for the truth guide agreement as much as interests do.
Some would argue that successful negotiators require only tact – the ability to use principles to conceal one’s true interests.
If this were correct, the United States was right to wage war on Iraq on the basis of the threat posed by Saddam Hussein’s regime.
But it is now widely accepted that the way in which the US negotiated its way into war was a mistake – one that has cost it enormous credibility as a negotiating partner.
In fact, the US often stands for high principles, such as freedom and democracy, and incorporates them successfully into its foreign policy.
Defending economic aid to Europe after World War II, General George C. Marshall, then US Secretary of State, gave an inspirational speech that argued that US policy is not directed against “any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos.”
The Marshall Plan was as much about principles as it was about protecting US interests.
Even if the Cameron government’s rhetoric seems to be focused on “interests,” its negotiating positions also reflect higher principles, just as other countries’ do.
The United Nations and other organizations bear witness to countries’ commitment to principles of justice and solidarity, and to their willingness to set aside their narrow agendas to serve higher causes.
Negotiation should address these causes no less than it speaks to interests.
None of this is to deny that interests do, after all, play a role in negotiations, or that interests can affect morality.
Immanuel Kant famously argued otherwise – that morality should be free of non-universal interests.
But the contemporary philosopher Jürgen Habermas argues that moral norms are valid as long as people accept them freely after having considered the consequences of their implementation for the satisfaction of interests.
Of course, consideration of interests means just that: they must be taken into account; they do not have to be entirely satisfied.
In some cases, the defense of interests alone might seem appropriate –&#160;for example, in certain business transactions.
The more complicated a negotiation, though, the more difficult it is to disregard complex issues such as values and norms or the importance of being sincere.
As Aristotle said: “that which is true and better is naturally always easier to prove and more likely to persuade.”
Failure to provide proper arguments and reasons for a negotiating position could lead to a breakdown of communication among the parties.
If negotiations truly need proper argumentation of this sort, it surely makes sense that many differences are resolved outside the context of negotiations.
Likewise, certain “negotiations” are not negotiations at all, but are better understood as processes of extortion and blackmail.
In today’s globalized world, true negotiation is necessary.
Countries and peoples form an interconnected web of interests that cannot be easily disentangled and satisfied in an isolated manner.
Resolving disputes requires mutually accepted principles that guide how individuals and countries interact.
Negotiation is the path toward successful conflict resolution, but it should be conducted according to basic rules of true and open communication.
Countries and peoples should stop debating the interests that often divide them and start discussing the principles that unite them.
As long as communication is conducted truthfully and with respect to values, norms, and objective facts, negotiations will be able to achieve consensus and agreement.&#160;
The Tsunami Effect
The extraordinary international response to the tsunamis that devastated South Asia is a remarkable political phenomenon.
Though it is too soon to predict all the effects, some good consequences are already evident, as are some that are troublesome and others whose impact will play out over time.
One useful consequence is that wealthy countries’ low levels of assistance to those less fortunate has gained wider attention.
Plainly, the comment by Jan Egeland, the United Nations official in charge of humanitarian assistance, calling the West “stingy,” hit home, especially in the United States.
At that point, the Bush administration had committed a measly $35 million in aid.
While condemning Egeland’s comment, Bush quickly multiplied America’s commitment ten-fold.
In addition, he enlisted former Presidents George Bush and Bill Clinton to lead a private fundraising effort.
This neatly fit a standard response to criticism of the level of American assistance: that private philanthropy exceeds government aid.
Depending on what monies are included, this is true, although the British, Dutch, Germans, French, and other Europeans are also generous donors, despite lacking the tax benefits that encourage private philanthropy in the US.
Moreover, like official US assistance, a relatively small share of American private philanthropy ordinarily goes to the poorest countries.
In contrast, the countries that are most generous – Norway, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, and tiny Luxemburg – give proportionately far more than American governmental and private assistance combined, and the lion’s share of their aid goes to the world’s most impoverished countries.
In the wake of the tsunamis, it seems possible that the US and other wealthy countries will rethink their assistance programs and, possibly, step up their aid to those most in need.
Perhaps even some oil-rich governments will be embarrassed by attention to their miserliness in doling out assistance.
But there is also a risk that assistance for tsunami victims is diverting aid from disasters that are of a more chronic character or that are less amenable to sensational media coverage.
In announcing that it would stop accepting donations for the victims of the tsunami after collecting €40 million for that purpose, Médecins Sans Frontières noted its urgent need for funds for such man-made catastrophes as Darfur in Sudan and for the Democratic Republic of Congo.
In recent years, many more people have died in the conflicts in Sudan and Congo than were killed by the tsunamis.
Some were direct victims of the fighting in those countries, while a much larger number died from war-related hunger and disease.
Similarly, the number of those forcibly displaced is a multiple of those who lost their homes and livelihoods due to the tsunamis.
Yet MSF was able to collect only €650,000 in two months of soliciting funds for Darfur, while it received €40 million for the tsunami victims in just eight days.
Given the limited number of skilled personnel available to humanitarian agencies, human resources could follow the money.
Another question likely to loom large in coming months is whether assistance is politicized and free of corruption.
Politicization is important because the two countries that were hardest hit, Indonesia and Sri Lanka, both suffer armed conflicts in tsunami-hit regions.
Aceh province in Indonesia was previously largely closed to outsiders.
It was ruled by the Indonesian army, which fought a brutal civil war against the separatist Free Aceh Movement.
Similarly, northern Sri Lanka is the main battleground for the long-running conflict between government forces and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
Despite headway towards settling that struggle, violence continues and could erupt again in full fury.
Germany, where combined public and private aid for tsunami victims has reached $1.1 billion (making it the largest international donor), says that it would like its aid to be used to foster peace settlements.
A worthy goal, but successful models do not come readily to mind.
More common is a situation like that of ex-Yugoslavia.
During the wars in Croatia and Bosnia the UN was responsible for humanitarian assistance and also dedicated to peacemaking.
Yet it was never able to use the former to advance the latter.
It would not be the first time that a government misused aid intended for disaster victims.
A notorious example is Nicaragua after the earthquake that leveled the capital, Managua, in December 1972.
Nicaragua’s dictator, Anastasio Somoza, diverted much of the international assistance meant for the survivors into his own pockets and those of his cronies.
In the process, he incited popular support for the left-wing Sandinista guerrillas who toppled his government later in the decade.
The tsunamis provide an opportunity for the UN to reclaim the high ground that it lost recently.
Battered by the Iraqi “oil for food” scandal, which, at the least, demonstrated mismanagement, and misdeeds by officials ranging from former Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers (now High Commissioner for Refugees), who faces allegations of sexual harassment, to rapes committed by UN peacekeeping troops in Congo, the UN has a chance to rehabilitate its reputation by managing the relief effort effectively.
Doing so requires putting the right person in charge — someone like Paul Hoffman, the American industrialist who managed the Marshall Plan more than half a century ago and, subsequently, headed the UN Development Program.
It also requires making sure that the person in charge gets the staff assistance and the political backing required to do the job well.
Taksim and the Left
ISTANBUL – The small park in Taksim Square in the sprawling metropolis of Istanbul is one of the few green spaces left in the city center.
On May 28, a handful of Turkish environmentalists started a peaceful protest against a redevelopment plan for the park that would replace the greenery with a replica of an Ottoman-era army barracks, a shopping mall, and apartments.
But heavy-handed police repression launched a massive civic movement that has spread to the entire country.
The redevelopment plan for the park triggered a huge protest against what a large segment of the Turkish public, particularly young people, considers paternalistic and authoritarian political leadership.
The movement’s rapid growth was fueled by widespread opposition to what many regard as official efforts to regiment lifestyles, as well as by frustration over perceived economic inequities.
Indeed, though environmentalists and secular youth spearheaded the protest movement, it became remarkably diverse and inclusive almost overnight.
Pious Muslims – particularly those who believe that Turkey’s urban development has created too much rent-seeking and too many easy fortunes – joined the demonstrations as well, as did some far-left groups.
Some of the protests became violent.
Overall, however, the movement has remained peaceful and even joyous.
Moreover, important figures in or close to the ruling Justice and Development Party expressed their willingness to hold a dialogue with the protesters.
President Abdullah Gül, in particular, played a calming, statesmanlike role.
A striking feature of the protests has been the distance that the demonstrators have put between themselves and existing political parties, including the Republican People’s Party (CHP), the largest force in the center-left secular opposition.
In this sense, the Taksim “sit-in” resembles protests elsewhere, particularly in the advanced democracies, from the “Occupy Wall Street” movement to the protests in Spain and Italy.
To be sure, there are country-specific features to such protests – including, in Turkey’s case, the reaction against lifestyle paternalism.
But social democrats must understand why the protests developed quite independently of existing, organized, center-left politics.
Without such realism, the center left in Europe and the emerging world cannot regain political momentum.
Modern production systems, in which information technology plays an increasingly crucial role, are totally different from the large factory floors that characterized the birth of trade unionism and social democracy.
The way much of GDP is now produced has made it significantly harder for the left to organize in traditional ways.
That has weakened center-left parties.
Yet information technology and global social media have empowered people to overcome social fragmentation along occupational, residential, and national lines.
On some recent days, posts about Taksim Square have reportedly occupied a huge part of the entire world’s “Tweet space.”
In this corner of cyberspace, there is, of course, everything under the sun, including calls for the worst sort of sectarianism.
Nonetheless, what dominates is a desire for individual freedom, an acceptance of diversity, great concern for the environment, and a refusal to be “organized” from above.
Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the CHP’s reformist leader, quickly recognized these dynamics: “The demonstrators don’t want us on the front lines,” he said, “and we have much to learn from these events.”
And yet, while civil society can be a trigger, sooner or later democratic politics has to drive the process of change.
Whether in New York, Paris, Madrid, Rome, Istanbul, or New Delhi, a feeling of unease and a desire for change has emerged in societies that are becoming increasingly unequal, and in which politics and business mix in non-transparent ways.
Rising youth unemployment and cuts in pensions and social expenditures come at a time when many large multinational corporations legally avoid taxes by shifting their profits to favorable jurisdictions.
In the eurozone, stock prices are soaring, while joblessness is at a record-high 12.2%.
The democratic opposition can address the flaws of the existing order only if it recognizes the need for very different forms of mobilization from those of the past.
It must recognize a strong popular desire for individual autonomy, more leadership positions for women and the young, and greater support for individual enterprise (along with reforms of social insurance that make it cost-effective and truly inclusive).
Finally, the environment, climate change, and global solidarity will be defining themes of the twenty-first century.
Acting on their own, nation-states can successfully address neither tax avoidance nor carbon emissions.
The renewed patriotism seen in many places &#160;– a response to the unfairness and dislocation that globalization can generate – must be reconciled with human solidarity, respect for diversity, and the ability to work across national borders.
The success of Germany’s Green Party reflects the focus that it has placed on many of these issues.
The events that started in Taksim Square are specific to Turkey, but they mirror aspirations that are universal.
The same can be said for the challenge facing the democratic left.
The Twilight of Pervez Musharraf
It is said that political power in Pakistan flows from the three A’s: Allah, the Army, and support from America.
Of the three, it is the army leadership that has the clearest means of ridding the country of Pakistan’s president in uniform, Pervez Musharraf.
And that’s the main reason any power-sharing deal with former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is unlikely to end Pakistan’s political turmoil.
Musharraf hoped to extend his presidency this fall without caving in to opposition demands that he renounce his military position and restore a civilian rival to the post of prime minister.
But few international leaders face such a wide range of sworn domestic enemies.
Since seizing power following a 1999 coup, Musharraf has survived at least three serious assassination attempts.
His anti-terrorist partnership with the United States fatally undermined his political alliance with Pakistan’s religious conservatives even before his government stormed Islamabad’s Red Mosque in July, killing more than 100 people.
The threat of terrorist attacks inside the country will continue to rise.
Musharraf also has plenty of secular enemies.
Their anger, inflamed in March when he tried unsuccessfully to sack the Supreme Court’s independent-minded chief justice, rages on.
The court recently ruled that Nawaz Sharif, who Musharraf unseated eight years ago, must be allowed to return from exile.
Sharif is planning a grand entrance.
His “decisive struggle against dictatorship” – and determined opposition to any deal with Bhutto that excludes him – will intensify.
Musharraf is warning him to remain in London.
America isn’t happy with Musharraf, either.
Some in Washington charge that he has done too little to roust al-Qaeda and Taliban fighters from safe havens along the country’s border with Afghanistan.
His recent flirtation with a plan to bypass Bhutto and declare emergency rule provoked pointed Bush administration criticism.
But it’s the army that is most likely to eventually decide the fate of his presidency.
Musharraf’s rule has given the military leadership a strong role in policymaking, but his eight years in office have badly damaged domestic support for the army’s influence within the government.
His unpopularity has become their unpopularity.
Aware of a potential threat from within their ranks, Musharraf has populated his inner circle with relatively junior (and reliably loyal) officers.
But a deal that makes Bhutto prime minister would undermine the military’s influence – and eventually its support for Musharraf’s presidency. As prime minister, she could eventually revisit her deal with Musharraf from a position of strength.
Military leaders know this, and the threat that they will eventually push him aside will plague his presidency well into next year.
The army is unlikely to move on Musharraf directly unless subtler methods fail.
The generals know that another coup would further weaken the military’s popular standing – as well as Pakistan’s relations with the US – at a moment when Bhutto and Sharif have raised expectations at home and abroad for a permanent return to civilian rule.
But if Musharraf were to refuse to go quietly, the generals could promise him a long list of public corruption charges that he must survive without their protection.
Musharraf’s presidency won’t survive long without military backing.
To preserve the appearance that their meddling is benign, senior military officers probably know that they cannot afford to install another general as president.
Instead, they will most likely support cosmetic political reforms, including a new law that formally separates the roles of army commander and head of state.
That is the strategy the military adopted in 1988, following the mysterious plane crash that killed former President (and General) Mohammed Zia ul-Haq. The army leadership ordered elections, permitted the formation of a civilian government, and then stage-managed the political process from the wings.
Bhutto, the leader of a secular party that now enjoys substantial support in Washington, would dominate policy planning in the next government at Musharraf’s expense.
She must build on her domestic support, but she can rely on economic and security cooperation with America to safeguard the country’s stability.
In addition, the military’s role as guarantor of stability, and its tight control of Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal, the army’s crown jewels, will continue.
The Bush administration can therefore enthusiastically back a return to civilian rule and claim a much-needed victory for democracy in a Muslim country.
But Bhutto would inherit Musharraf’s domestic enemies.
Sharif would fulminate against her every misstep, threats of attack from religious radicals would continue, and the military would safeguard its interests from just off stage.
Adding to the pressure, America would expect the kind of cooperation in pacifying Pakistan’s tribal areas that Musharraf has proven unable to provide.
The military will, under any scenario, continue to quell fears of complete political chaos.
But it would also likely ensure that a Musharraf-Bhutto deal does not fully close a tumultuous chapter in Pakistan’s history.
The Two Faces of Vladimir Putin
Russia’s split personality – symbolized by its Tsarist coat of arms, a two-headed eagle – has been on open display recently.
One minute, President Vladimir Putin’s regime is on a charm offensive, desiring a settlement to its six-decade-old territorial dispute with Japan over the Kurile Islands and reassuring investors following the conviction of oil billionaire Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
The next moment Putin balks at removing Russia’s military garrison from Moldova’s secessionist Transdniester region while prosecutors talk ominously of putting more oligarchs in the dock.
Perhaps the greatest display of this political schizophrenia took place last month in Red Square, where a witch’s brew of Red “Victory” flags, tri-color “Imperial” flags, Stalin portraits, and Orthodox icons marched side by side during the 60th anniversary celebration marking WWII’s end.
Putin took that occasion to repeat his political mantra – “Russia is developing it’s own brand of democracy” – while spurning requests from the Baltic countries that Russia come clean about its deal with Hitler to devour them on WWII’s eve.
This bizarre brew appears to have been concocted in an effort to reconcile the irreconcilable: the current yearning for democracy with Russia’s despotic past.
But, like any muddle, it is succeeding only in confusing Russians about themselves and their country.
Strangely, Putin seems as trapped by this muddle as everybody else.
At times, Putin truly sees himself as a “modernizer” seeking to root Russia in the West.
At other times, like Stalin, he believes that Russia’s power requires a strong hand – what he calls his “dictatorship of law.”
The problem, as Khodorkovsky’s conviction demonstrated, is that dictatorship usually seems to be trumping law.
Historically, attempts at modernization in Russia, even when they look real, as with Stalin’s industrialization or Yeltsin’s market reforms, ultimately result in a Potemkin village-like state of affairs, because Russian society cannot change fast enough or with the patience necessary to see the changes through.
So, when Yeltsin’s American-style democratization of the 1990’s failed to bring “orderly” capitalism instantly, Putin on his accession imposed a restoration of state “order,” as if a stable political or economic system demanded a fusing of the Soviet past with the Orthodox Church and Mother Russia imagery.
Indeed, Putin’s signature characteristic is to be all men for all Russia’s people.
By blending the Soviet past with the Tsarist past and a few shards of Yeltsin-era democracy, Putin seems to think that he can neutralize the extremes of Russian history.
Instead, the extremes seem to be squeezing out the desire for modernization.
High oil prices now seem to be the only factor allowing Putin to keep the reform charade going.
The nineteenth-century czar Alexander III once said: “Russia has only two true allies – its army and its navy.”
Oil is Putin’s army and navy, allowing him to build and maintain the image of a strong, but also an internationalist, state.
Alexander's formula is also popular today with Putin’s nationalists in Moscow and St. Petersburg.
In his pro-imperial Russia film “The Barber of Siberia,” the Oscar-winning director Nikita Mikhalkov – whose father composed the Stalin-era national anthem that Putin recently revived – used the coronation of Alexander III as the symbolic centerpiece of Russia’s greatness, inviting Russian leaders to walk in his footsteps.
This strong-willed monarch, while ruling the Russian empire autocratically, managed to bring stability and prosperity, allowing capitalism to take root.
He worked to strengthen and modernize Russia’s armed forces while avoiding armed conflict.
He became known as “The Peasants’ Tsar,” though he didn’t tolerate any opposition thinking contrary to his own.
Putin sees his own crusade to save Russia from disintegration and separatism as similar to Alexander’s.
But how forward-looking is it to model a twenty-first-century country on the absolutist example of the past?
Stalin is yet another cherished role model.
Here, too, Putin tries to walk on both sides of the street, calling Koba a tyrant to sooth the wounded feelings the Baltic leaders, yet instantly qualifying his remarks by saying that Stalin was no Hitler.
Can we really compare the degree of evil of these two men?
Despite his insistence on rubbing shoulders with world leaders and portraying himself as a modernizer, Putin, like his predecessors, is in fact a ruler who believes that only authoritarian rule can protect his country from anarchy and disintegration.
But the old ideas, the mimicry and symbols Putin employs to achieve his goals, no longer correspond to today’s realities or Russia’s present capabilities.
Previously, it was Russia’s Western mission that was pure Potemkin village.
Now Russianness itself seems to lack a secure foundation, for it is but a hollow shell of discarded state symbols.
Like a bad driver, a nation that looks left and right but never ahead is bound to crash.
The Tyranny of King Cotton
Americans like to think that if poor countries simply open up their markets, greater prosperity will follow.
Unfortunately, where agriculture is concerned, this is mere rhetoric.
The United States pays only lip service to free market principles, favoring Washington lobbyists and campaign contributors who demand just the opposite.
Indeed, it is America’s own agricultural subsidies that helped kill, at least for now, the so-called Doha Development Round of trade negotiations that were supposed to give poor countries new opportunities to enhance their growth.
Subsidies hurt developing country farmers because they lead to higher output – and lower global prices.
The Bush administration – supposedly committed to free markets around the world – has actually almost doubled the level of agricultural subsidies in the US.
Cotton illustrates the problem.
Without subsidies, it would not pay for Americans to produce much cotton; with them, the US is the world’s largest cotton exporter.
Some 25,000 rich American cotton farmers divide $3 to $4 billion in subsidies among themselves – with most of the money going to a small fraction of the recipients.
The increased supply depresses cotton prices, hurting some 10 million farmers in sub-Saharan Africa alone.
Seldom have so few done so much damage to so many.
That damage is all the greater when we consider how America’s trade subsidies contributed to the demise of the Doha Round.
Rather than offering to do away with its cotton subsidies, America offered to open up American markets to cotton imports – an essentially meaningless public-relations move that quickly backfired.
Owing to its huge subsidies, America exports cotton, and it would import little even if formal barriers are removed.
Thus, recent trade negotiations have a surreal air about them, because, whatever their outcome, ultimately cotton subsidies will have to go.
Brazil, frustrated with America’s intransigence, brought a case against US cotton subsidies before the WTO, which ruled as almost any economist would: the subsidies distort world trade and are therefore prohibited.
Faced with the WTO order, the US will try to comply with the letter of the law and avoid its spirit, making changes in the subsidy program to ensure “technical” compliance.
But these attempts will almost surely fail; in the end – though it may take years – cotton subsidies will be eliminated.
Of course, the European Union’s subsidies are far larger, but, in contrast to the US, Europe has made some effort to reduce them, especially export subsidies.
While export subsidies appear more obviously “trade distorting,” America’s cotton and other subsidies are in fact almost as bad.
When subsidies lead to increased production with little increase in consumption, as is typical with agricultural commodities, higher output translates directly into higher exports, which translate directly into lower prices for producers, lower incomes for farmers, and more poverty in the Third world, including millions of cotton farmers eking out subsistence incomes in semi-arid conditions.
America and other advanced countries are the real losers from the demise of the Doha Round.
Had the Bush administration fulfilled its commitments, Americans taxpayers would have benefited from the elimination of huge agricultural subsidies – a real boon in this era of yawning budget deficits.
Americans would have been better off as consumers, too, with increased access to a variety of low-cost goods from poor countries.
Likewise, migration pressure would have been reduced, because it is the huge disparity in incomes more than anything else that leads people to leave their homes and families to immigrate to the US.
A fair trade regime would have helped reduce that disparity.
Indeed, citizens throughout the rich developed world all stand to benefit from a more prosperous globe – especially a world in which there is less poverty, with fewer people facing despair. For we all suffer from the political instability to which such despair gives rise.
But it is America that perhaps now stands to gain the most by reviving the Doha talks with a more credible and generous offer.
America’s influence in the world has suffered greatly in the last few years; the Bush administration’s hypocritical use of free-market rhetoric while pursuing protectionist policies has made matters worse.
America’s national interests thus dictate a change of policy. But there is also another powerful rationale for doing so: treating fairly those who are poorer and less powerful is the morally right thing to do.
Europe’s National Wild Cards
DUBLIN – Europe’s needs and Europeans’ desires are at odds.
At a time when strong, coordinated action is needed to stave off financial collapse in the European Union, the popular support that drove European integration over the last six decades is waning.
After almost 70 years of peace, Europeans seem to have forgotten why unity was so important, indulging nationalist sentiment without regard for its potential consequences.
At the same time, they fail to grasp that their economies are too closely interconnected for independent economic policy to work.
This failure is rooted in electoral politics’ confinement to individual countries, which forces politicians to pretend that they can address economic issues with national policies alone.
Indeed, politicians face no electoral pressure to pursue broader action, even if it would bring domestic benefits.
Now the euro crisis is forcing EU leaders to address institutional changes – namely the creation of banking, fiscal, and political union – that they have long deferred.
But, while member states must agree unanimously on all key decisions, their mandates oblige them to view EU issues through the prism of national interest.
The brinkmanship and bargaining that this approach encourages make it impossible to develop and present pan-European visions to the public.
This problem is perhaps most evident in the United Kingdom.
Although the UK is not a eurozone member, its cooperation is crucial if EU institutions are to be used to solve the euro crisis.
But, rather than offer the support that its European partners need, Britain is pursuing its own agenda.
For example, by refusing to sign the fiscal compact, which imposes stricter controls on national spending in the eurozone, the UK has forced the arrangement to operate outside EU mechanisms.
The UK’s rationale for its refusal – that no protocol was included in the treaty exempting the financial sector from certain regulations – suggests that similar outcomes can be expected in future negotiations.
In fact, as Prime Minister David Cameron recently explained, his government seeks to renegotiate the terms of its EU membership, and to hold a referendum on the outcome, which potentially would decide whether the UK remains an EU member.
While the UK is entirely free to leave the EU, given that it is a treaty-based union, the move carries serious risks.
In preparation for the renegotiation, UK leaders are conducting a comprehensive audit of EU laws in order to identify powers that could be reclaimed.
This could have a positive outcome, highlighting powers that other member states agree should be returned to national governments.
The problem is that the UK has a strong interest in retaining full access to the EU market – the eurozone accounts for half of its exports of goods and services – but seems unwilling to submit to any obligation.
As a result, British officials appear more likely to develop proposals that suit only the UK, and that could give it an unfair advantage.
This would hinder negotiations, and could ultimately damage public support for EU membership.
Like all markets, the EU’s Single Market is a political construct that relies on common rules, regulations, and conventions for stability and reliability.
Returning to national governments rule-making powers that could be used to impose criteria aimed at excluding others would endanger the entire market.
Likewise, some regulation – for example, environmental rules, product-safety standards, and anti-trust enforcement – is needed to ensure that competition is fair.
Before the referendum is held, the UK public must understand that such matters simply cannot be returned to national authorities.
Beyond damaging relations with the EU, the UK’s actions could undermine efforts to address Europe’s economic, social, and identity crises.
If the UK presents a unilateral list of proposals for new EU rules, the other 26 EU member states could be encouraged to engage in brinkmanship of their own.
The likely result – 27 disparate sets of demands – could lead to the serial re-opening of old compromises on issues that have little relevance to the urgent threats that the EU now faces.
Member states simply do not have the time to conduct a case-by-case analysis of requests from the UK – or the concomitant deliberations.
And the European Court of Justice would have difficulty reconciling a special set of exceptions for one country with the shared rights and freedoms on which the EU is based.
Cameron’s supporters cite the precedent set by Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson, who in 1975 renegotiated the terms of Britain’s &#160;membership in the European Economic Community – terms that his conservative predecessor, Edward Heath, had accepted a few years earlier – and then held a referendum on continued EEC membership.
This tactic worked once, they argue, and it will work again.
But Wilson had to negotiate with eight fairly similar countries.
By contrast, Cameron will face 27 distinct countries (including Croatia, which will join later this year), many of which are facing serious domestic challenges.
As a result, the negotiations have far more serious political implications – and far more room for error.
Despite these risks, many British politicians believe that they can satisfy voters at the expense of “Europe,” perpetuating the idea that ties with the EU – a supposedly homogeneous foreign entity – amount to little more than a disposable convenience.
Now, it is up to the British public to think deeply about the benefits and sacrifices implicit in EU membership.
The Unbearable Lightness of Change
MADRID – Barack Obama’s first year in office has been a sobering exercise in the limits of presidential power.
It also carries lessons about how the resilient and impersonal forces of history can constrain any leader’s drive for change.
Obama’s current “winter of discontent” genuinely reflects the mixed record of his first year.
The Massachusetts electoral debacle only highlighted the growing rift between the president’s agenda and popular sensibilities.
Admittedly, Obama inherited a collapsing financial system, a declining world order, and the ever-present threat of global terrorism.
In his titanic efforts to stem decline and reform America, Obama has shown vision and talent, but he also learned the hard way that, as Henry Kissinger put it in his memoirs, the pledges of new administrations are almost invariably like “leaves on a turbulent sea.”
The impossible deadlines, the always ambiguous information the president is fed, and the complex choices that he must make are too frequently bound to clash with political constraints and the resistance to change of both allies and foes.
The president’s domestic agenda is bold and revolutionary, but it clashes frontally with the most fundamental tenets of America’s liberal and individualistic ethos.
His health-care reform plan, as the Massachusetts vote demonstrated, is perceived as a personal obsession and an entirely unnecessary distraction from much more urgent and vital concerns, such as the financial crisis and unemployment.
Obama’s priorities in foreign policy are definitely sound.
But creating a structure of international relations that will make a more stable and enduring world order is not a task to be completed within one year.
Nor is it at all certain that the sacrifices required of a country already stretched beyond the limits of its financial capabilities, together with the resistance of world powers, will allow this to be accomplished even in a single presidential term.
Iraq is showing some positive signs of political and institutional recovery, but the omens for the future remain, in Obama’s own words, “messy.”
The disintegration of an already fragmented country, the return of civil war, and the shadow of Iran’s power being cast over the Iraqi state are all plausible scenarios.
A man of peace, Obama has become no less a war president than his predecessor.
Having seen the harsh realities of the world as it really is , he has become the champion of the “just war.”
In Afghanistan, he opted for a substantial military surge, but the notion of victory that would allow for a withdrawal of troops remains as foggy and uncertain as it was in the case of Iraq.
The solution is ultimately political, not military.
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates was right to recognize that the Taliban are “part of the political fabric” of Afghanistan and thus “need to participate in the country’s government.”
But this might not be achieved without involving the major regional stakeholders, including Pakistan, China, and possibly Iran.
The Obama administration’s failure in re-launching the India-Pakistan peace talks over Kashmir is one of the gravest weaknesses of its “AfPak” strategy.
If these two countries’ mutual hostility is not reined in, and a fundamentalist Afghanistan continues to provide the strategic depth through which Pakistan threatens its sworn Indian enemies, the current disaster might still breed defeat.
Obama is right to boast of his success in enlisting China to join serious sanctions on North Korea, but he might be wrong to draw conclusions from this about Iran, a vital strategic partner for the Chinese.
Likewise, America’s “reset button” policy with Russia has certainly improved relations with the Kremlin, but it remains highly improbable that the Russians would endanger their privileged relations with Iran by joining an economic siege.
Israel ’s fear that the failure of sanctions might bring the United States to accept coexistence with a nuclear-armed Iran in the way it did with the Soviet Union during the Cold War is not entirely unfounded.
Obama’s administration will not start a war with a third Muslim country while the two others continue to burn.
Iran might eventually turn into the graveyard of Obama’s dream of a world without nuclear weapons.
George Bernard Shaw once observed that “in the arts of peace Man is a bungler.”
Obama has just admitted that in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, a president can also be one.
“This is as intractable a problem as you get,” he admitted after a wasted year of more error than trial.
He naively ignored the harsh lessons of 20 years of abortive peacemaking, and insisted on sticking to the worn-out paradigm of direct negotiations between parties that, when left to their own devices, are bound to come to a deadlock.
He was commendably humble to admit that he was wrong “to have raised expectations so high.”
With no breakthrough in the Arab-Israeli conflict, Obama is left with the epicenter of the Middle East’s maladies seriously undermining his entire strategy in the region.
Yet he continues to be the greatest promise for a better world that this political generation can offer.
And he still has time to vindicate Woodrow Wilson’s belief that a “president can be just as big a man as he chooses to be.”
The Japanese Experiment
NEWPORT BEACH – After years of tweaks, Japan has now initiated a major shift in its policy paradigm, with reactions ranging from great optimism that the country may finally be lifted out of a quarter-century of economic stagnation, to concerns that the authorities’ dramatic change of course may in fact end up making things worse.
But, while debate naturally focuses on Japan’s economic, financial, and political maneuvers, the tipping point could well lie abroad.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s new government has embraced a revolutionary (rather than evolutionary) economic-policy approach that engages several initiatives, some of which were once deemed implausible, unthinkable, or even undesirable.
From the doubling of the money supply to additional fiscal stimulus and wide-ranging structural reforms, the new policy paradigm is nothing less than one of the boldest economic-policy experiments in Japan’s post-war history.
To demonstrate their seriousness, Japanese officials moved quickly to commit to measurable metrics.
On the policy input side, they have specified and begun to implement purchases of securities totaling $75 billion per month (three times as much, in relative terms, as the US Federal Reserve currently purchases under its unconventional monetary-policy regime).
On the output side, and after many years of persistent deflation (prices fell 0.5% last month), Japan is now targeting a 2% inflation rate within two years, thus underscoring its commitment to avoid a pre-mature withdrawal of monetary support for growth.
Already, financial markets have responded with alacrity.
The Japanese equity market is up an impressive 55% since hints of the paradigm shift started hitting investors’ radar screens.
At the same time, the Japanese yen has depreciated sharply, including by more than 20% against the struggling euro.
This response is part of the transmission mechanism for the Japanese government’s policies.
The surge in the stock market benefits domestic investors, making them likelier to spend more (what economists call the “wealth effect”).
This, in turn, should revive corporate “animal spirits,” leading to higher investment in new plants and equipment, together with higher wages and salaries.
These are, of course, the same mechanisms that the Fed has targeted for almost three years in its own efforts to stimulate higher growth in the US.
The macroeconomic outcomes have consistently fallen short of expectations, and there is reason to believe that it will be even more difficult in Japan for monetary policy alone to gain sufficient traction.
Japan’s aging population mutes the potential impact of both the wealth effect and animal spirits.
Resource flexibility is lower than in the US. Interest rates are already low.
The experience of deflation is well entrenched.
And, given Japan’s high level of public indebtedness, the risks of collateral damage and unintended consequences are potentially higher.
With gross overall government debt already at 238% of GDP, some worry that Japan would face the threat of economic and financial dislocation were a failed policy experiment to lead its private sector – which traditionally has displayed an enormous home bias – to disinvest from Japan.
This does not mean that Japan’s policy revolution will necessarily disappoint.