And spillover effects from Greece will continue to affect Balkan and other emerging European banking markets.
Indeed, several Western financial groups are considering partial or complete exits from the region – without any clear strategic replacement in sight.
The potential systemic crisis threatens to accelerate deleveraging further, with serious consequences for emerging Europe.
That is why the Vienna Initiative must become an effective “voice” for the host countries in the Europe-wide debate on debt resolution and banking union.
Every effort must be made to prevent the creation of new barriers within Europe’s financial system.
Some progress has been made toward safeguarding emerging Europe’s banking system.
The European Investment Bank, the World Bank, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development have agreed on a new Joint Action Plan, including investment totaling €30 billion ($39 billion) over the next two years, as well as policy advice, to support economic recovery and sustained growth in the region.
They must now deliver.
The European Commission and multilateral lenders should help to facilitate ongoing structural change in the banking sector, including bank acquisitions and balance-sheet restructuring for viable export-driven companies.
In exchange, private banks must live up to their collective responsibility to smooth the deleveraging process and limit the systemic impact of their actions.
Under these conditions, deleveraging could put emerging Europe on a more sustainable growth path.
Demokratisasi di Eurozone
ATHENA – Layaknya Macbeth, pembuat kebijakan cenderung melakukan dosa-dosa baru untuk menutupi perilaku buruk mereka yang terdahulu.
Dan sistem-sistem politik membuktikan betapa berharganya mereka melalui seberapa cepat mereka mampu mengakhiri kesalahan kebijakan yang dibuat para pejabatnya secara terus-menerus.
Jika dikaji berdasarkan standar ini, maka Eurozone, terdiri dari 19 negara demokrasi yang mapan, justry tertinggal dibandingkan negara dengan perekonomian non-demokrasi terbesar di dunia.
Selepas permulaan terjadinya resesi yang didahului dengan krisis keuangan global pada tahun 2008, pembuat kebijakan di Tiongkok menghabiskan waktu tujuh tahun untuk  menggantikan lemahnya kebutuhan atas ekspor bersih di negara tersebut dengan investment bubble lokal, yang diperbesar karena penjualan lahan secara agresif oleh pemerintah daerah.
Ketika hari perhitungan datang di musim panas ini, para pemimpin di Tiongkok mengeluarkan $200 miliar yang merupakan cadangan devisa yang diperoleh dengan susah payah seolah-olah berperan sebagai Knut yang Agung berupaya mencegah pasang-surutnya kekalahan di pasar modal.
Akan tetapi, dibandingkan dengan Uni Eropa, upaya pemerintah Tiongkok untuk memperbaiki kesalahannya – pada akhirnya membiarkan suku bunga dan nilai saham merosot – nampak seperti teladan yang baik atas kecepatan dan efisiensi.
Memang benar bahwa gagalnya “program konsolidasi dan reformasi fiskal” Yunani dan sikap pemimpin Eropa yang masih berpegang teguh meskipun sudah ada bukti selama lima tahun bahwa program ini tidak mungkin berhasil, menjadi gejala atas kegagalan tata kelola pemerintahan Eropa yang lebih luas, suatu hal yang memiliki akar historis yang mendalam.
Pada awal tahun 1990an, trauma atas ambruknya Mekanisme Nilai Tukar Mata Uang Eropa hanya menguatkan tekad pemimpin di Eropa untuk meningkatkannya.
Semakin sering skema ini dipandang tidak berkelanjutan, semakin sering kuat tekad para pejabat untuk bertahan pada skema tersebut – dan semakin optimis pula narasi yang mereka sampaikan.
“Program” Yunani hanya sekedar jelmaan dari inersia kebijakan Eropa yang dianggap sempurna.
Pejabat di Tiongkok mungkin tidak wajib bertanggung jawab pada parlemen atau kongres yang terpilih secara demokratis – namun pejabat pemerintah memiliki satu badan – tujuh anggota komite Politbiro – dimana  mereka harus mempertanggungjawabkan kesalahannya.
Di satu sisi Eurozone diatur oleh Eurogroup yang sifatnya tidak resmi yang terdiri atas menteri keuangan dari negara-negara anggota ditambah perwakilan Bank Sentral Eropa dan ketika merundingkan “program-program ekonomi yang melibatkan lembaganya,” juga akan diikuti oleh Dana Moneter Internasional (International Monetary Fund).
Akhir-akhir ini, sebagai akibat dari perundingan sengit yang dilakukan pemerintah Yunani dengan para kreditor, baru lah masyarakat Eropa menyadari bahwa perekonomian terbesar di dunia, yakni Eurozone, dijalankan oleh badan yang tidak memiliki aturan prosedur yang tertulis, mendebatkan persoalan-persoalan penting “secara rahasia” (dan tanpa menyusun notulensi), dan tidak wajib bertanggung jawab pada lembaga apapun yang dipilih rakyat, bahkan tidak juga kepada Parlemen Eropa.   
Salah jika anda mengganggap kebuntuan antara pemerintah Yunani dan Eurogroup sebagai bentrokan antara aliran kiri Yunani dan arus utama konservatif Eropa.
“Athens Spring” mewakili suatu hal yang lebih bermakna: hak suatu negara kecil di Eropa untuk menentang kebijakan gagal yang merusak prospek satu generasi (atau dua), tidak hanya di Yunani melainkan juga di negara lain di Eropa.
Athens Spring ini dihancurkan karena alasan-alasan yang tidak berhubungan dengan politik sayap kiri pemerintah Yunani.
Berulang kali Uni Eropa menolak dan merendahkan kebijakan-kebijakan yang masuk akal.
Kejadian ini menjadi contoh posisi dua sisi mengenai kebijakan pajak.
Sebagai menteri keuangan Yunani saya mengusulkan penurunan pajak penjualan, pajak pendapatan, dan pajak korporasi untuk memperluas dasar pengenaan pajak, meningkatkan pemasukan, dan menguatkan perekonomian Yunani yang hancur.
Pengikut Ronald Reagan pasti tidak akan membantah rencana saya ini.
Uni Eropa di sisi lain meminta – dan memberlakukan – kenaikan pada ketiga tarif pajak.
Jadi apabila perkelahian antara Yunani dengan para kreditor Eropa bukan lah bentrokan sayap kiri-kanan, lalu apakah itu?
Ahli ekonomi dari Amerika Serikat, Clarence Ayres, pernah menulis, seolah-seolah tengah menggambarkan para pejabat Eropa: “Mereka memuji kenyataan karena mengaitkannya dengan status seremonial, namun mereka melakukan itu agar bisa membenarkan status, bukan untuk mewujudkan efisiensi teknologi”.
Dan mereka bisa lolos dari itu karena pembuat keputusan di Eurozone tidak wajib bertanggung jawab pada badan berdaulat apapun.
Wajib bagi mereka yang ingin memperbaiki efisiensi Eropa dan menurunkan ketidakadilan yang berat ini untuk bekerja menuju re-politicizing eurozone sebagai langkah pertama menuju demokratisasi.
Bagaimanapun juga, bukankah Eropa layak mendapatkan pemerintah yang setidaknya lebih akuntabel dibandingkan pemerintah komunis di Tiongkok?
The Perilous Politics of the Euro
SANTIAGO – The jury is still out on whether Greece will manage to avoid default, remain in the eurozone, and reverse the brutal contraction of its economy.
But any fair panel already would have issued a verdict on the political consequences of the common currency: utter failure.
Of course, the case for the euro was always political and came in two varieties: earthy and lofty.
The earthy case, seldom made clearly in polite company, was that the countries in southern Europe spent too much, taxed too little, and thus borrowed in excess.
So long as they could finance deficits by printing a local currency and devaluing it from time to time, they would stick to their free-spending ways.
Only the straightjacket of the euro and a monetary policy governed from Frankfurt could discipline them.
That was the theory.
The practical result was precisely the opposite.
With the risk of devaluation gone, interest-rate spreads dropped precipitously, and so did borrowing costs.
Cheap money from abroad flooded into Europe's lower-income countries.
In some places – Greece, Italy, and Portugal – the money financed an unsustainable public-spending binge.
In others – Spain and Ireland – it financed the delusions of private real-estate developers.
Debts ballooned everywhere.
The lofty political case for the euro was uttered most pleasingly in French.
It promised peace, prosperity, and growing mutual respect, with political union as the ultimate goal.
It did not matter that no one seemed to know how to get there.
As I heard at countless conferences over the years, European will and determination would do the trick.
As a non-European, I was told (sometimes politely, sometimes less so) that I could not possible understand that.
Well, the results are now visible, and even non-Europeans can grasp what has happened.
European institutions' legitimacy is down, and neo-fascist movements are up.
Anti-immigrant prejudices and clichés about tight-fisted northerners and lazy southerners proliferate.
Even proper newspapers are not above depicting German politicians in lederhosen and Hitlerian moustaches.
There may well be a worse outcome for the project of building an integrated and tolerant Europe, but I have trouble imagining it.
It did not have to be this way.
Monetary union was always a risky bet, but it did not necessarily have to produce mass unemployment (more than half of all young people in Greece and Spain do not have a job).
A significant part of the problem reflects the eurozone's flawed design, and that failure, too, is political.
Yes, many of Greece's troubles were of its own making.
Pension benefits have been widely abused, tax collection is a mess, and (aside from beautiful beaches) the country offers few goods and services that the rest of the world wants to buy.
But the depression – now a half-decade old – also has external causes.
Other European countries are not just buying too little from Greece; they are buying too little everywhere.
As Martin Wolf of the Financial Times never tires of pointing out, there is a massive imbalance in Europe, and it is not the one you might think.
Since the current crisis erupted, the eurozone's current account has gone from a small deficit to a surplus of nearly 2.5% of GDP.
As countries like Greece have cut their expenditures, others, like Germany, have not expanded theirs.
Northern Europeans are proud of living within their means – never mind that in doing so they are helping to sustain a regional crisis.
This kind of problem already worried John Maynard Keynes at the time of the post-World War II Bretton Woods negotiations.
Outsiders can force a country to spend less by refusing to lend to it.
But how do you force a country or group of countries to spend more?
The eurozone does not have an answer for this inherently political conundrum, and therein lies one of its fundamental flaws.
Nor does the eurozone have the automatic fiscal shock absorbers that – as is widely understood by now – are essential to stabilize incomes across the union.
When the price of oil drops and Texas and Oklahoma fall into recession, money flows their way on a moment's notice and without any political vitriol.
But such a transfer union will not happen as long as a single northern European citizen is left standing.
So the eurozone will be forever plagued by economic imbalances and the political tensions that inevitably accompany them.
And, speaking of political tensions, Greece's negotiations with the EU broke new ground.
The new Syriza government caved after barely two weeks, when confronted with the ultimate nuclear threat: misbehave and the European Central Bank will stop funding your banks.
Not even finance ministers in leather jackets are willing to countenance a bank run and the financial chaos that follows.
Independent central banks are a great thing, and ECB President Mario Draghi is a great central banker.
But that independence is meant to apply to monetary policy (jacking up interest rates if necessary, however unpopular it may be) and not to fiscal policy (forcing a country to cut expenditures and raise taxes to pay outstanding debt).
Did anyone say democratic deficit?
Of course, none of this means that Greece's exit from the eurozone would be desirable.
As the old joke goes, if you want to go there, I wouldn't start here.
But here – in the monetary union – is where Greece finds itself, and leaving in a lurch without a plan B would be disastrous.
Bad economics easily turns into bad politics.
Owing to its flawed design, the common currency now threatens to abort the very project of political union that it was meant to advance.
Now that would be a Greek tragedy.
Put Up or Shut Up
NEW YORK – In public policy, peace talks, election campaigns, or corporate strategy, laying out intentions, promises, and commitments is never enough.
It is merely a first step toward a desired end – and entirely meaningless unless the second, third, and all subsequent necessary steps are taken.
Moreover, taking the first step starts the clock on others' trust and confidence that the next steps will in fact be taken, or else risks creating the false impression that the failure to achieve a particular goal reflects mistaken (or irrelevant) intentions, not inadequate execution.
We can see examples of this virtually everywhere we look.
Consider the European Central Bank's announcement in January that it would implement quantitative easing.
At the time, many leaders seemed to think that the ECB's move would be enough: Announcement made, money printed, economies back on track.
Unfortunately, that is not how monetary policy works: QE will not be enough, and no one should be naive about that.
In order to get economies back on track, QE is a useful step, but only as part of a larger package of measures.
In the absence of other economic reforms, QE on its own cannot effect the changes needed to kick-start growth.
And if the reforms are not implemented and growth fails to materialize, politicians are likely to blame QE, not their own failure to take all the other steps that must follow it on the path of economic recovery.
Now consider free speech.
Following the massacre at the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in Paris last month, world leaders dashed to the scene, locked arms, and marched in support of freedom of expression as a bedrock principle of civilized societies.
The natural next step for many of them should have been to return home and immediately implement that principle. Instead, they returned home.
True, Egypt's military regime – whose foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, raised eyebrows when he appeared near the head of the march in Paris – released the Al Jazeera journalist Peter Greste from prison, and has since freed two other journalists, Mohamed Fahmy and Baher Mohamed, on bail.
But where is the regime's renunciation of the authority to have imprisoned them in the first place?
In another arena, peace negotiations, the recent ceasefire agreement in Ukraine is but the latest attempt to end the war between the country's government and Russian-backed separatists that has been raging for much of the past year in the eastern Donbas region.
Throughout the fighting, attempts to stop the killing have come and gone, and the war's innocent victims – not to mention much of the international community – have grown weary and cynical.
The most effective peace agreements are part and parcel of a peace process.
The first step – signing the agreement – represents the parties' commitment to take the necessary subsequent steps.
Everyone walks away knowing exactly what they are supposed to do, what to expect others to do, and what the consequences will be if they do not.
When agreements fail, it is usually not because of what they contain, but because of what is missing, or because of what the signatories do despite what they have agreed.
A roadmap to peace is useful only if everyone follows it.
Otherwise, the goal is lost.
Election campaigns are the example par excellence of the phenomenon, and the world is now entering another “Season of the First Step."
At least seven general elections will be held in European Union member countries this year (and France will hold regional elections in March).
Greece has already voted (electing a government that so far seems unable to move beyond intentions and commitments), and the coming months will bring elections in Estonia, Finland, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Portugal, Poland, and Spain.
Add to this the US presidential election next year – preceded by a campaign that has already started – and we can expect a lot of promises floating around.
As voters in these countries are inundated with good intentions, ringing assurances, and solemn commitments, they will expect parties and candidates to follow through if they are elected.
Certainly, parties and candidates attempt to persuade voters on the basis of their track records (and by impugning their opponents' track records).
If they do not follow through on their intentions, promises, and commitments, access to information and instant communication is such that empty promises simply will no longer persuade most people.
Companies campaign, too.
They send their leaders before law-making bodies to express contrition for grave malfeasance and promise future good behavior.
And yet the headlines are as filled as ever with stories of unethical, if not outright criminal, corporate behavior.
Unfortunately, too many corporate leaders persist in viewing the world as “us" versus “them," rather than attempting to understand why, in the absence of vigorous action, no one trusts them.
Beginnings are vital; but they are just that.
There is no easy solution for the eurozone economy, for Greece, for Ukraine, or for any of the other major challenges we face today.
But unless protagonists are sure that announcements, campaign promises, and peace agreements will give rise to clear, purposeful action, they should think twice before opening their mouths.
Sustaining the Unsustainable Eurozone
ATHENS – When the eurozone was established, its creators envisioned gradual progress toward an “optimal currency area,” characterized by fiscal integration, the free movement of labor, and political union.
But this process has not occurred, and, as the interminable Greek crisis has shown, the eurozone remains rife with structural weaknesses and extremely vulnerable to internal shocks.
This is clearly not sustainable.
Despite efforts to promote fiscal-policy coordination, eurozone members’ budgets still fall under the purview of separate national authorities, and northern Europeans continue to oppose transfers from more to less prosperous countries beyond the very limited allowance of the European Union’s regional funds.
Moreover, labor mobility is severely constrained by linguistic and cultural barriers, as well as administrative bottlenecks.
And “ever-closer” political union has ceased to attract public support – if it ever did – and is thus not feasible today.
A growing number of commentators – and no longer only in the Anglo-Saxon world – question the monetary union’s viability.
Some encourage Greece to exit the eurozone, believing that a more restricted and homogeneous currency union would be stronger and easier to unite.
Others consider a Greek exit to be just the start of the inevitable unraveling of a scheme that does not serve the purpose for which it was created.
The eurozone has so far managed to prove the doomsayers wrong.
By sheer force of political will, compromise after compromise has been reached, thereby sustaining a historic project that is not, in its current state, sustainable.
The need to maintain this commitment to European unity, and overcome the economic difficulties that arise, is reinforced by new geopolitical challenges.
Most notably, Russia’s perceived ambition of recapturing its Soviet-era influence is challenging the rules-based order that was established after World War II, and a surge in religious and political extremism is threatening democratic and liberal values.
But the economic difficulties are bound to continue, fostering doubts about the currency union’s future – doubts that could become self-fulfilling by undermining the euro’s ability to function properly.
Already, economic pressures have fueled anti-European sentiment in Spain, Italy, and even France; if allowed to continue, such sentiment could culminate in secession, with devastating consequences for the eurozone and Europe as a whole.
The first step in such a process would probably be the eurozone’s division into sub-areas, comprising countries of relatively equal resilience.
As it becomes increasingly difficult to pursue coherent fiscal and monetary policies, the risk of the eurozone’s complete dissolution would grow.
Greece’s exit could shorten this timeline considerably.
Though such a scenario was inconceivable five years ago, when the Greek crisis first erupted, the term “Grexit” entered the European lexicon soon after, when the crisis reached a new peak.
But European leaders seemed to recognize the implications of allowing a country – even small, crisis-stricken Greece – to exit the eurozone.
That is why, this year, a series of Eurogroup meetings were held with the avowed purpose of averting such an outcome.
The problem is that Europeans have become so accustomed to muddling through that long-term solutions seem all but impossible.
Indeed, in recent years, eurozone authorities have introduced several policies for fighting financial crises – including government-backed rescue funds, a partial banking union, tougher fiscal controls, and a role for the European Central Bank as lender of last resort.
But most of these policies – with the possible exception of the banking union – are aimed at managing default risk, not eliminating this risk’s root causes.
It is time to recover the capacity, displayed by the EU’s founders, to look ahead and pursue a dream of a better future.
Specifically, eurozone leaders must introduce a mechanism for fiscal transfers from stronger to weaker economies.
In a currency union, individual economies cannot alter their exchange rates to account for changes in relative competitiveness.
The resulting price stickiness tends to delay macroeconomic stabilization and structural adjustment, leading to rising debt and unemployment in weaker economies.
Without free labor mobility, fiscal transfers are the eurozone’s only option to ease debt repayment and, by stimulating economic activity, boost employment.
Establishing such a mechanism will not be easy, as it requires a resource that is in short supply in Europe today: trust.
Indeed, the north and south have struggled to overcome cultural differences and unequal economic conditions, preventing them from viewing the situation from each other’s perspective.
Binding the union closer together could prove critical to building such trust.
One strategy that combines rationality with the gradualism needed to overcome political resistance would be to increase the EU budget steadily, so that it can ultimately play a macroeconomic role, promoting stability and reinforcing cohesion within the eurozone.
It is a tough sell, but also a vital one.
Moving on From the Euro
SAINT-PIERRE-D’ENTREMONT, FRANCE – European Monetary Union was never a good idea.
I remember my surprise when, as a young assistant professor, I realized that I was opposed to the Maastricht Treaty.
I believed then – and still do – that European integration is a very good thing.
But the textbook economics I was teaching showed how damaging EMU could be in the absence of European fiscal and political union.
Nothing that has happened since has convinced me that the textbook was excessively pessimistic.
On the contrary: it was far too optimistic.
Life is strewn with banana skins, and when you step on one you need to be able to adjust.
But the monetary union itself turned out to be a gigantic banana skin, inducing capital flows that pushed up costs around the European periphery.
And adjustment – that is, currency devaluation – was not an option.
Furthermore, most textbooks of the time ignored the financial sector; thus, they ignored the fact that capital flows to the periphery would be channeled via banks, and that when the capital stopped flowing, bank crises would strain peripheral members’ public finances.
This, in turn, would further erode banks’ balance sheets and constrain credit creation – the sovereign-bank doom loop that we have heard so much about in recent years.
And no textbooks predicted that European cooperation would impose pro-cyclical austerity on crisis-struck countries, creating depressions that in some cases have rivaled those of the 1930s.
It has been obvious for some years that the “actually existing EMU” has been a costly failure, both economically and politically.
Trust in European institutions has collapsed, and political parties skeptical not just of the euro, but of the entire European project, are on the rise.
And yet most economists, even those who were never keen on EMU in the first place, have been reluctant to make the argument that the time has come to abandon a failed experiment.
A famous article by Barry Eichengreen pointed out that an anticipated EMU breakup would lead to the “mother of all financial crises.”
It is hard to disagree with him.
That is why economists of all stripes, whether or not they supported the introduction of the common currency, have spent the last five years developing and promoting a package of institutional reforms and policy changes that would make the eurozone less dysfunctional.
In the short run, the eurozone needs much looser monetary and fiscal policy.
It also needs a higher inflation target (to reduce the need for nominal wage and price reductions); debt relief, where appropriate; a proper banking union with an adequate, centralized fiscal backstop; and a “safe” eurozone asset that national banks could hold, thereby breaking the sovereign-bank doom loop.
Unfortunately, economists have not argued strongly for a proper fiscal union.
Even those who consider it economically necessary censor themselves, because they believe it to be politically impossible.
The problem is that silence has narrowed the frontier of political possibility even further, so that more modest proposals have fallen by the wayside as well.
Five years on, the eurozone still lacks a proper banking union, or even, as Greece demonstrated, a proper lender of last resort.
Moreover, a higher inflation target remains unthinkable, and the German government argues that defaults on sovereign debt are illegal within the eurozone.
Pro-cyclical fiscal adjustment is still the order of the day.
The European Central Bank’s belated embrace of quantitative easing was a welcome step forward, but policymakers’ enormously destructive decision to shut down a member state’s banking system – for what appears to be political reasons – is a far larger step backward.
And no one is talking about real fiscal and political union, even though no one can imagine European Monetary Union surviving under the status quo.
Meanwhile, the political damage is ongoing: not all protest parties are as pro-European as Greece’s ruling Syriza.
And domestic politics is being distorted by the inability of centrist politicians to address voters’ concerns about the eurozone’s economic policies and its democratic deficit.
To do so, it is feared, would give implicit support to the skeptics, which is taboo.
Thus, in France, Socialist President François Hollande channels Jean-Baptiste Say, arguing that supply creates its own demand, while the far-right National Front’s Marine Le Pen gets to quote Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz approvingly.
No wonder that working-class voters are turning to her party.
A victory for the National Front in 2017 or 2022, which is no longer unthinkable, would destroy the European project.
Citizens of smaller eurozone member states will have noted the brutal way the ECB was politicized to achieve Germany’s goals in Greece, and the conclusion that the eurozone is a dangerous “union” for small countries will seem inescapable.
If centrist parties remain on the sidelines, rather than protesting what has happened, the political extremists will gain further valuable territory.
As for economists like me, who have balked at advocating an end to the failed euro experiment and favored reform, perhaps it is time to admit defeat and move on.
If only anti-Europeans oppose EMU, the EU baby could end up being thrown out with the euro bathwater.
An end to the euro would indeed provoke an immense crisis.
But ask yourself this: Do you really think the euro will be around in its present form a century from now?
If not it will end, and the timing of that end will never be “right.”
Better, then, to get on with it before more damage is done.
The Eurozone’s False Recovery
LONDON – At first glance, the eurozone economy seems like it might finally be on the mend.
Stock markets are rallying. Consumer confidence has picked up.
Lower oil prices, a cheaper euro, and quantitative easing by the European Central Bank are all expected to boost growth.
ECB President Mario Draghi claims that “a sustained recovery is taking hold,” while policymakers in Berlin and Brussels latch onto signs of life in Spain and Ireland as proof that their bitter prescription of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms worked as advertised.
On closer inspection, however, it becomes clear that the improvement is modest, probably temporary, and not the result of the policies promoted by Germany.
True, according to some estimates, the eurozone economy may now be growing at an annual rate of 1.6%, up from 0.9% in the year to the fourth quarter of 2014.
But that is far slower than in the United States and Britain.
With the eurozone economy 2% smaller than it was seven years ago, “recovery” does not feel like the right word – especially as the relief is unlikely to last.
For starters, the one-off boost from lower oil prices is already being unwound.
After dropping by more than half between mid-June and mid-January, oil prices in euros have since bounced back by a third, partly owing to the euro’s sharp depreciation, which is making imports generally more expensive.
The effect of that on households’ budgets and companies’ costs is hardly cause for celebration.
Policymakers are counting on a more competitive currency to stimulate growth. But they are likely to be disappointed.
With eurozone exports increasingly reliant on global supply chains, a cheaper currency provides less of a boost than before.
Exporters may also choose to pocket any gains, rather than seek to expand market share.
In 2014, exports from the eurozone amounted to nearly €2 trillion ($2.6 trillion at the time) – more than those from China.
Given patchy global demand, rapid export growth will be difficult to achieve.
In any case, with exports accounting for only one-fifth of the eurozone’s €10 trillion economy, they are unlikely to spur a strong recovery while domestic demand remains weak.
According to the ECB’s model, the euro’s 10% depreciation over the past year (in real, trade-weighted terms) may lift growth this year by a mere 0.2%.
The benefits of quantitative easing are also likely to prove ephemeral.
The decline in governments’ borrowing costs is unlikely to boost growth much, as European Union rules preclude fiscal expansion.
Overall, the eurozone’s fiscal stance is set to be broadly neutral this year, according to the European Commission, albeit with further squeezes in Ireland, France, and Italy.
Quantitative easing does improve funding conditions for the few eurozone companies large enough to tap capital markets.
But, even in the US and Britain, where capital markets play a much larger role in corporate finance, asset-price inflation did little to encourage consumers to spend or companies to invest.
On the contrary, investment in a weak real economy has been far less attractive than the prospect of earning easy money from financial engineering.
Most businesses in the eurozone rely on bank finance, and while credit conditions have improved somewhat, lending is flat (and continues to fall in southern Europe).
As long as zombie banks are weighed down with bad loans, that is unlikely to change much.
Nor can the small uptick in the eurozone’s growth, much less the relatively rapid expansion in Spain and Ireland, be attributed to the German recipe of fiscal consolidation and measures to increase export competitiveness.
Indeed, nothing could be further from the truth.
Spain is hardly an example of a successful fiscal adjustment.
On the contrary, its recovery coincided with the easing of the extreme austerity imposed in 2011-13, which has encouraged households to spend more, despite stagnant wages. Even so, its economy remains 5.7% smaller than it was seven years ago.
A whopping 23.7% of Spaniards – and one in two young people – are unemployed, while many more have dropped out of the labor force altogether.
Meanwhile, Spain’s budget deficit was 5.7% of GDP last year, the highest in the EU.
Its rapidly rising public debt is set to top 100% of GDP this year.
As the country heads toward an election later this year, the European Commission has sanctioned the widening of its structural deficit.
Rather than flourishing as a result of austerity, Spain is in many ways getting a free pass.
Nor does Ireland – the fastest-growing EU economy last year – confirm the appropriateness of Germany’s policy prescriptions.
Ireland, after all, is a tiny, highly open economy whose booming export sector is benefiting from existing strengths – including low business taxes, a skilled workforce, and a flexible economy – and favorable external conditions, especially the strong recovery in its main markets, the US and Britain.
Even so, the economy is smaller than it was before the crisis, the unemployment rate is in double digits, domestic demand remains depressed, and the €64 billion bank-bailout bill unjustly imposed on 2.2 million Irish taxpayers still looms large.
The eurozone economy is set to do a bit better in 2015, but not because of the policies demanded by Germany.
And it is likely to be a temporary bounce, not the start of a sustained recovery.
To overcome its balance-sheet recession, the eurozone needs to clean up its banks, reduce the crushing overhang of mostly private debt, redress the huge shortfall in investment, eliminate barriers to enterprise, and tackle the deflationary drag of German mercantilism.
And that is why the eurozone will not escape its problems anytime soon.
Signs of Life in the Eurozone
NEW YORK – The latest economic data from the eurozone suggest that recovery may be at hand.
What is driving the upturn?
What obstacles does it face?
And what can be done to sustain it?
The immediate causes of recovery are not difficult to discern.
Last year, the eurozone was on the verge of a double-dip recession.
When it recently fell into technical deflation, the European Central Bank finally pulled the trigger on aggressive easing and launched a combination of quantitative easing (including sovereign-bond purchases) and negative policy rates.
The financial impact was immediate: in anticipation of monetary easing, and after it began, the euro fell sharply, bond yields in the eurozone’s core and periphery fell to very low levels, and stock markets started to rally robustly.
This, together with the sharp fall in oil prices, boosted economic growth.
Other factors are helping, too.
The ECB’s easing of credit is effectively subsidizing bank lending.
The fiscal drag from austerity will be smaller this year, as the European Commission becomes more lenient.
And the start of a banking union also helps; following the latest stress tests and asset quality review, banks have greater liquidity and more capital to lend to the private sector.
As a result of these factors, eurozone growth has resumed, and eurozone equities have recently outperformed US equities.
The weakening of the euro and the ECB’s aggressive measures may even stop the deflationary pressure later this year.
But a more robust and sustained recovery still faces many challenges.
For starters, political risks could derail progress.
Greece, one hopes, will remain in the eurozone.
But the difficult negotiations between the Syriza-led government and the “troika” (the ECB, the European Commission, and the International Monetary Fund) could cause an unintended accident – call it a “Grexident” – if an agreement on funding the country is not reached in the next few weeks.
Moreover, Podemos, a leftist party in the Syriza mold, could come to power in Spain.
Populist anti-euro parties of the right and the left are challenging Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi.
And Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Front is polling well ahead of the 2017 French presidential election.
Slow job creation and income growth may continue to fuel the populist backlash against austerity and reform.
Even the ECB estimates that the eurozone unemployment rate will still be 9.9% in 2017 – well above the 7.2% average prior to the global financial crisis seven years ago.
And austerity and reform fatigue in the eurozone periphery has been matched by bailout fatigue in the core, boosting support for a range of anti-euro parties in Germany, the Netherlands, and Finland.
A second obstacle to sustained recovery is the eurozone’s bad neighborhood.
Russia is becoming more assertive and aggressive in Ukraine, the Baltics, and even the Balkans (while sanctions against Russia have hurt many European economies).
And the Middle East is burning just next door: the recent terrorist attacks in Paris and Copenhagen, and against foreign tourists in Tunisia, remind Europe that hundreds of homegrown jihadists could return from fighting in Syria, Iraq, or elsewhere and launch further attacks.
Third, while ECB policies keep borrowing costs lower, private and public debt in the periphery countries, as a share of GDP, is high and still rising, because the denominator of the debt ratio – nominal GDP – is barely increasing.
Thus, debt sustainability will remain an issue for these economies over the medium term.
Fourth, fiscal policy remains contractionary, because Germany continues to reject a growing chorus of advice that it should undertake a short-term stimulus.
Thus, higher German spending will not offset the impact of additional austerity in the periphery or the significant shortfall expected for the three-year, €300 billion ($325 billion) investment plan unveiled by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker.
Fifth, structural reforms are still occurring at a snail’s pace, holding back potential growth.
And, while structural reforms are necessary, some measures – for example, labor-market liberalization and pension overhauls – may boost the eurozone’s savings rate and thus weaken aggregate demand further (as occurred in Germany following its structural reforms a decade ago).
Finally, Europe’s monetary union remains incomplete.
Its long-term viability requires the development over time of a full banking union, fiscal union, economic union, and eventually political union.
But the process of further European integration has stalled.
If the eurozone unemployment rate is still too high by the end of 2016, annual inflation remains well below the ECB’s 2% target, and fiscal policies and structural reforms exert a short-term drag on economic growth, the only game in town may be continued quantitative easing.
But the ongoing weakness of the euro – fed by such policies – is fueling growth in the eurozone’s current-account surplus.
Indeed, as the euro weakens, the periphery countries’ external accounts have swung from deficit to balance and, increasingly, to surplus.
Germany and the eurozone core were already running large surpluses; in the absence of policies to boost domestic demand, those surpluses have simply risen further.
Thus, the ECB’s monetary policy will take on an increasingly beggar-thy-neighbor cast, leading to trade and currency tensions with the United States and other trade partners.
To avoid this outcome, Germany needs to adopt policies – fiscal stimulus, higher spending on infrastructure and public investment, and more rapid wage growth – that would boost domestic spending and reduce the country’s external surplus.
Unless, and until, Germany moves in this direction, no one should bet the farm on a more robust and sustained eurozone recovery.
Europe’s Misguided Investment Mania
BRUSSELS – The mantra in Brussels and throughout Europe nowadays is that investment holds the key to economic recovery.
The lynchpin of the new European Commission’s economic strategy is its recently unveiled plan to increase investment by €315 billion ($390 billion) over the next three years.
But the Commission’s proposal is misguided, both in terms of its emphasis on investment and its proposed financing structure.
The Commission’s plan, the signature initiative of President Jean-Claude Juncker at the start of his term, comes as no surprise.
With the eurozone stuck in a seemingly never-ending recession, the idea that growth-enhancing investment is crucial for a sustainable recovery has become deeply entrenched in public discourse.
The underlying assumption is that more investment is always better, because it increases the capital stock and thus output.
This is not necessarily the case in Europe at the moment.
European Union authorities (and many others) argue that Europe – particularly the eurozone – suffers from an “investment gap.”
The smoking gun is supposedly the €400 billion annual shortfall relative to 2007.
But the comparison is misleading, because 2007 was the peak of a credit bubble that led to a lot of wasteful investment.
The Commission recognizes this in its supporting documentation for the Juncker package, in which it argues that the pre-credit-boom years should be used as the benchmark for desirable investment levels today.
According to that measure, the investment gap is only half as large.
Unfortunately, even the pre-boom years are not a good guide for today’s European economy, because something fundamental has changed more quickly than is typically recognized: Europe’s demographic trends.
The eurozone’s working-age population had been growing until 2005, but it will fall from 2015 onward.
Given that productivity has not been picking up, fewer workers mean significantly lower potential growth rates.
And a lower growth rate implies that less investment is needed to maintain the capital/output ratio.
If the eurozone maintained its investment rate at the level of the pre-boom years, there would soon be much more capital relative to the size of the economy.
One might be tempted to say: So what?
More capital is always good.
An ever-increasing capital stock relative to output, however, means ever-lower returns to capital and thus ever more non-performing loans in the banking sector over time.
Given the weak state of Europe’s banking system, accumulating too much capital is not a luxury that the EU can afford.
Even setting aside the question of whether more is always better, what can the Juncker plan do to have a positive short-run impact on aggregate investment?
Academic research on the determinants of investment has generally concluded that the key variable is growth (or expectations of growth), and that interest rates play at most a secondary role.
One immediate implication of this, of course, is that monetary policy is unlikely to have a strong impact on investment.
Indeed, the market signal is clear: At present, there is no shortage of funding available in most of the EU.
The countries on the eurozone periphery, where credit might still be scarce, account for less than one-quarter of Europe’s economy.
So a lack of funding is not the reason that investment remains weak.
The Juncker plan is supposed to unlock, with €21 billion in EU funding, projects worth 15 times as much (€315 billion).
That sounds far-fetched.
Europe’s banking system already has more than €1 trillion in capital.
The addition of €21 billion, in the form of guarantees from the EU budget, is unlikely to have a significant impact on banks’ willingness to finance investment.
The Juncker plan targets, in particular, infrastructure projects, which are often riskier than other investments.
But these risks usually are not financial; they reflect potential political and regulatory barriers at the national level.
These problems cannot be solved by a guarantee from the EU budget (which in any case could not be larger than 1/15th of the value of the project).
The reason why there still is no good interconnection between the Spanish and French power grids is not a lack of financing, but the unwillingness of monopolies on both sides of the border to open their markets.
Many rail and road projects are also proceeding slowly, owing to local opposition, not a lack of financing.
These are the real barriers to infrastructure investment in Europe.
Large European companies can easily obtain financing at near-zero interest rates.
Calling for more investment is superficially always attractive.
But there are fundamental reasons to believe that the eurozone’s investment rate will remain permanently depressed.
The often-invoked investment gap is mostly a result of wishful thinking, and the remaining barriers to investment have little to do with a lack of financing.
Economic performance in the United States and the United Kingdom holds an important lesson for the eurozone.
Both economies’ recoveries have been driven largely by a pickup in consumption on the back of stronger household balance sheets, especially in the US.
The revival of investment has followed the resumption of consumption growth.
If European policymakers are serious about economic recovery, they should focus on consumption, not investment.
Optimizing the Eurozone
TOKYO – The eurozone is facing a bleak economic outlook, with growth remaining stagnant and the threat of deflation looming large.
The economist Martin Feldstein, who was skeptical of the initiative from the start, now calls it a “failure.”
Is Feldstein right, or could the eurozone become the “optimal currency area” that its creators believed it to be?
Answering this question requires, first and foremost, an understanding of the costs and benefits of various exchange-rate systems.
The International Monetary Fund was established 70 years ago to manage an “adjustable peg” system – a hybrid system in which exchange rates were usually fixed to the US dollar, but could be adjusted occasionally to improve the country’s competitive position in export markets.
For the first few decades, this system leaned heavily toward “peg,” owing to the US dollar’s direct convertibility to gold.
This brought significant stability to the global monetary order, following the competitive devaluations of the 1930s that some economists considered damaging.
But the fixed exchange-rate system also undermined the United States’ capacity to manage its balance of payments.
That is why, in 1971, President Richard Nixon unilaterally abandoned the dollar’s convertibility to gold, leaving major currencies’ exchange rates to float against one another.
Such a system provides important advantages – most notably, it enables the US Federal Reserve to pump money into the economy to prevent or halt a recession.
But it also carries serious risks, exemplified in the trade imbalances that emerged in the 1980s.
From 1980 to 1985, the US dollar appreciated by 50% against the currencies of Japan, West Germany, France, and the United Kingdom; America’s current-account deficit was approaching 3% of GDP; and its top four competitors had massive surpluses and negative GDP growth.
In order to correct these imbalances, the five countries signed the Plaza Accord, in which they agreed to intervene in currency markets to devalue the dollar.
It is against this background that the euro was born, with the goal of boosting European economies by expanding their “local” market, lowering transaction costs, and facilitating the flow of information.
In 1991, the loss of monetary-policy independence seemed like a worthwhile trade-off for Europe’s economies; today, it seems that it may have been a mistake.
In fact, America’s experience in the 1960s should have warned the eurozone’s creators that tying national monetary authorities’ hands might not be such a good idea.
That would not be the case if the eurozone operated according to Robert Mundell’s vision of an optimal currency area, with labor and capital adjustments replacing exchange-rate adjustment, and shocks being homogeneous (rather than asymmetric).
Moreover, Germany’s experience with reunification suggests that political union is integral to such a union’s success.
The eurozone’s performance has not met any of these criteria.
Most notably, eurozone countries have faced powerful asymmetric shocks, to which their lack of independent monetary-policy instruments made it virtually impossible to respond.
As a result, they have struggled with recurring economic crisis.
To understand the corrective power of monetary policy, one need only consider Japan’s recent progress in escaping from decades of stagflation.
Monetary expansion was one of the three key features of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic strategy – an approach that could have been implemented years ago to halt the yen’s sharp appreciation.
The problem was that Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda’s predecessors behaved as if they were bound by a fixed exchange-rate regime.
Unlike in Japan, eurozone countries’ failure to implement bold monetary-policy measures is not a choice.
The only available monetary-policy tool is to change collectively the euro’s value relative to outside currencies.
But use of this tool is constrained by the wide discrepancies among individual countries’ appetite for inflationary or deflationary price levels.
To be sure, European economic integration – a process that, one might say, culminated with the eurozone’s establishment – also brought clear political benefits.
As Robert Schuman promised when he conceived the idea of a European Community, integration has prevented the recurrence of war between Germany and France.
But whether monetary union on such a large scale was necessary to achieve this goal is dubious.
In any case, the eurozone exists – and, at this point, it would be exceedingly difficult to dismantle it fully.
Given this, the goal today should be to move toward an optimal currency area.
For starters, Europe’s leaders must recognize that the eurozone, as it is currently constituted, is larger than Europe’s optimal currency area.
Some of its member countries – certainly Greece, and probably Italy and Spain – need an independent monetary policy.
Otherwise, they will continue to go from one crisis to the next, with countries that do fall within the optimal currency area – for example, Germany and France – facing the consequences.
Once membership in the eurozone is optimized, the next step will be to ensure continued progress toward political consolidation.
The result will be a stronger, more efficient eurozone – one in which the benefits really do outweigh the costs.
Can the Euro Be Repaired?
PARIS – When Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister, recently tabled the option of a Greek exit from the euro, he wanted to signal that no member could abstain from the monetary union’s strict disciplines.
In fact, his initiative triggered a much broader discussion of the principles underpinning the euro, its governance, and the very rationale for its existence.
Only a fortnight before Schäuble’s proposal, Europe’s leaders had barely paid attention to a report on the euro’s future prepared by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker and his colleagues from the other European Union institutions.
But the new dispute over Greece has convinced many policymakers of the necessity to return to the drawing board.
Meanwhile, citizens wonder why they share this currency, whether it makes sense, and if agreement can be reached on its future.
For currencies, as for countries, founding myths matter.
The conventional wisdom is that the euro was the political price Germany paid for French acquiescence to its reunification.
In fact, German reunification only provided the final impetus for a project conceived in the 1980s to resolve a longstanding dilemma.
European governments were both strongly averse to floating exchange rates, which they assumed would be incompatible with a single market, and unwilling to perpetuate a Bundesbank-dominated monetary regime.
A truly European currency built on German principles appeared to be the best way forward.
In retrospect, German reunification was more a curse than a blessing.
When exchange rates were locked in 1999, Germany’s was overvalued, and its economy was struggling; France’s was undervalued, and its economy was booming.
During the ensuing decade, imbalances slowly grew between a resurgent Germany and countries where low interest rates had triggered credit booms.
And when the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, conditions were ripe for a perfect storm.
No one can say how Europe would have evolved without the euro.
Would the fixed-exchange-rate system have endured or collapsed?
Would the Deutschemark have been overvalued?
Would states have reintroduced trade barriers, ending the single market?
Would a real-estate bubble have developed in Spain?
Would governments have reformed more or less?
Establishing a counterfactual baseline against which the euro’s impact could be assessed is impossible.
But that is no excuse for complacency.
Over the last 15 years, the eurozone’s economic performance has been disappointing, and its policy system must answer for this.
What really matters is whether a common European currency still makes sense for the future.
This question is often evaded, because the cost of exiting is deemed too high to consider it (and could be higher still if the break-up takes place in a crisis and sharpens reciprocal acrimony among participating countries).
Moreover, pulling the plug on the euro could unleash the dark forces of nationalism and protectionism.
But, as Oxford’s Kevin O’Rourke recently argued, this is hardly a sufficient argument.
It is the logical equivalent of advising a couple to remain married because divorce is too expensive.
So does the euro still make sense?
It was expected to deliver three economic benefits.
Monetary union, it was assumed, would foster economic integration, bolstering Europe’s long-term growth.
Instead, intra-eurozone trade and investment have increased only modestly, and growth potential has actually weakened.
This is partly because national governments, rather than building on currency unification to turn the eurozone into an economic powerhouse, tried to hang onto their remaining power.
This was perhaps logical politically, but it made no economic sense: Europe’s huge domestic market is one of its main assets, and opportunities to strengthen it should not be squandered.
Second, it was hoped that the euro would become a major international currency (particularly given how few countries are equipped with the necessary legal, market, and policy institutions).
And, according to recent ECB statistics, this hope has been largely fulfilled.
With international use of the euro behind only the US dollar, this achievement can help Europe to continue shaping the global economic order, rather than sliding into irrelevance.
Third, it was (somewhat naively) believed that the institutions underpinning the euro would improve the overall quality of economic policy, as though Europe-wide policies would automatically be better than national ones.
The acid test came in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis: because it overestimated the fiscal dimension of the crisis and underestimated its financial dimension, the eurozone performed worse than the United States and the United Kingdom.
If the euro is to create prosperity, further reforms of the policy system are therefore needed.
But an agenda can be designed and implemented only if there is a broad consensus on the nature of the problem.
And, as the ongoing dispute over Greece illustrates, agreement remains elusive: Participating countries have developed contradictory analyses of the causes of the debt crisis, from which they derive contradictory prescriptions.
Richard Cooper of Harvard University once observed that in the early days of international public health cooperation, the fight against global diseases was hampered by countries’ adherence to different models of contagion.
They all favored joint action, but they could not agree on a plan, because they disagreed on how epidemics crossed borders.
That is the problem the eurozone faces today.
Fortunately, it is not unsolvable, as significant reforms like the creation of the European Stability Mechanism and the launch of banking union show.
Disagreements also did not prevent the ECB from acting boldly, which illustrates that the governance of institutions does matter.
But the fact that reforms and actions were undertaken only lately, and under the pressure of acute crisis, is a sobering reminder of the difficulty of reaching consensus.
Europe cannot afford to procrastinate and pretend.
Either the eurozone’s members find agreement on an agenda of governance and political reforms that will turn the currency union into an engine of prosperity, or they will stumble repeatedly from dispute to crisis, until citizens lose patience or markets lose trust.
Clarity is a prerequisite of serious discussion and ambitious reform.
Each of the major participants now has an obligation to define what it regards as indispensable, what it considers unacceptable, and what it is ready to give in exchange for what it wants.
A New Approach to Eurozone Sovereign Debt
ATHENS – Greece’s public debt has been put back on Europe’s agenda.
Indeed, this was perhaps the Greek government’s main achievement during its agonizing five-month standoff with its creditors.
After years of “extend and pretend,” today almost everyone agrees that debt restructuring is essential.
Most important, this is true not just for Greece.
In February, I presented to the Eurogroup (which convenes the finance ministers of eurozone member states) a menu of options, including GDP-indexed bonds, which Charles Goodhart recently endorsed in the Financial Times, perpetual bonds to settle the legacy debt on the European Central Bank’s books, and so forth.
One hopes that the ground is now better prepared for such proposals to take root, before Greece sinks further into the quicksand of insolvency.
But the more interesting question is what all of this means for the eurozone as a whole.
The prescient calls from Joseph Stiglitz, Jeffrey Sachs, and many others for a different approach to sovereign debt in general need to be modified to fit the particular characteristics of the eurozone’s crisis.
The eurozone is unique among currency areas: Its central bank lacks a state to support its decisions, while its member states lack a central bank to support them in difficult times.
Europe’s leaders have tried to fill this institutional lacuna with complex, non-credible rules that often fail to bind, and that, despite this failure, end up suffocating member states in need.
One such rule is the Maastricht Treaty’s cap on member states’ public debt at 60% of GDP.
Another is the treaty’s “no bailout” clause.
Most member states, including Germany, have violated the first rule, surreptitiously or not, while for several the second rule has been overwhelmed by expensive financing packages.
The problem with debt restructuring in the eurozone is that it is essential and, at the same time, inconsistent with the implicit constitution underpinning the monetary union.
When economics clashes with an institution’s rules, policymakers must either find creative ways to amend the rules or watch their creation collapse.
Here, then, is an idea (part of A Modest Proposal for Resolving the Euro Crisis, co-authored by Stuart Holland, and James K. Galbraith) aimed at re-calibrating the rules, enhancing their spirit, and addressing the underlying economic problem.
In brief, the ECB could announce tomorrow morning that, henceforth, it will undertake a debt-conversion program for any member state that wishes to participate.
The ECB will service (as opposed to purchase) a portion of every maturing government bond corresponding to the percentage of the member state’s public debt that is allowed by the Maastricht rules.
Thus, in the case of member states with debt-to-GDP ratios of, say, 120% and 90%, the ECB would service, respectively, 50% and 66.7% of every maturing government bond.
To fund these redemptions on behalf of some member states, the ECB would issue bonds in its own name, guaranteed solely by the ECB, but repaid, in full, by the member state.
Upon the issue of such an ECB bond, the ECB would simultaneously open a debit account for the member state on whose behalf it issued the bond.
The member state would then be legally obliged to make deposits into that account to cover the ECB bonds’ coupons and principal.
Moreover, the member state’s liability to the ECB would enjoy super-seniority status and be insured by the European Stability Mechanism against the risk of a hard default.
Such a debt-conversion program would offer five benefits.
For starters, unlike the ECB’s current quantitative easing, it would involve no debt monetization.
Thus, it would run no risk of inflating asset price bubbles.
Second, the program would cause a large drop in the eurozone’s aggregate interest payments.
The Maastricht-compliant part of its members’ sovereign debt would be restructured with longer maturities (equal to the maturity of the ECB bonds) and at the ultra-low interest rates that only the ECB can fetch in international capital markets.
Third, Germany’s long-term interest rates would be unaffected, because Germany would neither be guaranteeing the debt-conversion scheme nor backing the ECB’s bond issues.
Fourth, the spirit of the Maastricht rule on public debt would be reinforced, and moral hazard would be reduced.
After all, the program would boost significantly the interest-rate spread between Maastricht-compliant debt and the debt that remains in the member states’ hands (which they previously were not permitted to accumulate).
Finally, GDP-indexed bonds and other tools for dealing sensibly with unsustainable debt could be applied exclusively to member states’ debt not covered by the program and in line with international best practices for sovereign-debt management.
The obvious solution to the euro crisis would be a federal solution.
But federation has been made less, not more, likely by a crisis that tragically set one proud nation against another.
Indeed, any political union that the Eurogroup would endorse today would be disciplinarian and ineffective.
Meanwhile, the debt restructuring for which the eurozone – not just Greece – is crying out is unlikely to be politically acceptable in the current climate.
But there are ways in which debt could be sensibly restructured without any cost to taxpayers and in a manner that brings Europeans closer together.
One such step is the debt-conversion program proposed here.
Taking it would help to heal Europe’s wounds and clear the ground for the debate that the European Union needs about the kind of political union that Europeans deserve.
The Threat That Will Save Europe
BRUSSELS – For the European Union, 2015 was another year of fundamental challenges.
Two key elements of European integration – the euro and border-free travel within the Schengen Area – were placed under severe strain.
And neither is in the clear.
Nonetheless, one development in 2015 offers reason to hope that EU leaders will move beyond “muddling through” to implement bolder solutions in 2016: The threat of expulsion gained credibility.
The global economic crisis that began in 2008 exposed the deep flaws in Europe’s monetary union, though it took the near-death experience of the euro crisis of 2010-2012 to force Europe’s leaders to act, by creating a large fund to help struggling countries and establishing a banking union.
Even so, more than three years later, that union – which entails supervision by the European Central Bank and the beginnings of a fund for restructuring failing banks, but lacks a common system for deposit insurance – is far from perfect.
Despite its flaws, the banking union helped to keep financial markets calm in the first half of 2015, even as Greece’s new government, led by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, challenged a basic feature of Europe’s approach to national financial crises: that recipients of support must engage in belt-tightening.
In a July referendum, Greek voters delivered the outcome for which Tsipras campaigned, soundly rejecting the conditions – including strict austerity – which Greece’s creditors had demanded in exchange for a new bailout.
A few weeks later, everything changed.
Tsipras accepted a bailout program that was, in some ways, even tougher than the one that voters had rejected.
An overwhelming majority of voters and members of parliament supported the move.
What triggered this about-face is obvious: After the referendum, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble suggested that Greece should be offered a “holiday” from the euro – a thinly veiled warning that exclusion from the eurozone was on the table.
Clearly, the threat worked.
The potential implications of this threat are disputed.
Some interpret it to mean that the eurozone has de facto become a fixed exchange-rate system, where exit might actually be preferable for a struggling country and its more competitive partners.
If this is the case, the eurozone’s days are numbered.
It might be more accurate, however, to view this Greek episode as proof of the eurozone’s resilience, underpinned by its still-powerful allure.
Even in the face of a GDP contraction larger than that of the United States during the Great Depression of the 1930s, Greece preferred continued membership in the eurozone to a return to the drachma, which would have freed up some additional tools for regaining competitiveness and imposed asubstantial haircut on creditors.
If the latter interpretation is correct, Europe’s monetary union, though still deeply flawed, has become more cohesive.
If eurozone membership cannot be taken for granted, if countries that do not abide by the common rules can simply be kicked out, countries will try harder to hold onto it.
The problems within the Schengen Area illustrate a similar evolution.
Like the eurozone, the Schengen Area is an incomplete structure, because it abolished internal borders without creating a common mechanism for policing the external border.
Until recently, this failing did not pose an acute problem, because dictatorial regimes in the Middle East and Africa controlled the migratory pressure resulting from wars and failing economies.
But the recent surge in migration to Europe, driven largely by Syria’s intensifying civil war, has brought Schengen’s shortcomings to the fore.
By last summer, countries along the Balkan route – first Greece, then Hungary and Slovenia – buckled under the pressure of hundreds of thousands of refugees attempting to make their way to safety.