The earth is arid and dead, but there won’t be another one, nor another heaven.”
The solitude of the individual facing his faith alone, without collective illusions, and forced to do something with himself in the arid, noisy world tells us something important about the exiled world of modernity and its complex and contradictory problems.
Magris’s novel is not only an important literary achievement; it also has a deep connection to the dangers that we face now, particularly the wave of fanaticism, from Mumbai to Oslo, in the name of a holy war against the “other.”
Are all the extremists searching for a new coherence, for a lost illusion of togetherness and a new hope of resurrection?
Can we ever forget September 11, 2001, the start of a bloody century in which the mystical force of hatred and destruction has recovered its strength?
Are Osama Bin Laden’s minions, the bloody Hamas-Hezbollah battalions, or troubled loners like Timothy McVeigh, Theodore Kaczynski, and now Norway’s Anders Behring Breivik, the “heroes” of our contemporary nightmare?
Is this the “rebel” response to an overly globalized, incoherent, and ultimately disturbing reality?
If so, their barbarism demands scrutiny – in relation to both historical precedent and to our modernity – rather than merely being labeled “monstrous” (though it certainly is that).
It is also a rich and original literary achievement that challenges today’s consumerist ethic.
By renouncing simplicity, it also repudiates today’s prevailing confusion of information with literature, of facts with creativity, and best-selling products with true works of art.
The Age of Hyper-Uncertainty
BERLIN – The year 2017 will mark the 40th anniversary of the publication of John Kenneth Galbraith’s The Age of Uncertainty.
Forty years is a long time, but it is worth looking back and reminding ourselves of how much Galbraith and his readers had to be uncertain about.
In 1977, as Galbraith was writing, the world was still reeling from the effects of the first OPEC oil-price shock and wondering whether another one was in the pipeline (as it were).
The United States was confronting slowing growth and accelerating inflation, or stagflation, a novel problem that raised questions about policymakers’ competence and the adequacy of their economic models.
Meanwhile, efforts to rebuild the Bretton Woods international monetary system had collapsed, casting a shadow over prospects for international trade and global economic growth.
For all these reasons, the golden age of stability and predictability that was the third quarter of the twentieth century seemed to have abruptly drawn to a close, to be succeeded by a period of greatly heightened uncertainty.
That’s how things looked in 1977, anyway.
Viewed from the perspective of 2017, however, the uncertainty of 1977 seems almost enviable.
In 1977, there was no President Donald Trump.
Jimmy Carter may not go down in history as one of the best US presidents, but he did not threaten actions that placed the entire global system at risk.
He did not turn his back on America’s international commitments such as NATO and the World Trade Organization.
Nor did Carter go to war with the Federal Reserve or pack its board with sympathetic appointees willing to sacrifice sound money to his reelection prospects.
On the contrary, he appointed Paul Volcker, a towering pillar of monetary stability, as chairman of the Board of Governors.
And although Carter did not succeed in balancing the federal budget, he didn’t blow it up, either.
Whether Trump slaps a tariff on Chinese goods, repudiates the North American Free Trade Agreement, packs the Federal Reserve Board, or undermines fiscal sustainability remains to be seen.
Conceivable outcomes range from mildly reassuring to utterly catastrophic.
Who knows what will happen?
By today’s standards, Carter was the embodiment of predictability.
In 1977, moreover, the prospects for European integration were rosy.
Denmark, Ireland, and, most notably, the United Kingdom had recently joined a rapidly growing European Community.
The EC was attracting members, not losing them.
It was a club that countries sought to join precisely in order to achieve faster economic growth.
Moreover, to buttress its common market, the EC had just established a regional monetary system, the suggestively named “snake in the tunnel.”
While this was far from a perfect monetary system, it had one very positive attribute: countries could leave in hard economic times, and rejoin if and when the outlook brightened.
In 2017, in contrast, negotiations over Brexit will continue to cast a dark cloud of uncertainty over the European Union.
How those negotiations will proceed and how long they will take are anyone’s guess.
Moreover, the main questions raised by Britain’s decision to leave – whether other countries will follow and, indeed, whether the EU itself has a future – remain far from resolved.
China, still largely cut off from the world, did not figure in this discussion.
And even if something went wrong in the Third World, developing countries were simply too small to drag down the global economy.
The situation today couldn’t be more different.
What happens in China, Brazil, or Turkey doesn’t stay in China, Brazil, or Turkey.
On the contrary, developments in these countries have first-order implications for the world economy, given how emerging markets have accounted for the majority of global growth in recent years.
China has an unmanageable corporate-debt problem and a government whose commitment to restructuring the economy is uncertain.
Turkey has a massive current-account deficit, an erratic president, and an unstable geopolitical neighborhood.
And if political scandals were export goods, Brazil would have a clear comparative advantage.
Although The Age of Uncertainty was about much more than the year 1977, it captured the tenor of the times.
But if Galbraith were writing the same book in 2017, he probably would call the 1970s The Age of Assurance.
A German Europe?
LISBON/RIGA – Is the Europe that is emerging from the euro crisis a German one?
During the euro crisis, power in the European Union seems to have shifted towards national capitals in general, and towards one national capital in particular: Berlin.
But, with Germany introverted, France downgraded, and Britain semi-detached, the big story in European foreign policy is that the time has come for the little guy who thinks big.
In this Europe, the important moves are now sometimes made in Stockholm or Warsaw, not only in Berlin, Paris, or London.
And, with major foreign-policy issues on Europe’s doorstep – whether in Egypt, Belarus, or now Syria – useful European initiatives are to be welcomed, regardless of where they originate.
Germany, in foreign policy as well as in economics, can exert decisive leadership in the EU – when it wants to.
For example, together with Poland, it led the EU’s attempt to develop a coordinated approach to Russia, and it flexed its muscles on Serbia.
But, on other issues – for example, Libya – Germany did not so much lead as use its newfound room for maneuver to follow its own preferences in the face of other EU members.
So the answer today to Henry Kissinger’s famous question about whom he should call when he wants to speak to Europe, is not necessarily “the German chancellor.”
While Berlin is increasingly imposing its economic preferences on others in the eurozone, it is not prepared to use military force as a foreign-policy tool, as it demonstrated in the case of Libya.
Moreover, Germany, it seems, is becoming a “geo-economic power” driven by the needs of its export sector.
By using economic means to pursue its foreign-policy ends, Germany is gradually turning its back on its European partners.
Meanwhile, as France experiences a loss of power relative to Germany on economic issues, it continues to play a decisive role in foreign policy.
France led the Libya operation, and is doing much the same with attempts to impose stronger sanctions against Iran and provide support for the United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire.
But France’s unilateral approach often antagonizes its European partners.
For example, French President Nicolas Sarkozy preempted a common European position on the Palestinian statehood bid at the UN in September.
In other words, even when France leads, it does not always do so in a constructive way.
Apart from the decisive role that it played in Libya alongside France, Britain is becoming increasingly marginal in European foreign policymaking.
Even before it vetoed a plan by eurozone countries to create a “fiscal union” at the European summit in December 2011, it was playing less of a leadership role than it traditionally has on key European foreign-policy issues.
Britain has continued to support EU enlargement, closer links with Turkey, and development in Africa, but it has not launched any creative initiatives to bring other member states along or change the terms of the EU debate.
On other issues, such as engaging “strategic partners” – China and Russia in particular – the United Kingdom is often a follower as well.
As the “big three” increasingly pursue their own narrowly defined national interests, however, other EU member states are emerging as leaders in key foreign-policy fields.
For example, Sweden – the 14th largest member state in terms of population, and eighth in terms of GDP – under the leadership of Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt and Foreign Minister Carl Bildt punches considerably above its weight.
Last year, it increased annual aid to North Africa by SEK100 million (€11.1 million), proposed an EU mission to Tunisia just a week after the revolution to support democratic aspirations there, and was an early and strong backer of UN resolutions in support of the uprising in Libya.
Poland, too, is emerging as a foreign-policy leader.
Prime Minister Donald Tusk and Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski have particularly taken the initiative on the EU’s strategy towards Russia, where Poland has largely overcome its differences with Germany and is now at the forefront of efforts to develop a genuinely comprehensive approach.
Poland has also led on European defense (though it declined to take part in the military intervention in Libya).
This reflects the strength of the Polish economy, which is expected to grow by more than 3% in 2012 – faster than almost anywhere else in the EU.
Germany might be getting all of the attention in this time of crisis, but the last year has been a reminder that Europe is most effective and influential when the small countries get involved and join forces with – and even lead – the big ones.
For example, on Iran (with exceptions like Greece), Europeans have united around a clear policy and collective positions, such as an oil embargo.
So, Poland and Sweden:&nbsp; Europe needs your leadership.
But that might not be enough in an EU with more than 500 million citizens.
Other EU states need to follow their example in order to make European foreign policy truly effective and influential.
A German Glimmer in a Global Boom
But the boom is not uniform.
In the United States, the number of experts giving a favorable assessment of the current situation declined; indeed, a majority believes that the economic situation will worsen during the next six months.
However, in the Asian countries, including China, the optimism is unbroken.
The same is true for Eastern Europe, the ex-Soviet states, and Latin America.
In general, the big EU countries are still performing badly, in contrast to the smaller members – hardly surprising, given that the EU is basically an institution to help the smaller countries overcome the drawback of their size by extending the agglomeration advantages that formerly were reserved to the bigger countries.
But even Germany, Europe’s biggest economy, is experiencing an upswing.
The Ifo climate indicator for Germany, based on monthly surveys of 7,000 firms, jumped upwards in the second half of 2005, reaching its highest value since the boom year 2000, with businesses’ assessment of the current situation and expectations improving.
After five years of stagnation, the economy is finally on the move.
While the second half of 2005 was already quite good, Ifo expects investment in equipment to grow by a healthy 6% in 2006.
After many years of contraction, investment in construction also will rise slightly.
Total investment growth is expected to reach 2.9% – weak by past standards, but nonetheless a promising salve for the wounded German mood.
But everything is relative: Germany’s trend growth rate is just 1.1%, and the country has been the slowest growing EU country since 1995.
Measured against a disappointing past, even Germany is currently experiencing an economic boom.
Indeed, even German unemployment, which has been rising in cycles since 1970, will decline slightly in 2006, from 4.8 to 4.7 million.
The good economic data will reinforce initial favorable impressions of Angela Merkel’s new government, which got off to an excellent start at the EU Summit, where Merkel helped to broker a compromise between Britain and France on the Union’s 2007-2013 budget (by adding another €2 billion to Germany’s annual contribution).
In fact, the government may even have contributed a bit to the good economic data by announcing a serious effort to consolidate Germany’s own public finances – a prerequisite for investor confidence.
According to the government, substantial tax increases will bring the fiscal deficit below the 3%-of-GDP limit set by the Stability and Growth Pact – a target missed for five consecutive years – by 2007.
The real test for the German government is the labor market.
Most observers now agree that Germany needs something like the American earned-income tax credit.
In Germany, it’s called “activating social aid” or “combi wages,” but the principle is the same: the state should reduce the money it pays for doing nothing and pay more for participating in the work force.
That would widen the wage distribution, create jobs, and maintain the living standard of the poor.
Merkel announced in her inaugural speech in the Bundestag that her government will introduce such a system in 2006.
If this is more than lip service, and if she really carries out a serious reform of the German welfare state’s incentive structure, the result could be higher employment and structural economic growth.
In the long term, that would be more promising for the EU – and for the global economy – than the demand-driven performance that Germany is currently enjoying.
A Global Agenda for Seven Billion
NEW YORK – Late next month, a child will be born – the 7th billion citizen of planet Earth. We will never know the circumstances into which he or she was born.
We do know that the baby will enter a world of vast and unpredictable change – environmental, economic, geopolitical, technological, and demographic.
The world’s population has tripled since the United Nations was created in 1945.
To help create this future, I am focusing my second term as Secretary-General on five global imperatives – five generational opportunities to shape the world of tomorrow by the decisions we make today.
Prevention as a framework for international cooperation is a second opportunity.
This year, the UN peacekeeping budget will total $8 billion. Think of what we could save by avoiding conflicts – by deploying political mediation missions, for example, rather than troops.
We know how to do this.
Our record proves it – in Guinea, Kenya, and Kyrgyzstan.
A third imperative is building a safer and more secure world. In this effort, we must be courageous in standing up for democracy, human rights, and peace.
This year was one of signature achievements in restoring and securing peace – in Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur, Egypt, and elsewhere. But hatred and bloodshed still stand in the way of our vision for peace.  
In the Middle East, we must break the stalemate.
Palestinians deserve a state.
Israel needs security.
Both want peace. A negotiated settlement can produce these outcomes, and the UN is a platform for forging such a peace.
So, too, will we continue our efforts to foster democratic governance in Iraq, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sierra Leone. And, in the name of all of humanity, we will continue to push forward on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, in service of realizing a world free of nuclear weapons.
The fourth big opportunity is supporting countries in transition.
This year’s dramatic events in North Africa and the Middle East inspired people around the globe.
Let us help make the Arab Spring a true season of hope for all.
In Libya, we are deploying a new UN support mission to assist the country’s transitional authorities in establishing a new government and legal order, consistent with the aspirations of the Libyan people.
Syria is a special concern.
For six months we have seen escalating violence and repression.
The government has repeatedly pledged to undertake reforms and listen to its people. It has not done so.
The moment to act is now.
The violence must stop.
Last but not least is the imperative of working with and for women and young people.  
Women hold up more than half the sky and represent much of the world’s unrealized potential.
We need their full engagement – in government, business, and civil society.
The UN has placed a high priority on promoting women at all levels of the Organization and this year, for the first time, UN Women is operating to promote the interests and rights of women all over the world.
Seven billion people now look toward the United Nations for solutions to the world’s great global challenges.
They hold different religions and backgrounds but common dreams and aspirations.
Our global future depends on bringing these individual talents and universal rights together in common cause.
Let our common agenda begin.
A Global Consensus Against Terrorism
Mention the United Nations and the first reaction is likely to be the ongoing oil-for-food scandal and what it will mean for Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s ability to lead the organization for the remaining year and a half of his tenure.
But there is much more going on at the UN than investigations.
Reform is in the air – in part because of the scandal, but also because of the UN’s inability to deal effectively with challenges ranging from Rwanda and Kosovo to Iraq and, most recently, Sudan.
Even the UN’s most ardent supporters now recognize that change is called for if the organization is to make a significant contribution to international peace and security.
Some of the reform talk concerns the UN Security Council’s composition.
The Security Council represents what the World War II Allies believed the post-war world would look like and how it should be run.
This helps to explain why a much-weakened France was made a permanent member of the Council – and why Germany and Japan (and a not-yet independent India) were not.
Defending the Security Council’s current make-up is impossible; the need for change is beyond debate.
In the meantime, there is important work to be done. One productive avenue would be to follow up on one of the recommendations of the High Level Panel that was endorsed by Annan; namely, that all UN members go on record declaring that terrorism has no place in today’s world.
This will prove more difficult than it first sounds.
For too long, the international community has tolerated terrorism – the intentional killing of civilians and noncombatants by non-state actors for political purposes – on the grounds that, on occasion, “one man’s terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter.”
Historians have the luxury of debating whether terrorism may have been justified in certain situations in the past.
We do not.
Modern terrorism is too destructive to be tolerated, much less supported.
Weapons of mass destruction – nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons – are just that, and no cause can excuse their use.
Moreover, as the terrorist attacks on America of 2001 showed, weapons as basic as box-cutters can become weapons of mass destruction if they are used to exploit the vulnerabilities of modern, global life.
Terrorism is even less justified given that political avenues exist nowadays for pursuing political aims.
Palestinians can negotiate their future relationship with Israel and can count on American, Russian, European, and UN assistance.
Iraqis have elected their own representatives and are poised to write their constitution.
No one pursuing reasonable goals and who is prepared to compromise can argue that terrorism is his or his group’s only option.
The world has already taken some important steps against terrorism.
A dozen international conventions and numerous UN resolutions commit governments to oppose hostage taking, the hijacking of civilian aircraft, and terrorism more broadly.
Similarly, the mandate of the Financial Action Task Force, created in 1989 to curb money laundering, has grown and become focused mainly on curbing terrorist financing.
UN Security Council Resolution 1373, passed after the September 11 attacks, calls on states to deny safe haven to terrorists, bring to justice anyone associated with terrorism, suppress recruitment by terrorist groups, block terrorists’ efforts to acquire weapons, and cooperate with other governments and international organizations in tracking suspects and boosting security.
What is missing is a new, 13th convention that closes the loophole that seems to permit governments to decide what constitutes terrorism and what does not.
Broad agreement is needed that any intentional killing of civilians and noncombatants is unacceptable, and that its perpetrators and supporters must be punished.
Of course, such a convention will not prevent all future acts of terrorism.
But ideas matter.
Terrorism needs to be de-legitimized in the way that slavery has been.
Doing so will make governments and individuals think twice before becoming a party to terrorism; it should also make it less difficult to garner support for international action against those who nevertheless carry it out.
We are taught early on in our lives that the end cannot justify the means.
It is time to put this principle into effect before many more innocent lives are lost.
A Global Green New Deal
NAIROBI – With unemployment soaring, bankruptcies climbing, and stock markets in free-fall, it may at first glance seem sensible to ditch the fight against climate change and put environmental investments on hold.
Such investments could generate an estimated five million “green-collar” jobs, provide a shot in the arm for the construction and engineering industries, and get America back into the equally serious business of combating climate change and achieving energy security.
The Republic of Korea, which is losing jobs for the first time in more than five years, has also spotted the green lining to grim economic times.
President Lee Myung-Bak’s government plans to invest $38 billion employing people to clean up four major rivers and reduce disaster risks by building embankments and water-treatment facilities.
Other elements of Lee’s plan include construction of eco-friendly transportation networks, such as high-speed railways and hundreds of kilometers of bicycle tracks, and generating energy using waste methane from landfills.
The package also counts on investments in hybrid vehicle technologies.
As a result, an estimated 500 megawatts of electricity, equal to 2% of the country’s electricity needs, will be generated, along with more than 5,000 jobs.
So it is clear that some countries now view environmental investments in infrastructure, energy systems, and ecosystems as among the best bets for recovery.
Others may be unsure about the potential returns from investing in ecosystem services such as forest carbon storage or in renewable energy for the 80% of Africans who have no access to electricity.
Still others may simply be unaware of how to precisely follow suit.
In early February, the United Nations Environment Program will convene some of the world’s leading economists at the UN’s headquarters in New York.
A strategy for a Global Green New Deal, tailored to different national challenges, will be fleshed out in order to assist world leaders and ministers craft stimulus packages that work on multiple fronts.
The Global Green New Deal, which UNEP launched as a concept in October 2008, responds to the current economic malaise.
Spent wisely, however, these stimulus packages could trigger far-reaching and transformational trends, setting the stage for a more sustainable, urgently needed Green Economy for the twenty-first century.
The trillions of dollars that have been mobilized to address current woes, together with the trillions of investors’ dollars waiting in the wings, represent an opportunity that was unthinkable only 12 months ago: the chance to steer a more resource-efficient and intelligent course that can address problems ranging from climate change and natural-resource scarcity to water shortages and biodiversity loss.
Blindly pumping the current bail-out billions into old industries and exhausted economic models will be throwing good money after bad while mortgaging our children’s future.
Instead, political leaders must use these windfalls to invest in innovation, promote sustainable businesses, and encourage new patterns of decent, long-lasting employment.
A Global Growth Bargain
In this decade, the world will be transformed&nbsp;yet again by the rise of the Asian consumer.&nbsp;By 2020, Asia’s domestic markets will be twice the size of America’s.
The world’s middle class will have swelled from one billion consumers to three billion.
The opportunities for growth in Europe and the US from this additional global demand are enormous.
The countries and companies that will flourish in Asia’s new markets will be those that can provide the technology-driven, custom-built, high value-added goods and services needed to serve Asia’s two billion consumers.
But neither Europe nor the US is in a strong enough position to take best advantage of these new markets.
The West must again begin to out-invent, out-innovate, and out-skill the rest of the world if it is to seize the opportunities that Asia presents.&nbsp;Indeed, unless the West significantly expands its capital investment in engineering, science, and new technologies, it will be marginalized by countries whose governments back their innovators with hard cash.
Obama’s investment plan could be the foundation stone for a formal global agreement that delivers higher levels of growth to all corners of the world and creates millions of new jobs.
Under such an agreement, Europe would join the US in raising levels of investment – complementing America’s “moonshot”&nbsp;initiative with a program of structural reform aimed at building a digital, green, energy-efficient, and competitive economy – while China would play its part by increasing its consumption.
I believe that such an agreement could boost the world economy by around 3% by 2014 – and lift 100 million people out of poverty.
I presented this plan when I chaired the G-20 in London in 2009.
I wanted East and West to commit to a formal strategy to deliver more enduring results than those promised by the rescue packages that we were putting together at the time.
Our attention was focused on preventing recession from turning into depression.
I argued that this was also the moment to pioneer a more lasting framework of growth.
In the end, no agreement was possible on a shared growth objective, and there has not yet&nbsp;been enough political will for the coordinated action to achieve it.
Since then, Europe and America have grown well below their capacity (despite huge unmet demand throughout the world) and unemployment has climbed to around 10% on both continents (with youth unemployment reaching an alarming 20%).
The global growth agreement that evaded us in 2009 remains the unfinished work of the G-20.
Front-loaded public investment could be funded through an enhanced European Investment Bank.
China has already laid the foundation for playing its part: its policy of xiaokang (reducing poverty and expanding the middle class) should create a market for billions of dollars of&nbsp;Western goods and services.
The West should propose that if China’s consumption increases by 2-4 percentage points of its GDP over the next three years (entirely possible as it improves its social safety net, cuts taxes, and puts homeownership within reach of ordinary citizens), America and Europe will expand their public investment by similar amounts.
If other Asian countries do likewise, and agree to create a level playing field for exporters, we could create around 50 million additional jobs.
Of course, in the West, an investment plan invites criticism from those who prefer that we do nothing but talk about growth strategies.
Indeed, critics argue that raising public investment conflicts with the drive to reduce deficits, and warn of higher interest rates on the back of further spending.
But critics are wrong about the impact on the deficit&nbsp;of focused investment.
A recent study by the International Monetary Fund produced unequivocal evidence that we can actually maintain deficit-reduction plans while benefiting from the additional capital investment that the US and European economies need.
The West is well placed to play its part in global renewal.
Its extraordinary workforces produce world-class goods and services.
But the West’s workforce must not be condemned to policies that willfully produce a decade of slow growth and low employment.
That would be a human tragedy, not just an economic disaster.
A Global Perfect Storm
NEW YORK – Dark, lowering financial and economic clouds are, it seems, rolling in from every direction: the eurozone, the United States, China, and elsewhere.
Indeed, the global economy in 2013 could be a very difficult environment in which to find shelter.
For starters, the eurozone crisis is worsening, as the euro remains too strong, front-loaded fiscal austerity deepens recession in many member countries, and a credit crunch in the periphery and high oil prices undermine prospects of recovery.
The eurozone banking system is becoming balkanized, as cross-border and interbank credit lines are cut off, and capital flight could turn into a full run on periphery banks if, as is likely, Greece stages a disorderly euro exit in the next few months.
Moreover, fiscal and sovereign-debt strains are becoming worse as interest-rate spreads for Spain and Italy have returned to their unsustainable peak levels.
Indeed, the eurozone may require not just an international bailout of banks (as recently in Spain), but also a full sovereign bailout at a time when eurozone and international firewalls are insufficient to the task of backstopping both Spain and Italy. As a result, disorderly breakup of the eurozone remains possible.
Farther to the west, US economic performance is weakening, with first-quarter growth a miserly 1.9% – well below potential.
And job creation faltered in April and May, so the US may reach stall speed by year end.
Worse, the risk of a double-dip recession next year is rising: even if what looks like a looming US fiscal cliff turns out to be only a smaller source of drag, the likely increase in some taxes and reduction of some transfer payments will reduce growth in disposable income and consumption.
Moreover, political gridlock over fiscal adjustment is likely to persist, regardless of whether Barack Obama or Mitt Romney wins November’s presidential election.
Thus, new fights on the debt ceiling, risks of a government shutdown, and rating downgrades could further depress consumer and business confidence, reducing spending and accelerating a flight to safety that would exacerbate the fall in stock markets.
In the east, China, its growth model unsustainable, could be underwater by 2013, as its investment bust continues and reforms intended to boost consumption are too little too late.
A new Chinese leadership must accelerate structural reforms to reduce national savings and increase consumption’s share of GDP; but divisions within the leadership about the pace of reform, together with the likelihood of a bumpy political transition, suggest that reform will occur at a pace that simply is not fast enough.
The economic slowdown in the US, the eurozone, and China already implies a massive drag on growth in other emerging markets, owing to their trade and financial links with the US and the European Union (that is, no “decoupling” has occurred).
At the same time, the lack of structural reforms in emerging markets, together with their move towards greater state capitalism, is hampering growth and will reduce their resiliency.
Finally, long-simmering tensions in the Middle East between Israel and the US on one side and Iran on the other on the issue of nuclear proliferation could reach a boil by 2013.
The current negotiations are likely to fail, and even tightened sanctions may not stop Iran from trying to build nuclear weapons.
With the US and Israel unwilling to accept containment of a nuclear Iran by deterrence, a military confrontation in 2013 would lead to a massive oil price spike and global recession.
These risks are already exacerbating the economic slowdown: equity markets are falling everywhere, leading to negative wealth effects on consumption and capital spending.
Borrowing costs are rising for highly indebted sovereigns, credit rationing is undermining small and medium-size companies, and falling commodity prices are reducing exporting countries’ income.
Increasing risk aversion is leading economic agents to adopt a wait-and-see stance that makes the slowdown partly self-fulfilling.
Compared to 2008-2009, when policymakers had ample space to act, monetary and fiscal authorities are running out of policy bullets (or, more cynically, policy rabbits to pull out of their hats).
Monetary policy is constrained by the proximity to zero interest rates and repeated rounds of quantitative easing.
Indeed, economies and markets no longer face liquidity problems, but rather credit and insolvency crises.
Meanwhile, unsustainable budget deficits and public debt in most advanced economies have severely limited the scope for further fiscal stimulus.
Using exchange rates to boost net exports is a zero-sum game at a time when private and public deleveraging is suppressing domestic demand in countries that are running current-account deficits and structural issues are having the same effect in surplus countries.
After all, a weaker currency and better trade balance in some countries necessarily implies a stronger currency and a weaker trade balance in others.
Meanwhile, the ability to backstop, ring-fence, and bail out banks and other financial institutions is constrained by politics and near-insolvent sovereigns’ inability to absorb additional losses from their banking systems.
As a result, sovereign risk is now becoming banking risk.
Indeed, sovereigns are dumping a larger fraction of their public debt onto banks’ balance sheet, especially in the eurozone.
To prevent a disorderly outcome in the eurozone, today’s fiscal austerity should be much more gradual, a growth compact should complement the EU’s new fiscal compact, and a fiscal union with debt mutualization (Eurobonds) should be implemented.&nbsp; In addition, a full banking union, starting with eurozone-wide deposit insurance, should be initiated, and moves toward greater political integration must be considered, even as Greece leaves the eurozone.
Unfortunately, Germany resists all of these key policy measures, as it is fixated on the credit risk to which its taxpayers would be exposed with greater economic, fiscal, and banking integration.
As a result, the probability of a eurozone disaster is rising.
And, while the cloud over the eurozone may be the largest to burst, it is not the only one threatening the global economy.
Batten down the hatches.
A Global Solutions Network
NEW YORK – Great social change occurs in several ways.
A technological breakthrough – the steam engine, computers, the Internet – may play a leading role.
Visionaries, such as Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King Jr., and Nelson Mandela, may inspire a demand for justice.
Political leaders may lead a broad reform movement, as with Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal.
Our own generation urgently needs to spur another era of great social change.
This time, we must act to save the planet from a human-induced environmental catastrophe.
Each of us senses this challenge almost daily.
Heat waves, droughts, floods, forest fires, retreating glaciers, polluted rivers, and extreme storms buffet the planet at a dramatically rising rate, owing to human activities.
Our $70-trillion-per-year global economy is putting unprecedented pressures on the natural environment.
We will need new technologies, behaviors, and ethics, supported by solid evidence, to reconcile further economic development with environmental sustainability.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is taking on this unprecedented challenge from his unique position at the crossroads of global politics and society.
At the political level, the UN is the meeting place for 193 member states to negotiate and create international law, as in the important treaty on climate change adopted at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992.
At the level of global society, the UN represents the world’s citizenry, “we the peoples,” as it says in the UN Charter.&nbsp; At the societal level, the UN is about the rights and responsibilities of all of us, including future generations.
In the past two decades, governments have come up short on solutions to environmental threats.
Politicians have failed to implement properly the treaties adopted at the 1992 Earth Summit.
Ban knows that strong government action remains vital, but he also recognizes that civil society must also play a larger role, especially because too many governments and politicians are beholden to vested interests, and too few politicians think in time horizons that extend past the next election.
To empower global society to act, Ban has launched a bold new global initiative, for which I am grateful to volunteer.
The UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network is a powerful effort to mobilize global knowledge to save the planet.
The idea is to use global networks of knowledge and action to identify and demonstrate new, cutting-edge approaches to sustainable development around the world.
The network will work alongside and support governments, UN agencies, civil-society organizations, and the private sector.
Humanity needs to learn new ways to produce and use low-carbon energy, grow food sustainably, build livable cities, and manage the global commons of oceans, biodiversity, and the atmosphere.
But time is running very short.
Today’s mega-cities, for example, already have to confront dangerous heat waves, rising sea levels, more extreme storms, dire congestion, and air and water pollution.
Agricultural regions already need to become more resilient in the face of increased climate volatility.
And as one region in one part of the world designs a better way to manage its transport, energy needs, water supplies, or food supplies, those successes should quickly become part of the global knowledge base, enabling other regions to benefit rapidly as well.
Universities have a special role to play in the new UN knowledge network.
Exactly 150 years ago, in 1862, Abraham Lincoln created America’s “land-grant” universities to help local communities to improve farming and the quality of life through science.
Today, we need universities in all parts of the world to help their societies face the challenges of poverty reduction, clean energy, sustainable food supplies, and the rest.
By linking together, and putting their curricula online, the world’s universities can become even more effective in discovering and promoting science-based solutions to complex problems.
The world’s corporate sector also has a significant role to play in sustainable development.
Now the corporate sector has two faces.
It is the repository of cutting-edge sustainable technologies, pioneering research and development, world-class management, and leadership in environmental sustainability.
Yet at the same time, the corporate sector lobbies aggressively to gut environmental regulations, slash corporate-tax rates, and avoid their own responsibility for ecological destruction.
Sometimes the same company operates on both sides of the divide.
We urgently need far-sighted companies to join the Sustainable Development Solutions Network.
These companies are uniquely placed to move new ideas and technologies into early-stage demonstration projects, thereby accelerating global learning cycles.
Equally important, we need a critical mass of respected corporate leaders to press their peers to cease the anti-environmental lobbying and campaign-finance practices that account for the inaction of governments.&nbsp;
Sustainable development is a generational challenge, not a short-term task.
The reinvention of energy, food, transport, and other systems will take decades, not years.
But the long-term nature of this challenge must not lull us into inaction.
We must start reinventing our productive systems now, precisely because the path of change will be so long and the environmental dangers are already so pressing.&nbsp;
At the Rio+20 Summit this past June, the world’s governments agreed to adopt a new set of goals on sustainable development for the period after 2015, to build upon the Millennium Development Goals’ success in reducing poverty, hunger, and disease.
In the post-2015 era, the fight against poverty and the fight to protect the environment will go hand in hand, reinforcing each other.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has already initiated several global processes to help establish the new post-2015 goals in an open, participatory, and knowledge-based way.&nbsp;
The Secretary General’s launch of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network is therefore especially timely.
Not only will the world adopt a new set of goals to achieve sustainable development, but it will also have a new global network of expertise to help achieve those vital objectives.&nbsp;
A Good Rate Hike for Europe
Two wrongs don’t make a right.
Just because European governments have failed to put bread on their constituents’ tables doesn’t mean that the European Central Bank should likewise fail in its job of promoting price stability in the euro zone.
That may sound obvious, but abandoning price stability is exactly what some European politicians are advocating.
For example, Italian politicians, who, given Italy’s recent dismal economic performance, would seem the least qualified to offer the ECB advice on monetary policy, are nonetheless advocating interest-rate cuts.
Echoing comments by Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, Deputy Economics Minister Mario Baldassarri said in Il Sole 24 Ore last week that all efforts to boost growth are in vain “if someone is pushing on the brake pedal.”
Who’s he kidding?
If anyone is “pushing down on the Italian growth brake” it is Berlusconi himself.
He has made no efforts at economic reform during his term and now seeks to blame the ECB for Italy’s lame economic performance.
But it is precisely the lack of economic reform at home that has made Italy one of the least competitive states in the euro-zone economy.
More than the usual “blame game” is at work here.
Pressures are mounting on the ECB to raise interest rates – and Berlusconi and Co.’s attacks are as much as an attempt to forestall future rate hikes as to get the ECB to loosen its monetary policy.
Soaring energy prices, for example, have become a leading inflation risk.
But higher energy prices, by themselves, will not cause the ECB to pull the interest-rate trigger.
The key will be so-called “second-round effects” – whether growing crude prices lead to higher wage demands from trade unions.
So far, the “social partners,” as ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet likes to call the unions, have been quiet.
Should this change, the ECB will have to raise rates even if Europe’s economic growth remains slack.
True, there is no inflation problem in the short run, but the ECB’s monetary policy focuses on the medium term.
One particular worry is that euro-zone money supply is well above the ECB’s benchmark level, indicating an excess supply of liquidity.
It is doubtful that the ECB would raise interest rates to curb excess liquidity so long as economic recovery remains in question.
Slow growth has silenced the monetarists on the ECB’s Governing Council. This will change, however, once the economic pick-up is confirmed.
Interest-rate hikes may be coming sooner rather than later, which is why Berlusconi and French President Jacques Chirac are talking up interest-rate cuts now.
Meanwhile, in Germany, the elections this September may have surprising consequences for ECB monetary policy.
Angela Merkel, the Christian Democrats’ candidate, is a reformer, holding out hope for Germany’s future – and that of Europe.
Unfortunately, Merkel’s campaign is off to a rocky start, and the recent entry of Oskar Lafontaine’s extreme left-wing party into the fray may necessitate the formation of a grand coalition between the Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats.
This would be bad news for the German economy, which could delay possible ECB interest rate hikes.
Because the expected gridlock in parliament would make reforms less likely, companies might hold off on investment, while consumers would be more likely to keep their wallets closed, because official policy would be even less clear than it is now.
On the other hand, a center-right coalition between the Christian Democrats and the Free Democrats could spark the ECB into action.
This raises an interesting point.
The public should be relieved if the ECB raises rates, because this would most likely signal that the long-awaited economic recovery is well under way, and that inflationary repercussions are being addressed.
A hike, in other words, would indicate that good things are happening.
But the public often views interest-rate increases as negative events that increase unemployment and stifle growth.
Blame-game politicians like Berlusconi, who have failed to put bread on the table, their minions in the media, and Keynesian economic professors who don’t understand and misrepresent Keynes sustain this distorted view.
Europe would be a lot better off if someone told the public the truth.
A Good Year for God
LONDON – It’s been a better year for God.
After withering literary assaults on the Almighty from the Oxford academic Richard Dawkins, the essayist Christopher Hitchens, and others, believers have hit back.
Best of all has been The Case for God by the brilliant religion writer Karen Armstrong.
More important still is the news that more people (certainly in Britain) are going to Christian churches of all denominations.
Moreover, the Pope made a very successful visit to Britain in September.
We know already about heavy attendance at the country’s mosques.
At this time of year, of course, many Christians who are not regular churchgoers attend the Nativity services.
Carols, church bells, and mangers are still at the heart of mid-winter festivities, alongside the consumer binge.
This year, however, the “big spend” in Europe may have been inhibited by the big winter freeze and the big austerity programs across most of the continent.
Even in the most Godless households, most children in Western societies probably know the details of the Christmas story.
The travelers who can find no room at the inn.
The birth of a baby in the stables.
The arrival of the wise men bearing gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
We learn about all this at the same time as we are told about Father Christmas, his Lapland reindeers, and his sacks full of presents.
We rapidly lose our belief in that winter myth.
But we tend to retain into adulthood the same views of God that we formed in childhood.
An old man with a long beard watches over us, and most of us retain a pretty literal opinion of the stories about his Son told in the Bible’s New Testament.
It is this God that atheists like Dawkins and Hitchens attack.
And, with such a target, it is not very difficult to poke holes and pile on the ridicule.
Leave aside the fact that you can make an even stronger case against Godlessness – remember the atrocities of atheist totalitarians in the twentieth century – and consider the assault on those whose commitment to literal interpretations of religious texts means that they deny science and reason.
To them the world was made in six days; evolution is a fanciful tale.
Those of us who think that science and religion dwell in different domains, and who recall that Socrates argued that science did not teach you about morality or meaning, find that our case is undermined by the literalists and fundamentalists in every religion.
There are Christians who know all about the fire and brimstone of the Book of Revelation, but seem not to have heard the instructions about generosity in the Sermon on the Mount.
Likewise, there are hard-line Jews, such as the settler groups who drive Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem and Hebron, who have forgotten the early teachings of Jewish scholars who argued that strangers should be treated like your own people.
And there are Muslims who ignore the Koran’s commands of pluralism, tolerance, and peace.
Where the atheist assault is often correct is in pinpointing the amount of harm frequently done in our world by such fundamentalists.
Right-wing American attitudes about their country’s place in the world are invigorated by fundamentalist dogma.
The United Nations is the devil’s own creation.
President Barack Obama is an un-American Muslim.
Palestine from the Jordan River to the coast should be handed to Israel so that the world can end with a cataclysmic Christian triumph.
Jewish fundamentalists obstruct any peace process that is left in the Middle East and build more illegal settlements.
Islamic fundamentalists define jihad as a war of terror against the West and call for an Islamic caliphate from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The strident and damaging dogmatism of fundamentalists of every stripe has a common feature: a truculent sense of grievance, rooted in fear and resentment of modernity.
Christian fundamentalism in America harks back to nineteenth-century populism and anti-intellectualism.
Members of evangelical churches associate their beliefs with the rugged individualism of the early pioneers.
They are contemptuous of the establishment.
Jewish fundamentalists believe that Israel’s critics are anti-Semitic or, in the case of Jewish opponents of Israel’s harder-line policies, “self-hating Jews.”
Islamic fundamentalists reckon that what the rest of us regard as the liberalizing influence of technological progress and globalization is a brash re-run of Western colonialism.
For a happier New Year, we should listen to the core messages of all these great religions, above all the Confucian golden rule that we should never do to others what we would not like to be done to us.
What religion should teach us is not how to hate, but – to borrow again from Confucius – how to develop societies that look after and welcome the poor, the stranger, and the oppressed.
That is the most important message for everyone, atheists included, to take from the Christian story of Christmas.
A Gravity Test for the Euro
CAMBRIDGE – Although I appreciate that exchange rates are never easy to explain or understand, I find today’s relatively robust value for the euro somewhat mysterious.
Do the gnomes of currency markets seriously believe that the eurozone governments’ latest “comprehensive package” to save the euro will hold up for more than a few months?
The new plan relies on a questionable mix of dubious financial-engineering gimmicks and vague promises of modest Asian funding.
Even the best part of the plan, the proposed (but not really agreed) 50% haircut for private-sector holders of Greek sovereign debt, is not sufficient to stabilize that country’s profound debt and growth problems.
So how is it that the euro is trading at a 40% premium to the US dollar, even as investors continue to view southern European government debt with great skepticism?
I can think of one very good reason why the euro needs to fall, and six not-so-convincing reasons why it should remain stable or appreciate.
Let’s begin with why the euro needs to fall.
Absent a clear path to a much tighter fiscal and political union, which can lead only through constitutional change, the current halfway house of the euro system appears increasingly untenable.
It seems clear that the European Central Bank will be forced to buy far greater quantities of eurozone sovereign (junk) bonds.
That may work in the short term, but if sovereign default risks materialize – as my research with Carmen Reinhart suggests is likely – the ECB will in turn have to be recapitalized.
And, if the stronger northern eurozone countries are unwilling to digest this transfer – and political resistance runs high – the ECB may be forced to recapitalize itself through money creation.
Either way, the threat of a profound financial crisis is high.
Given this, what arguments support the current value of the euro, or its further rise?
First, investors might be telling themselves that in the worst-case scenario, the northern European countries will effectively push out the weaker countries, creating a super-euro.
But, while this scenario has a certain ring of truth, surely any breakup would be highly traumatic, with the euro diving before its rump form recovered.
Second, investors may be remembering that even though the dollar was at the epicenter of the 2008 financial panic, the consequences radiated so widely that, paradoxically, the dollar actually rose in value.
Although it may be difficult to connect the dots, it is perfectly possible that a huge euro crisis could have a snowball effect in the US and elsewhere.
Perhaps the transmission mechanism would be through US banks, many of which remain vulnerable, owing to thin capitalization and huge portfolios of mortgages booked far above their market value.
Third, foreign central banks and sovereign wealth funds may be keen to keep buying up euros to hedge against risks to the US and their own economies.
Government investors are not necessarily driven by the return-maximizing calculus that motivates private investors.
If foreign official demand is the real reason behind the euro’s strength, the risk is that foreign sovereign euro buyers will eventually flee, just as private investors would, only in a faster and more concentrated way.
Fourth, investors may believe that, ultimately, US risks are just as large as Europe’s.
True, the US political system seems stymied in coming up with a plan to stabilize medium-term budget deficits.
Whereas the US Congress’s “supercommittee,” charged with formulating a fiscal-consolidation package, will likely come up with a proposal, it is far from clear that either Republicans or Democrats will be willing to accept compromise in an election year.
Moreover, investors might be worried that the US Federal Reserve will weigh in with a third round of “quantitative easing,” which would further drive down the dollar.
Fifth, the current value of the euro does not seem wildly out of line on a purchasing-power basis.&#160; An exchange rate of $1.4:€1 is cheap for Germany’s export powerhouse, which could probably operate well even with a far stronger euro.
For the eurozone’s southern periphery, however, today’s euro rate is very difficult to manage.
Whereas some German companies persuaded workers to accept wage cuts to help weather the financial crisis, wages across the southern periphery have been marching steadily upwards, even as productivity has remained stagnant.
But, because the overall value of the euro has to be a balance of the eurozone’s north and south, one can argue that 1.4 is within a reasonable range.
Finally, investors might just believe that the eurozone leaders’ latest plan will work, even though the last dozen plans have failed.
Abraham Lincoln is credited with saying “You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time.”
A comprehensive euro fix will surely arrive for some of the countries at some time, but not for all of the countries anytime soon.
So, yes, there are plenty of vaguely plausible reasons why the euro, despite its drawn-out crisis, has remained so firm against the dollar so far.
But don’t count on a stable euro-dollar exchange rate – much less an even stronger euro – in the year ahead.
A Green Alternative to Austerity?
OXFORD – While austerity in Europe faces increasing social resistance, in principle it has the merit of simplicity.
As the debate on fiscal consolidation versus growth intensifies, it is clear that there is little agreement on how to kick-start the economy, beyond fielding broad stimulus packages.
One idea is that environmental technology might feed a virtuous cycle of innovation and employment.
To some, green growth evokes a countryside covered with windmills and urban roofs lined with solar panels.
But it is broader than that.
For example, when Airbus moved from injection molding to 3D printing to produce the metal hinges for its airplanes’ doors, it reduced their weight by half, yielding phenomenal savings in material and associated fuel consumption over a lifetime of flying those hinges around the world.
Still, it is easier to find exciting anecdotes than it is to show how they scale up to revitalizing an entire economy.
Moreover, there is a great diversity of narratives on the green economy – and their proliferation is likely to grow.
This June, thousands of activists, policymakers, and business people will converge on Rio de Janeiro for the third giant United Nations Sustainable Development Conference (Rio+20), whose theme is the green economy.
The conference will unleash new arguments about green jobs, growth, cost increases, cost reductions, changes in values, consumer choice – green this and green that.
As a co-author of A New Growth Path for Europe, a report commissioned by the German government, I am guilty of contributing to this cacophony of complementary perspectives on green growth.
The European Climate Foundation had already published its Roadmap 2050, A Practical Guide to a Prosperous, Low-Carbon Europe.
Since then, the UN Environment Program has released its Green Economy Report; McKinsey has written about the Resource Revolution; and the International Trade Unions Council has published Growing Green and Decent Jobs – to name but a few.
All take somewhat different approaches and offer different recommendations, making it hard for policymakers to see the forest through the trees.
And, at the root of this multiplicity of perspectives lays the fact that economics struggles to explain how growth and innovation move an economy as a whole.
The macroeconomic models on which policymakers depend are solid tools in times of smooth and incremental evolution, but green growth is not about gradual change.
For example, the European Union’s goal of achieving an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 implies a complete overhaul of EU infrastructure in just a few decades.
Economists’ inability to model such rapid, radical change should not be taken as a condemnation of the discipline; it is simply a reflection of the state of our knowledge, and of the fact that the economy is really, really complicated.
We simply do not yet have sufficiently precise insights into how all of its elements interact during times of far-reaching change, whether it be a financial crisis or a growth spurt.
Yet, the studies of green growth mentioned above all appear to provide such explanations.
So, what do they really tell us?
In practice, each is limited to just one or two aspects of the economy, and describes how these interact.
Growing Green and Decent Jobs looks at the relationship between investment and jobs.
A New Growth Path for Europe examines the impact of expectations and learning-by-doing.
Roadmap 2050 focuses on greening the power system.
The authors then make a leap of faith to derive conclusions about the economy as a whole.
But, while the value of these studies is in the light that they shed on the parts, the ensuing headlines invariably are about the whole, articulated in terms of GDP and jobs.
Each of the studies describes a part of a green economy, but none can capture the whole – not because they are deficient, but because it is simply beyond our capability.
That said, the fact that one cannot prove conclusively how green growth would work does not mean that we should give up on the idea.
We know from history that waves of innovation, from the steam engine to the information and communications revolution, have led to dramatic increases in economic growth.
We cannot prove that a wave of environmental innovation will have a similar effect, but the studies of the parts make such an outcome highly plausible.
As humans, we are uniquely equipped to make decisions on the basis of ambiguous information – in fact, we do it all the time.
When we choose a career or a spouse in our private lives, or when a politician seizes an opportunity from a plethora of possibilities, the task at hand is always about making highly consequential decisions based on imperfect information.
A big pile of green-growth reports demonstrates the plausibility of this path to recovery from an historic economic crisis.
It is now up to us to realize its potential.
Green growth offers a realistic alternative to the faltering austerity approach to overcoming the current economic crisis.
Policymakers should incorporate this thinking into the “beyond austerity” narrative that is taking shape in a growing number of key EU member states.
Ethics and Agriculture
MELBOURNE – Should rich countries – or investors based there – be buying agricultural land in developing countries?
That question is raised in Transnational Land Deals for Agriculture in the Global South, a report issued last year by the Land Matrix Partnership, a consortium of European research institutes and nongovernmental organizations.
The report shows that since 2000, investors or state bodies in rich or emerging countries have bought more than 83 million hectares (more than 200 million acres) of agricultural land in poorer developing countries.
This amounts to 1.7% of the world’s agricultural land.
Most of these purchases have been made in Africa, with two-thirds taking place in countries where hunger is widespread and institutions for establishing formal land ownership are often weak.
The purchases in Africa alone amount to an area of agricultural land the size of Kenya.
It has been claimed that foreign investors are purchasing land that has been left idle; thus, by bringing it into production, the purchases are increasing the availability of food overall.
But the Land Matrix Partnership report found that this is not the case: roughly 45% of the purchases involved existing croplands, and almost a third of the purchased land was forested, indicating that its development may pose risks for biodiversity.
The investments are both private and public (for example, by state-owned entities) and come from three different groups of countries: emerging economies like China, India, Brazil, South Africa, Malaysia, and South Korea; oil-rich Gulf states; and wealthy developed economies like the United States and several European countries.
On average, per capita income in the countries that are the source of these investments is four times higher than in the target countries.
Most of the investments are aimed at producing food or other crops for export from the countries in which the land is acquired, for the obvious reason that richer countries can pay more for the output.
More than 40% of such projects aim to export food to the source country – suggesting that food security is a major reason for buying the land.
Oxfam International calls some of these deals “land grabs.”
Its own report, Our Land, Our Lives,indicates that, since 2008, communities affected by World Bank projects have brought 21 formal complaints alleging violations of their land rights.
Oxfam, drawing attention to large-scale land acquisitions that have entailed direct rights violations, has called on the Bank to freeze investments in land purchases until it can set standards ensuring that local communities are informed of them in advance, with the option of refusing them.
Oxfam also wants the Bank to ensure that these land deals do not undermine either local or national food security.
In response, the World Bank agreed that there are instances of abuse in land acquisition, particularly in developing countries in which governance is weak, and said that it supported more transparent and inclusive participation.
At the same time, it pointed to the need to increase food production to feed the extra two billion people expected to be alive in 2050, and suggested that more investment in agriculture in developing countries is required to improve productivity.
The Bank rejected the idea of a moratorium on its own work with investors in agriculture, arguing that this would target precisely those who are most likely to do the right thing.
One may ask whether transparency and the requirement that local landholders consent to a sale is enough to protect people living in poverty.
Supporters of free markets will argue that if local landowners wish to sell their land, that is their choice to make.&#160;
But, given the pressures of poverty and the lure of cash, what does it take for people to be able to make a genuinely free and informed choice about selling something as significant as a right to land?
After all, we do not allow poor people to sell their kidneys to the highest bidder.
Of course, hardline supporters of free markets will say that we should.
But, at the very least, it needs to be explained why people should be prohibited from selling kidneys, but not from selling the land that grows their food.
Most people can live without one kidney.
No one can live without food.
Why does the purchase of body parts give rise to international condemnation, while the purchase of agricultural land does not – even when it involves evicting local landholders and producing food for export to rich countries instead of for local consumption?
The World Bank may indeed be more concerned about local landholders’ rights than other foreign investors are.
If so, the 21 complaints made against Bank projects are most likely the visible tip of a vast iceberg of violations of land rights by foreign investors in agricultural projects in developing countries – with the others remaining invisible because victims have no access to any complaint procedure.
One such case belatedly came to the attention of the United Nations Human Rights Committee.
In November, the Committee concluded that Germany had failed to police the Neumann Kaffee Gruppe regarding its complicity in the forced eviction of several villages in Uganda to make way for a large coffee plantation.
But the evictions took place in 2001, and the villagers are still living in extreme poverty.
They found no remedy, in either Uganda or Germany, for the violation of rights that, according to the Committee, they possess under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Germany is a signatory.
Are we to believe that landholders fare better with Chinese or Saudi investors?
How to Feed the World
PRAGUE – Hunger has wracked humanity since time immemorial.
Nearly every major society has been shaped by famine; one estimate suggests that China suffered drought or flood-induced starvation in at least one province almost every year from 108 BC to 1911.
Yet the struggle against hunger is a battle that humanity could finally win.
More cereals were produced annually in the last quarter of the twentieth century than in any preceding period, and more grain will be harvested this year than at any time in history.
Since 1992, the number of hungry people worldwide has plummeted by more than 200 million, even as the human population grew by nearly two billion.
But enormous challenges remain.
Affordable, nutritious food is one of people’s top priorities everywhere, and one in nine people still do not get enough food to be healthy.
With today’s population of 7.3 billion expected to reach 8.5 billion by 2030 and 9.7 billion in 2050, food demand will increase accordingly.
Along with more mouths to feed, stresses on food supplies will include conflicts, economic volatility, extreme weather events, and climate change.
Increases in agricultural productivity, owing to improvements in seeds, new fertilizers and pesticides, improved credit access, and technological breakthroughs, have been a key driver in reducing hunger.
Between 1930 and 2000, agricultural output in the United States quadrupled, with productivity growth outstripping that of manufacturing.