In this year of anniversaries, it is worth reflecting on France’s future.
On July 14, France’s national holiday, which this year marked the 225th anniversary of the storming of the Bastille, Algerian soldiers paraded down the Champs-Élysées for the first time since Algeria’s war for independence a half-century ago, a moving symbol of historic transcendence.
It has also been one hundred years since the outbreak of the First World War, and 25 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall quickly led to German reunification.
Europe has changed much since then.
Twenty-five years ago, France and the Federal Republic of Germany had similar populations of about 60 million inhabitants (like Italy and the United Kingdom).
German reunification added more than 16 million new citizens from the former East Germany, making the enlarged Federal Republic the most populous country in the European Union by far.
This upset the balance of the Franco-German axis around which the EU as a whole had long turned.
To avoid negative political consequences, Germany agreed to be underrepresented in weighted voting on EU matters – an imbalance in its own right that was not substantially corrected until the Lisbon Treaty entered into effect in 2009.
Over time, and in a process accentuated by the recent economic crisis, size and economic might meant that Germany began to set the tempo of European affairs.
Today, Germany has clearly become the point of reference for shaping policy on the most important issues facing the EU.
But the logic of how Europe was constructed requires that France complement Germany – and now that other major EU countries, including Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom, and Poland, do so as well.
Indeed, today’s Europe can no longer be the two-country affair – if it ever was that ‒ of 30 years ago.
But, for many of the EU member states, France remains a model.
So when France suffers, Europe suffers.
Healing Europe and healing France are two parts of the same equation, with the same unknowns in play.
Because of its very relevance, historical heft, and cultural baggage, France mistrusts the changes taking place around it – as though the weight of its nationhood were keeping it from taking flight and narrowing its horizons.
But no country today can remain isolated from globalization, tame it, or lead it alone.
So France must look again to Europe, which in turn needs both France and Germany if it is to be balanced and successful.
France is still burdened by the consequences of its “no” vote in 2005 on the proposed European Constitution – clearly not its finest hour.
Ten years on, France should not be afraid of exchanging some of its sovereignty for political union in Europe.
On the contrary, France should be one of the leaders of that effort, adding its voice and centrality as a country halfway between Europe’s north and south and acting as a model for many other countries on social issues.
Just as Germany took a step forward by giving up its Deutshce Mark in favor of the euro, France must evolve beyond the classical framework of the nation-state.
As Germany’s economic preponderance translates into greater political power, it becomes increasingly important to supplement this with France’s unique point of view.
This is particularly true in view of today’s unstoppable progress toward closer economic integration, which will lead, happily or haphazardly, to greater political integration.
France’s solid economic foundation furnishes it with the means to face up to the reforms that it urgently needs.
Its per capita income is more than €30,000 ($40,000) per year, and it has a strong welfare state and an educated society.
Yet its GDP growth is stagnant.
Europe and the world cannot afford to allow dynamic France to succumb to static France, the France that resists all change.
For example, France’s cooperation on the construction of a common European market for energy is crucial for Spain; indeed, this relationship could be enormously beneficial both for France and all of Europe.
France should consider Europe its own.
French republican values find their expression in the EU.
Liberty, equality, and fraternity are enemies of the nationalist, extremist, and europhobic visions benighting Europe today.
These dark visions must be met with France’s commitment to integration, the rule of law, and secularism.
France has taken on important international commitments recently that all must appreciate, with the hope that France’s political, economic, and social reawakening continues.
There should be no U-turn in the course toward modernization, especially now, when political forces that exploit fear and hatred are on the rise, betraying republican values.
This is the moment for France, along with the rest of Europe, to overcome its pessimism, doubt, and mistrust.
Revolutionary Patience
MADRID – On December 17, 2010, Mohamed Bouazizi set himself alight in Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia.
Within weeks, the popular revolt triggered by Bouazizi’s act had spread far beyond Tunisia, engulfing much of the Arab world.
In Europe, Ukraine and other troubled countries, such as Bosnia, began their long and still incomplete transitions to democracy a quarter-century ago.
The Arab world, by contrast, has logged a mere three years of transition – the blink of an eye in historical terms.
Still, there have already been significant changes, and the region is advancing – though the destination remains unknown.
As in other parts of the world, Arab countries need time to attain the democracy and pluralism their peoples seek.
They will achieve their goals – but not in a mere three years.
In fact, events in today’s Middle East continue to be shaped by the radical changes brought about after World War I. Previously, most Arabs had been grouped together under various caliphates.
After the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire in 1923, two nation-states (Iran and Turkey) emerged, while the Arabs were distributed among 22 new countries, generally under British or French colonial domination.
Once the colonies had achieved independence – Saudi Arabia, today a Sunni regional power, was created in 1932 – a new attempt was made to unite the Arab nation by means of the political Islam that emerged in the 1920’s in response to the fall of the Ottoman Caliphate.
The phenomenon took many forms, including the Muslim Brotherhood, founded in 1928.
At the same time, efforts at nation-building along secular lines were reflected in Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser’s pan-Arabism and the Syrian Baath Party, resulting in the establishment of the United Arab Republic, a union between Egypt and Syria that lasted from 1958 to 1961.
A half-century later, the simultaneous revolts in the Arab world were the result of neither political tendency, instead reflecting broad popular rejection of dysfunctional and corrupt authoritarian governments.
But, with Syria immersed in a brutal civil war that has claimed more than 130,000 lives already, Libya on the verge of collapse, and Egypt returning power to the army and proscribing the Muslim Brotherhood, Tunisia has been the only success.
Tunisia adopted its new constitution on January 27, thus clearing the way for what will be the most secular and fairest elections in any of the region’s countries.
The new constitution is the most modern in the Arab world, the fruit of a non-violent transition.
With a small, well-educated population, Tunisia has become the exception.
Egypt’s government, by banning the Muslim Brotherhood, has taken the country backward since the military coup that overthrew President Mohamed Morsi last July.
The Egyptian process, however, should not be considered merely a return to the pre-2011 status quo; rather, developments constitute what could be characterized as an ascending spiral that, while turning back on itself, nevertheless advances.
The generational split within Egypt is evident: social mobilization has given young Egyptians valuable political experience, and this represents a key difference from the three decades of former President Hosni Mubarak’s rule.
The same could be said of Syria, though the spiral there has been an unremittingly downward one, and any reversal remains blocked, particularly since the failure of the second round of peace negotiations in Geneva.
More generally, lack of pluralism and the inability to share power are holding back the transitions.
With the exception of Tunisia, this can be seen to varying degrees in all of the affected countries.
In Egypt, both the army – whether under Mubarak or Field Marshal Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi – and the Islamists have demonstrated that they want all power for themselves.
Political pluralism cannot be imposed.
Societies must demand it and build the lasting institutions needed to preserve it.
This process can take many years, making it crucial not to lose historical perspective.
The situation in each country was different when the revolts began.
Countries with homogenous societies, such as Tunisia, have suffered only minimal violence, unlike socially heterogonous countries, such as Syria.
Nor are there any consolidated regional structures to which the transition countries can adhere; and there are few local models – with the exception of Turkey, for example – that can be used to help democracy and pluralism take root.
Indeed, the context in which these transitions were set in motion was – and remains –unfavorable compared to those taking place in Europe.
Unlike the Arab countries, Eastern Europe and the Balkans benefited from a common starting point and a common path forward: all are part of a continent that has taken historic steps toward integration since World War II.
That has given them a common destination as well, both politically (accession to the European Union) and in terms of their security (through NATO).
But the situations in Bosnia and Ukraine are still very fluid.
Twenty-five years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, and 23 years after the disintegration of Yugoslavia, the post-communist transition is still incomplete.
We cannot expect results in the Middle East in three years that have not been achieved in Europe in a quarter-century.
Despite the backsliding in Egypt and the intolerable violence in Syria, the region is evolving at its own pace in a complex, changing, and unstable geopolitical context.
A patient strategy and an unwavering dedication to pluralism are fundamental, whether in Kyiv or Cairo.
Saving the House
MADRID – A crack in a house’s foundation, if not repaired, can continue to grow, ultimately destabilizing the structure and rendering it uninhabitable.
Its occupants must then move to another home.
But the world’s population cannot move somewhere else.
Houses, while not cheap, are replaceable; our planet is not.
Climate change, as we have known for years, is one such crack in the foundation.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has been studying the phenomenon since 1988.
Twenty-two years ago, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was unveiled; today, 195 countries have agreed to prevent dangerous global warming by limiting the increase in global temperature to 2⁰C.
Yet we continue along our perilous path.
The IPCC has calculated that we are hurtling toward temperature rises of 3.7⁰C to 4.8⁰C by the end of the century.
The crack is widening, and some of the world’s inhabitants – particularly the most vulnerable – are already seeing the water seep in.
Who is responsible, and who should pay to stop the warming?
These questions have dominated international discussion and debate about climate change from the start.
Distinguishing between causal and remedial responsibility is crucial, and the UNFCCC’s chief document recognizes common but differentiated responsibilities, as well as respective capabilities.
As the sociologist Claus Offe recently pointed out, it is one thing to say who is to blame for the damage, and quite another to determine who can or should take responsibility for solving the problem.
This endless search for the true locus of responsibility (both causal and remedial) is not restricted to the realm of climate change.
In a globalized world, for example, citizens of nation-states might wonder (as many have) why a financial crisis a hemisphere away causes their countries’ banks to collapse abruptly.
In Europe, where countries have banded together since the end of World War II, yielding some precious individual sovereignty in order to construct a more stable whole, the struggles of the common currency have instilled fear in citizens’ hearts – and in their votes.
In the shift from government to governance, we have built a matrix of actors – private and public, at local, national, and supra-national levels – to address social and economic problems.
But in this intricate and ever-changing institutional universe, we often no longer know who is in control.
This issue comes to the fore most frequently in the case of shared global problems, such as climate change.
Simply put, the international order must be reformed and adapted to the economic rise of countries like India and China.
The recent agreement among the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) to establish a New Development Bank and a contingent reserve arrangement is a clear signal of this thirst for change.
But a wholesale structural overhaul of the global economy’s institutional architecture is improbable, regardless of the context.
In the interim, creativity is key.
The best solutions are those that build on the current structure’s strongest points.
Top-down governance approaches have been useful, showing the willingness of some of the historical greenhouse-gas emitters to accept remedial responsibility.
The European Union, for example, has affirmed its commitment to the UNFCCC’s Kyoto Protocol, the only international climate-change treaty to date to include binding emissions-reduction targets.
But the most recent UNFCCC summits have revealed the limits of this approach.
So, as the world prepares for the UNFCCC summit in Paris in 2015, preceded by the high-level summit that UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon will convene in New York this September, it will be worthwhile to examine and export creative initiatives emerging from the bottom-up.
China, for one, has launched seven pilot emissions-trading schemes, covering a quarter-billion people – the second-largest such effort in the world (after the EU).
In Uganda, the city of Kampala is working to light its streets using solar power.
Many small island states, such as Tuvalu, are setting an important example by rapidly pursuing the goal of carbon-neutrality.
One of the UNFCCC’s top priorities is to secure financing to scale up developing countries’ mitigation and adaptation efforts, thereby mobilizing the capacity and goodwill of historical emitters to catalyze further innovation.
Scientists worldwide are working on solutions; indeed, only science will help us to proceed effectively, just as it has enabled living standards in most of the world to rise above subsistence levels.
At this critical point, when the fossil fuels that have brought us so much prosperity could lead to our demise, it is again technological innovation that can steer us onto a better path.
In the case of climate change, only creativity, innovation, responsibility, and political will can enable us to save our common house.
We need to open our eyes, recognize the crack in the foundation, and face our responsibility to fix it.
In the first quarter of 2015, governments should declare their countries’ intended contributions to that effort, thereby boosting confidence and accelerating progress en route to Paris.
Meanwhile, we should be on the lookout for potential innovations and invest in research and development wherever that potential lies.
Grave New World
MADRID – Global transformations are nothing new.
But, with globalization and technological advancements, the pace and scale of such transformations have accelerated considerably.
In the coming decades, this trend will only intensify – bringing with it significant potential for instability.
It has been more than 20 years since Saddam Hussein’s Iraq invaded Kuwait, prompting the near-unanimous adoption of United Nations Security Council resolutions demanding the withdrawal of Iraqi forces.
When Saddam defied the resolutions, a 34-country coalition, supporting the United States-led air offensive known as Operation Desert Storm, drove his troops out of Kuwait.
That was in 1991, when the Soviet Union’s collapse had left the US as the world’s only superpower.
But that is no longer the case – a reality that is reflected in the international community’s muddled responses to similar territorial breaches today.
Consider Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea earlier this year.
Though the move clearly violated Ukraine’s territorial integrity, 11 countries voted against the UN resolution condemning the action, and 58 countries – including all of the non-Western powers – abstained.
Clearly, the global balance of power has changed.
In international politics, perceptions matter – sometimes even more than reality.
The perception today is that America’s unipolar moment has come to an end; Europe is on the decline; and a new set of powers is rising, bringing their own unique worldviews to global affairs.
In a sense, this might seem like a good thing.
More varied perspectives could enrich multilateral processes and generate more comprehensive solutions to global problems.
But this multipolar dynamic also generates instability.
Though the world is becoming increasingly interconnected, and challenges are no longer confined to national or even regional borders, major powers are increasingly reluctant to assume global responsibilities.
Worse, given their frequent unwillingness to accommodate one another’s interests, impasses – even clashes – become likely.
Strong, effective, and inclusive multilateral institutions can play a vital role in combating this instability and fostering cooperation.
But even the best-designed structures can achieve little without the political will to resolve conflicts through dialogue.
In order to make progress, countries must learn to defend their principles while respecting those of others – and never to lose sight of their shared interests and objectives.
Without such a unified approach, geopolitical stability is diminished.
For example, Ukraine has been an independent country since 1991 and is fully integrated into the international system, having ceded its nuclear weapons in 1994 and presided over three sessions of the UN General Assembly.
In failing to craft an adequate response to the Russian invasion, however, the international community pushed Ukraine toward a dark past.
One hopes that the recently concluded Minsk Protocol – which includes 12 provisions, including a cease-fire and a program of economic recovery – succeeds in resolving the conflict.
In any case, international stability has been compromised – and several more potentially destabilizing developments are on the horizon.
In the developed world, US President Barack Obama’s tenure will soon end.
European politics are, too, undergoing a potentially significant transition, with the new European Commission set to commence operations, against a worrying background of rising nationalism in European Union member states.
Two leaders who will remain in power for the foreseeable future are Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese Premier Xi Jinping – both of whose countries have generated instability in their respective regions.
Long before Russia invaded Ukraine, China was engaged in territorial disputes with several of its neighbors, most notably in the East and South China Seas.
Furthermore, Russia and China are pushing back against traditional Western dominance in multilateral institutions.
They – along with Brazil, India, and South Africa (the BRICS) – have established their own development bank, motivated partly by the International Monetary Fund’s failure to fulfill its 2010 pledge to adjust voting rights to reflect the global balance of economic power.
(Until the 2010 G-20 summit where that pledge was made, China had the same voting rights as Belgium.)
All of this uncertainty surrounding the world’s emerging and traditional superpowers has impeded efforts to address security challenges in the Middle East, from the enduring Israel-Palestine conflict and the aftermath of the Arab Spring to the new and potent threat posed by the Islamic State.
Unlike Al Qaeda, the Islamic State is not a fragmented network of relatively small cells; it is a territorial entity operating as a pseudo-state in Syrian and Iraqi territory.
And the rest of the world does not seem to know how to stop its unrelenting advance.
The US has rushed to form a confusing coalition with nearly 30 countries, including ten Arab states.
How the coalition will be organized and what results it will achieve remain to be seen.
Here, the European Union could help.
In fact, when the US first employed its so-called “leading from behind” strategy during the 2011 intervention in Libya, European countries were forced to assume greater responsibility.
Instead of viewing that intervention as an anomaly, the EU should recognize the need to enhance its role in defending global security – not least to uphold its own interest in a prosperous and stable neighborhood.
In this sense, the EU’s decision to delay implementing its association agreement with Ukraine in order to create space to pursue consensus with Russia is a positive indicator.
In a multipolar world, actors with widely divergent worldviews must work together to advance their shared interest in security, stability, and prosperity.
It is time for all of the world’s powers to recognize their responsibility for making constructive cooperation a reality.
The World’s Central Banker
BERKELEY – The US Federal Reserve these days is broadly happy with its monetary policy.
But, since mid-2007, its policy has been insufficiently expansionary.
The policy most likely to succeed right now would be analogous to that implemented by the Fed in 1979 and 1933, Great Britain in 1931, and Shinzo Abe today.
Those of us who fear that the Fed’s approach has greatly deepened the US economy’s malaise and is turning America’s cyclical unemployment into permanent long-term structural non-employment have lost the domestic monetary-policy argument.
But there is another policy argument that needs to be joined.
The Fed is not just the US central bank; it is the world’s central bank.
America’s current exchange-rate regime is one of floating rates – or at least of rates that can float.
Back in the 1950s and 1960s, economists like Milton Friedman assumed that a global regime of floating exchange rates would be one in which currency values moved slowly and gradually alongside differences in the economy’s inflation and productivity-growth rates.
In the 1970s, the economist Rudi Dornbusch (and reality) taught us that that was wrong: a floating-rate regime capitalizes expected future differences in nominal interest rates minus inflation rates into today’s exchange rate.
A country that changes its monetary policy vis-à-vis the US changes its current exchange rate by a lot; and, in today’s highly globalized world, that means that it deranges its import and export sectors substantially.
Because no government wants to do that, nearly all governments today follow the US in setting monetary policy, diverging from it only tentatively and cautiously.
So the US is not just one economy in a world of economies following their own monetary policies under a flexible exchange-rate regime.
The US is, rather, a global hegemon: the central bank for the world, with a responsibility not just to stabilize output, employment, and inflation and ensure financial stability in the US, but also to manage the world economy in its entirety.
One area of concern is the health and stability of growth in emerging markets as they attempt to benefit from capital inflows; satisfy North Atlantic demands for open financial markets; and manage the resulting instability created by speculative “hot money,” the carry trade, irrational exuberance, and overshooting.
Emerging-market central-bank governors fear a US that alternates between expansionary policy that fuels huge hot-money inflows and a domestic inflationary spiral, and rapid tightening that chokes off credit and causes a domestic recession.
Then there is the main problem facing the global economy today: the crisis of Europe and the eurozone.
The creation of the euro without an appropriate fiscal union meant that transfers from surplus to deficit regions would not eliminate or even cushion demand imbalances.
The fact that the eurozone lacked the labor-market flexibility needed to make it an optimal currency area meant that adjustment via regional reallocation of economic activity would be glacial, while its members’ loss of control over monetary policy ruled out adjustment via nominal depreciation.
Moreover, Europe lacks the governance institutions needed to choose the easiest path to manage economic rebalancing: moderate inflation in the north, rather than grinding deflation and universal bankruptcy in the south.
The European Union’s institutional design amplifies the voices of those interests pushing for policies that have now set Europe on the deflationary road, thus all but guaranteeing lost decades during which the EU will fail to deliver growth and prosperity.
We have an example from the early twentieth century of the political consequences of such a period of economic depression and stagnation.
The reaction to what Karl Marx called “parliamentary cretinism” is the rise of movements that seek, instead, a decisive leader – someone to tell people what to do.
Such leaders soon learn that their solutions are no better than anybody else’s and decide that the best way to remain in power is by blaming all problems on foreigners.
Thus they exalt the “nation” and focus their policies on zero-sum quarrels with other countries and on scapegoating deviant “aliens” at home.
This is not in Europe’s interest, and it is not in America’s interest to have to deal with such a Europe.
A democratic, prosperous, and stable Europe implies a much better and safer world for the US.
Here is where the Fed comes in.
By shifting its monetary-policy regime to target 4% annual inflation – or 6% annual nominal GDP growth – the US would set in motion rapid rebalancing in the eurozone.
Rather than see the 30% euro appreciation that would follow from the ECB’s current monetary policy, German exporters would scream for measures to prevent America’s “competitive devaluation,” finally bringing about moderate inflation in the north rather than the current grinding depression in the south.
A world in which the US has a proven record of honoring the trust that is required of it to play the role of global economic hegemon is a much better world for the US than one in which it is not trusted.
Simply put, the US must manage the global economy for the collective common good, or else confront a world in which global macroeconomic management results from race-to-the-bottom national policy struggles.
America’s medium- and long-term political, security, and, yes, economic interests require the Fed to recognize that its policy mission is not to focus narrowly on attempting to achieve and maintain internal balance.
Rather, it is to embrace and fulfill its role as the world’s central bank, by balancing aggregate demand and potential supply for the global economy as a whole.
The Internet’s Next Act
BERKELEY – Ten years ago, the world emerged from the dot-com bust and started to look more soberly at the Internet’s potential.
While speculative greed and fear of missing out might have overplayed the short-term outlook, the Internet’s immense longer-term prospects were never in doubt.
I, and other optimistic economists, assumed that free information and communication would herald an era of rapid productivity growth and improved wellbeing – to a greater or lesser extent – for everyone, regardless of their skills, wealth, or social background.
Were we right?
In many respects, the revolution in information and communications technology (ICT) has delivered more than it promised – and often in unpredictable ways.
For many, the true marvel of the digital age is its creation of a parallel universe.
Anyone with a laptop and an Internet connection can gossip with (or about) virtual friends; witness extraordinary events that may or may not have happened; or play games in a mock world of incomparable complexity.
The Internet has created a dreamscape that is accessible to all and that can inspire us to still greater heights of imagination.
Indeed, those who scoff at the value of this should remember that ever since Homer sang around the hearth fire about the wrath of Achilles, dreams have been our greatest source of pleasure and inspiration.
But the benefits of the Internet have come not just to those who work or play online.
Everyone has gained to some degree.
Go to a WalMart, Costco, Tesco, or Lidl superstore anywhere in the world, and compare the price, quality, and range of today’s goods with those of a generation or two ago.
This dramatic change for the better largely reflects the rapid development of global supply chains, with real-time monitoring of customer preferences enabling manufacturers located on the other side of the world to know instantly what, when, and how much to produce.
There is much more to come.
Companies are using the Internet to “crowdsource” new ideas, and even let customers co-design their own products.
New Web-based platforms allow ordinary people �� without money or special skills – to share their cars, spare bedrooms, or even do-it-yourself tools, thus challenging the dominance of global corporations.
The “Internet of Things” is connecting simple household items – like a thermostat – to the Web, helping owners to save money and even reduce their carbon emissions.
And yet we must still ask: Is everyone really benefiting in the new economy?
Only a fortunate few, especially those who combine innovative thinking with financial acumen, have fully captured the monetary profits of the ICT revolution, becoming its poster children in the process.
Lower down the economic scale, most people, though enjoying easy access to technology and low prices, have lost ground, with real wages falling for many years.
This is not a temporary decline: labor in advanced Western economies can no longer command a large wage premium, and workers’ situation may worsen further.
Moreover, white-collar managers and employees – the brainpower that keeps the intricate global corporate machinery whirring, and once the backbone of the middle class – are no longer in such high demand.
Many of their skills, which long underpinned their status, careers, and livelihoods, are becoming redundant.
For today’s ordinary middle-class family, a medical mishap can become a financial catastrophe.
Owning a home involves a life of indebtedness.
Providing a decent education to one’s children requires struggle and sacrifice.
The assumptions that defined middle-class households – and many working-class households – for at least two generations are disappearing before our eyes.
Who is speaking out for them?
Most households stand to gain from the continuation of the ICT revolution.
But middle-class and working-class families would benefit more if the hyper-cheap products and services, free information, and virtual leisure experiences augmented, rather than eroded, their marketable skills.
The politician who can figure out how to steer the revolution accordingly might never lose another election.
Greenspan Has Left the Building
BERKELEY – The first time I went to Washington, DC, as an adult was in 1993, when I arrived to work for President Bill Clinton in the Treasury Department.
Back then, America urgently needed to rebalance the federal budget to rein in explosive growth in the debt/GDP ratio; to overhaul America’s extraordinarily expensive and inefficient health-care system; and to begin to deal with global warming via a slow ramp-up of a carbon tax.
Beyond these three immediate issues were long-run policy challenges: updating the country’s pension system to deal with an aging population and the decline of defined-benefit pensions; improving the education system so that more people would bear the risk of pursuing higher education; and reversing the erosion of America as a middle-class society.
None of these goals (perhaps with the exception of the last one) were partisan issues.
The long-run deficit, health-care financing, and global warming, no less than securing retirement income and enabling educational opportunity, were issues on which bipartisan progress and agreement should have been easily attained.
Yet we Clintonites received absolutely no cooperation from either Republican officeholders or Republican policy intellectuals.
Figures like Senators Pete Domenici and Alan Simpson, who talked a good game about the long-run deficit, never met a budget-busting Republican program that they would oppose or a deficit-reducing Democratic initiative that they could support.
Economists who, under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush, talked such a good game about excessive tax burdens and the importance of balanced budgets went very quiet after Clinton took office in January 1993, and stayed quiet after January 2001, when George W. Bush’s administration dismantled so much of what the Clinton administration had accomplished.
But back in 1993 there was one exception – one senior Republican officeholder and policy intellectual who did not forget his policy commitments of earlier years: US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
For Greenspan, putting the long-run financing of America’s federal government on a sound footing was an important and bipartisan goal, and in 1993-1994 he was willing to take monetary-policy risks to boost the chances of achieving it.
The Fed, in Greenspan’s view, had a responsibility not only to fight inflation but also to create a prosperous, entrepreneurial society, and he sought to achieve that dual mandate – with high employment as important as stable prices – during the high-tech boom of the late 1990’s.
Unique among his Republican peers, after 2001 he spoke – quietly in public, but loudly in private – against the Bush administration’s feckless fiscal policies.
That is why, despite the damage that his reputation suffered in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, Greenspan retains enormous credibility among all those who hope to see rational economic policy in America.
If there are going to be sensible negotiating partners on the Republican side, he should be at their head.
That is why I find his new book, The Map and the Territory, so disappointing.
Greenspan portrays the US Department of Housing and Urban Development and its affordable-housing goals as playing a big role in causing the 2008 crisis.
Moreover, he claims that the Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation is a large factor holding back the recovery.
Likewise, he argues that the Earned Income Tax Credit – enacted in 1975 under Republican President Gerald Ford and expanded greatly under Reagan – is a threat to Americans’ moral fiber.
Too much of the book reads, as the Washington Post’s Steven Pearlstein put it, like it was lifted from the Web site of Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential campaign.
The six problems that confronted me and others when we arrived in Washington in 1993 have not been solved.
The long-run fiscal situation remains discouraging, if not as dire as we feared it would become.
Health-care financing remains a mess, even if we have considerable reason to hope that Obamacare has started to address the problem.
And we have made no progress on global warming, preserving a middle-class society, or improving the education system to make equality of opportunity a reality.
Nor have we dealt with the likely shortfall of pension income and assets in an aging America.
But that is not what Greenspan sees.
For him, all of these problems boil down to a simple question: “What type of society do we wish to live in?”
And the choice, in his view, is equally simple: either “a society of dependence” or one based on “self-reliance.”
That is not an analysis; it is a sound bite.
At a time when America desperately needs insight and ideas, Greenspan gives us only partisan bludgeons.
That is bad news for those of us who would like to see an effective, technocratic economic-policymaking process emerge in Washington.
We must somehow come to grips with the fact that we no longer have negotiating partners on the Republican side.
The Rise of the Robots
BERKELEY – For decades, people have been predicting how the rise of advanced computing and robotic technologies will affect our lives.
On one side, there are warnings that robots will displace humans in the economy, destroying livelihoods, especially for low-skill workers.
Others look forward to the vast economic opportunities that robots will present, claiming, for example, that they will improve productivity or take on undesirable jobs.
The venture capitalist Peter Thiel, who recently joined the debate, falls into the latter camp, asserting that robots will save us from a future of high prices and low wages.
Figuring out which side is right requires, first and foremost, an understanding of the six ways that humans have historically created value: through our legs, our fingers, our mouths, our brains, our smiles, and our minds.
Our legs and other large muscles move things to where we need them to be, so our fingers can rearrange them into useful patterns.
Our brains regulate routine activities, keeping the leg- and finger-work on track.
Our mouths – indeed, our words, whether spoken or written – enable us to inform and entertain one another.
Our smiles help us to connect with others, ensuring that we pull roughly in the same direction.
Finally, our minds – our curiosity and creativity – identify and resolve important and interesting challenges.
Thiel, for his part, refutes the argument – often made by robot doomsayers – that the impact of artificial intelligence and advanced robotics on the labor force will mirror globalization’s impact on advanced-country workers.
Globalization hurt lower-skill workers in places like the United States, as it enabled people from faraway countries to compete for the leg-and-finger positions in the global division of labor.
Given that these new competitors demanded lower wages, they were the obvious choice for many companies.
According to Thiel, the key difference between this phenomenon and the rise of robots lies in consumption.
Developing-country workers took advantage of the bargaining power that globalization afforded them to gain resources for their own consumption.
Computers and robots, by contrast, do not consume anything except electricity, even as they complete leg, finger, and even brain activities faster and more efficiently than humans would.
Here, Thiel offers an example from his experience as CEO of PayPal.
Instead of having humans scrutinize every item in every batch of 1,000,000 transactions for indications of fraud, PayPal’s computers can approve the obviously legitimate transactions, and pass on the 1,000 or so that could be fraudulent for thoughtful consideration by a human.
One worker and a computer system can thus do what PayPal would have had to hire 1,000 workers to do a generation ago.
Given that the computer system does not need things like food, that thousand-fold increase in productivity will redound entirely to the benefit of the middle class.
Put another way, globalization lowered the wages of low-skill advanced-country workers because others would perform their jobs more cheaply, and then consume the value that they had created.
Computers mean that higher-skill workers – and the lower-skill workers who remain to oversee the large robotic factories and warehouses – can spend their time on more valuable activities, assisted by computers that demand little.
Thiel’s argument may be correct. But it is far from airtight.
In fact, Thiel seems to be running into the old diamonds-and-water paradox – water is essential, but costs nothing, whereas diamonds are virtually useless, but extremely expensive – albeit in a sophisticated and subtle way.
The paradox exists because, in a market economy, the value of water is set not by the total usefulness of water (infinite) or by the average usefulness of water (very large), but by the marginal value of the last drop of water consumed (very low).
Similarly, the wages and salaries of low- and high-skill workers in the robot-computer economy of the future will not be determined by the (very high) productivity of the one lower-skill worker ensuring that all of the robots are in their places or the one high-skill worker reprogramming the software.
Instead, compensation will reflect what workers outside the highly productive computer-robot economy are creating and earning.
The newly industrialized city of Manchester, which horrified Friedrich Engels when he worked there in the 1840s, had the highest level of labor productivity the world had ever seen.
But the factory workers’ wages were set not by their extraordinary productivity, but by what they would earn if they returned to the potato fields of pre-famine Ireland.
So the question is not whether robots and computers will make human labor in the goods, high-tech services, and information-producing sectors infinitely more productive.
They will.
What really matters is whether the jobs outside of the robot-computer economy – jobs involving people’s mouths, smiles, and minds – remain valuable and in high demand.
From 1850 to 1970 or so, rapid technological progress first triggered wage increases in line with productivity gains.
Then came the protracted process of income-distribution equalization, as machines, installed to substitute for human legs, and fingers created more jobs in machine-minding, which used human brains and mouths, than it destroyed in sectors requiring routine muscle power or dexterity work.
And rising real incomes increased leisure time, thereby boosting demand for smiles and the products of minds.
Will the same occur when machines take over routine brainwork?
Maybe.
But it is far from being a safe bet on which to rest an entire argument, as Thiel has.
Is America Turning Japanese?
BERKELEY – Back in the late 1980’s, Japan seemingly could do no wrong in economists’ eyes.
They saw a clear edge in Japan’s competitiveness relative to the North Atlantic across a broad range of high-tech precision and mass-production industries manufacturing tradable goods.
They also saw an economy that, since reconstruction began after World War II, had significantly outperformed the expected growth of European economies.
And they saw an economy growing considerably faster than North Atlantic economies had when they possessed the same absolute and relative economy-wide productivity levels.
The safe bet in the late 1980’s seemed to be that mechanization, computerization, and robotization would proceed.
Political and economic pressure would lead more Japanese sectors to undergo the transformation to machine-intensive, high-productivity modes of organization that export-oriented manufacturing had already undergone (and that sectors like agriculture and distribution had undergone or were undergoing in the North Atlantic region).
The Japanese work ethic would persist, the reasoning went, and Japan’s high savings rate and slow population growth would give it a substantial edge in capital intensity – and thus in labor productivity – on top of whatever economy-wide advantage it might develop in total factor productivity.
Moreover, proximity to a vast pool of low-wage workers would allow Japan to construct a regional division of labor that took full advantage of its high-paid, well-educated workforce and outsourced low-skill, low-wage, and hence low-productivity jobs to continental Asia.
As Japan equaled and perhaps surpassed the North Atlantic in terms of capital intensity, industrial knowhow, and standard of living, the global economy’s most highly rewarded activities – research and development in high-tech industries, high-end consumer fashion, high finance, and corporate control – would increasingly migrate to Tokyo Bay.
With one-third the population of the United States, Japan was unlikely ever to become the world’s preeminent economic superpower.
But Japan would close the 30% gap (adjusted for purchasing power parity) between its per capita GDP and that of the US.
The prevailing belief was that, by 2015 or so, Japan’s per capita GDP would more likely than not be 10% higher than in the US (in PPP terms).
None of that happened.
Japan’s economy today is some 40% smaller than observers back in the late 1980’s confidently predicted.
The 70% of per capita US GDP that Japan achieved back then proved to be the high-water mark.
Its economy-wide relative productivity level has since declined, with two decades of malaise eliminating the pressures to upgrade in agriculture, distribution, and other services.
Japan’s export-oriented manufacturing industries have maintained their edge but have not attracted other high-end activities – in fashion, finance, or corporate control – to any significant degree.
On the contrary, since the late 1980’s, Japan’s high personal savings rate, rather than being a source of supply-side strength, has been a source of demand-side weakness, financing investment abroad and government debt rather than spurring a domestic investment boom that would boost capital intensity and labor productivity.
Japan is not a poor country today.
But its economic structure and level of prosperity make it look more like Italy than its counterparts in the eastern Pacific Rim – the US coastal states of Washington, Oregon, and California.
Seven years ago, prior to the global financial crisis, the overwhelming consensus among economists was that, in retrospect, Japan’s expected convergence in productivity levels to America’s Pacific coast was not in the cards.
Japanese culture produced enormous blockages to employing half the population – women.
And Japanese politics entrenched rural and small-business interests in a way that impeded the diffusion of export-oriented manufacturing.
Japan, the argument went, was too different in too many ways for the North Atlantic to serve as an economic-development model.
And the export-oriented manufacturing firms that had been stimulated and shepherded by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry were not the core around which the rest of the Japanese economy would crystallize, but rather a separate and walled-off estate.
Thus, the Japanese economy’s potential annual growth rate slowed by roughly an additional two percentage points at the beginning of the 1990’s, as the post-WWII development model lost its steam.
It was largely a fluke that this growth slowdown coincided with an asset-bubble collapse and a cyclical depression – one that caused Japanese output to shrink by about 10% in a few short years, followed by only a slow recovery to the new, lower potential growth rate.
But from the perspective of the past seven years, this clearly needs to be rethought.
According to all evidence, the US economy’s fall from its long-run growth path has left America 7% poorer today (and into the indefinite future) than expected back in 2007.
That approach has left many economists themselves living in countries that are considerably poorer than they expected.
The Long Short Run
BERKELEY – Before 2008, I taught my students that the United States was a flexible economy.
It had employers who were willing to gamble and hire when they saw unemployed workers who would be productive; and it had workers who were willing to move to opportunity, or to try something new in order to get a job.
As bosses and entrepreneurial workers took a chance, supply would create its own demand.
Yes, I used to say, adverse shocks to spending could indeed create mass unemployment and idle capacity, but their effects would be limited to one, two, or at most three years.
And each year after the initial downturn had ended, the US economy would recover roughly 40% of the ground between its current situation and its full employment potential.
The domain of the Keynesian (and monetarist) short run, I said, was 0-2 years.
When analyzing events at a horizon of 3-7 years, one could safely assume a “classical” model: the economy would return to full employment, while changes in policy and in the economic environment would alter the distribution but not the level of spending, production, and employment.
Beyond seven years was the domain of economic growth and economic institutions.
All of this is now revealed as wrong, at least for today, if not in the past or the future.
Japan since the start of the 1990’s provides strong evidence that the short run can last for decades, and then be followed not by a return to the old normal, but by a transition to a new normal in which the Keynesian short run of economic depression casts a long shadow.
What we have seen since 2008 is that Japan is not an exception.
The default framework for thinking about these questions is a very old one: the market-and-natural-interest-rate framework of Knut Wicksell’s Geldzins und Guterpreis (“Interest and Prices”).
In every economy, the argument goes, there is a market interest rate determined by the financial system, and there is a natural interest rate – the value at which desired savings at full employment equal desired investment at full employment, and at which the economy as a whole desires neither to leverage nor to deleverage.
If the economy as a whole desires to leverage up, the result is an inflationary boom.
If the economy as a whole desires to deleverage, a depression ensues.
It is then the central bank’s job to intervene in the banking system in order to push the market interest rate to the natural interest rate, thereby balancing the economy at full employment without excess inflation.
The problem now is that the natural interest rate – that is, the liquid safe nominal interest rate on short-term US Treasury securities – is less than zero.
Thus, the central bank cannot push the market interest rate there.
Until something happens to raise the natural interest rate, we are stuck with a depressed economy.
Some blame a global savings glut for this state of affairs, and call for less thrift.
But if we were at full employment, we would recognize that the world still has mammoth growth opportunities, and to sacrifice future growth for current well-being is a second-best choice.
Others blame a global investment shortfall driven by a lack of technological opportunities.
But, given that this view is expressed in every deep depression, it appears to be an effect of economic stagnation, rather than a cause of it.
Still others say that the problem would resolve itself, at least in the US, if the target for annual inflation were raised from 2% to 5%, because a loss of so much of the real purchasing power that people hoard in cash would induce the needed boost in real investment.
I think they are probably right, but former central bankers like Paul Volcker and Alan Greenspan would warn that a 5% inflation target is ultimately unsustainable.
People can be happy with a stable 2% target (which is too low to notice), but 5% annual inflation would eventually become 10%, and 10% would eventually become 20%, and then the US would face another deep recession, like in 1982, or even more unpleasant alternatives.
Finally, according to a fourth group of economists, centered around Ricardo Caballero of MIT, the problem is a global shortage of safe assets.
This view translates into policies aimed at better mobilizing society’s financial risk-bearing capacity, and that use the public sector to outwit the forces of time and ignorance that curb willingness to engage in risky investments.
So we have four theories, all advocated by smart, thoughtful, and hard-working economists.
In a better world, sophisticated debate in a vibrant public sphere would inform economic policy.
In the world as it is, we are all Japan in the early 1990’s, looking ahead to two or more decades of lost economic growth.
Asia’s Democratic Drama
GENEVA – Asia’s political spectrum ranges from the brutal despotism of North Korea to the enlightened constitutional monarchy of Bhutan (so enlightened that it developed Gross National Happiness as an alternative measure to Gross Domestic Product), with many shades in between.
But the old charge that Asia is ill-suited for Western-style democracy is being leveled again.
Are the skeptics right?
In South and East Asia, democracies outnumber dictatorships by 17 to six.
But democracies are facing turbulent times.
Thailand’s political impasse, amid massive anti-democracy demonstrations, has hit world headlines, and elections have also been violently contested in Bangladesh.
There have been widespread human-rights abuses in Sri Lanka.
Cambodians have suffered a brutal political clampdown.
And political life in the world’s largest democracy, India, is raucous and unruly.
Nonetheless, the notion of democratic exclusivity is both wrong and historically short-sighted.
Although almost all Western countries are currently democracies, this has only been the case since the 1990’s.
Just a half-century earlier, one could count the number of Western democracies on one’s fingers.
And even these were imperfect: using the most basic democratic yardstick – universal suffrage – the United States could not be seen as truly democratic until the civil-rights victories of the 1960’s.
Although Britain was a beacon of democracy in the twentieth century, it did not extend this principle to an empire that held sway over more people and territory than any previous world power.
It suppressed independence movements in India and across the Middle East and Africa (though many of these movements’ members willingly fought for Britain during both World Wars).
Similarly, the Dutch did not extend their democracy to Indonesia.
Nor did France support free and fair elections in Indochina or in its Middle Eastern and African colonies.
The Belgians were particularly brutal in Congo.
The Spanish and Portuguese ravaged Latin America.
And the Germans were not much better in Southwest Africa.
Indeed, two of history’s most terrifying ideologies, fascism and communism, were devised and embraced in continental Europe.
The fact that the word “democracy” derives from ancient Greek, and that one can discern the kernel of democratic thought in Greek philosophy, by no means implies that democracy is embedded in the West’s political DNA.
Only after centuries of absolutist rule, extremism, war, revolution, and oppression can the West as a whole reasonably claim to be free, democratic, peaceful, and prosperous – and even now there are exceptions.
It is also debatable whether this so-called Western democracy was a cause or a consequence of peace and prosperity.
The West was not always the world’s most politically advanced region.
When Jesuit missionaries came to China in the seventeenth century, they enthused about how much Europeans could learn from the country’s enlightened political philosophy, Confucianism.
The enlightenment philosophers Voltaire and Kant did just that.
Confucian concepts such as the “mandate of heaven” seemed infinitely more just than that of Europe’s “divine right of kings.”
The Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen traces the origins of Indian democratic dialogue to the third-century BC Buddhist Emperor Ashoka.
He also contrasts the religious tolerance preached and practiced by the Muslim Emperor Akbar in the 1590’s with the Inquisition, which was hounding heretics in Europe at around the same time.
Our assumptions about the relative prosperity of Asia and the West should also be reconsidered.
As recently as 200 years ago, Asia accounted for 60% of global GDP.
However, following the industrial revolution in northwestern Europe, the colonization of much of Asia, and the Opium Wars in China, their relative positions switched.
By the 1950’s, Asia’s share of global GDP had fallen to less than 20%.
In his 1968 work Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations, Swedish economist and Nobel laureate Gunnar Myrdal considered the words “Asian” and “poor” to be synonymous.
But, over the past three decades, Asian prosperity appears to be within reach once more.
It is of course impossible to say how Asia might have developed had Western imperial powers stayed away.
There is no reason to suppose that the region could not have found its own path to peace, prosperity, and democracy.
Socially and economically, Asia now stands roughly where Europe was at the start of the twentieth century; and one can only hope that its democratic journey will be shorter and less violent.
Crucially, that path has already been taken by South Korea.
Despite 35 years of brutal Japanese colonization, three years of civil war, military dictatorship, and a lack of natural resources, the country has emerged from extreme poverty to become – in a volatile neighborhood – a stable, prosperous, and vibrant democracy.
Its neighbors could surely follow in its footsteps.
Democracy is not a Western product; nor is it for Western citizens alone.
Asia has enough historical experience to suggest that even its six remaining dictatorships could, in time, embrace a fairer system of government – and the peace and prosperity that come with it.
Solving Europe’s Credibility Problem
PARIS – As the eurozone debates how to escape the stagnation trap in which it finds itself, one question has become increasingly important: Can governments credibly commit to trim public spending in the future while avoiding immediate cuts?
Fortunately, the answer is a qualified yes: there are ways to ensure that fiscal accommodation now is followed by consolidation later.
Growth and inflation in the eurozone remain much too weak.
The European Central Bank’s latest assessment is bleak, and ECB President Mario Draghi has made no secret of the fact that risks remain on the downside.
Nominal GDP growth – that is, real growth plus inflation – will not exceed 1.5% this year and may well end up perilously close to 1%.
Though monetary policy is supportive, it is close to reaching its limits, and the ECB’s initiative to stimulate credit by lending to commercial banks on super-cheap terms has not proved as effective as hoped.
AAA ten-year government bonds currently yield about 1%, suggesting that markets do not expect a strong rebound.
This is the type of situation in which fiscal policy should come to the rescue.
Draghi made that very point in his speech at the annual gathering of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, in late August, and several economists have suggested that it is time for the eurozone to engineer a temporary fiscal expansion.
In a recent article, Francesco Giavazzi and Guido Tabellini of Bocconi University proposed a permanent tax cut, followed by gradual spending cuts.
Combined with pro-growth reforms of product and labor markets, such a program could yield both lasting supply-side benefits (through lower taxation) and a temporary demand boost that would help to revive eurozone growth.
Gradualism on spending cuts may have other merits, quite apart from its macroeconomic benefits. Efficient public-sector reform takes time.
Governments that trim public expenditures in a hurry rarely make informed choices.
An expenditure review based on systematic policy evaluations is the best approach to sorting out good spending from bad spending and thus maximize value for money.
There are two objections to this approach.
First, it is argued that action of this sort would violate the requirements of the EU’s fiscal compact.
That is not necessarily the case.
Of the eurozone’s 18 members, ten are no longer considered to be running an excessive deficit.
Even for those under enhanced scrutiny, such as France and Spain, escape clauses exist: in case of a “protracted period of very low annual GDP growth,” the EU can grant an exemption from the required annual adjustment.
These countries cannot launch stimulus measures, but the EU could let them fine-tune the pace of consolidation, provided that they are able to commit to comprehensive cuts in the future.
So the eurozone has some – albeit limited – fiscal space.
Debt levels and remaining deficits underscore the need for extreme caution, but, assuming a common will to undertake action, there would be room for maneuver within the European rules.
The second objection is that governments will fail to deliver on their promises.
Responding to Giavazzi and Tabellini, Roberto Perotti (also of Bocconi) has argued that the gradualist strategy simply would not be credible.
Spending cuts are bound to be politically difficult decisions, and governments cannot commit to delivering them with certainty.
So, says Perotti, the “cut taxes now, cut spending later” combination would involve enormous moral hazard.
Perotti has a point.
Carlo Cottarelli, appointed by the Italian government to oversee its expenditure review, noted recently that even before spending cuts were enacted, they were being used to finance new spending.
The political economy of public-spending reform is tricky, and well-designed macroeconomic plans can be taken hostage by pork-barrel politics.
There is, however, a solution to this problem: Governments and parliaments can delay action without postponing decision.
Nothing prevents them from deciding now that pensions will be reduced in three years or that a given industrial subsidy will disappear on January 1, 2017.
If parliaments want to tie their own hands, they can do so simply by passing a law.
Actual decisions whose effects are delayed could serve as a down payment, ensuring that, say, half of the spending cuts programmed for the years to come are already enacted.
To be sure, decisions can always be reversed; parliaments can simply pass another law.
But this is also true of spending cuts that have already been implemented.
Everything is reversible in a democracy.
Moreover, Europe has instruments to ensure that commitments retain their long-term value.
Its surveillance apparatus is mostly used to monitor budget deficits in real time, but it could also help to evaluate the future consequences of policy decisions.
The so-called “costing” of policy measures (determining the exact amount of savings brought about by a reform) requires technical skills and access to extensive data.
The European Commission is uniquely equipped to do this job; together with the independent national fiscal watchdogs, it could be asked to review draft laws in detail, assess their future budgetary effects, and thereby ensure that governments do not embellish their projections when promising that their reforms will yield future savings.
A “cut taxes now, cut expenditures later” strategy is therefore feasible.
Though such a strategy would be challenging to implement and enforce, it could be credible and remain compatible with fiscal responsibility if it were buttressed by strong commitment mechanisms at the national and European levels.
Of course, not everybody agrees that such a strategy, though possible, is desirable.
But that is an entirely different matter.
Can Investment Save Europe?
PARIS – Economic growth in Europe remains disappointing.
Virtually all European Union members are expected to post higher output in 2014; but, according to the International Monetary Fund’s latest projections, the average growth rate in the eurozone will barely exceed 1%.
And, whereas the British economy is displaying strong momentum, its GDP has only now surpassed the pre-crisis mark.
In per capita terms, the EU is still poorer than it was seven years ago.
In this context, a new policy target has emerged: investment.
Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, who currently holds the EU’s rotating presidency, has pushed for it, and Jean-Claude Juncker, the president-elect of the European Commission, has called it his “first priority.”
His goal for the next three years is to mobilize an additional €100 billion ($134 billion) per year (0.75% of GDP) for public and private investment.
Investment is certainly a politically appealing theme.
It can unite Keynesians and supply-side advocates; proponents of public spending and supporters of private business can stand together.
And historically low long-term interest rates undoubtedly provide an exceptionally favorable opportunity to finance new ventures.
But it does not automatically follow that governments should pour money into public infrastructure projects or foster private investment by adding further incentives amid already auspicious market conditions.
At a time when private income has shrunk, public resources are scarce, and debt burdens are heavy, plans to stimulate investment should be carefully scrutinized.
Even seemingly purposeful projects can seriously backfire: only a few years ago, Europe’s well-intentioned efforts to stimulate renewables resulted in a solar energy bubble of macroeconomic proportions.
Whereas cutting greenhouse-gas emissions is necessary, the current generation of relatively inefficient renewables should not be deployed at the expense of the development of more cost-effective technology.
That is why it is essential to determine, prior to any effort to boost investment, whether sluggish growth in Europe reflects abnormally low capital formation.
The data suggest that it does: from 2007 to 2013, investment has fallen by 18% in the EU, compared to just 6% in the United States.
In Southern Europe, investment has literally collapsed; even in Germany, it will reach pre-crisis levels only this year.
But this is hardly a sufficient observation, because excessive pre-crisis real-estate investment made a sharp downward adjustment inevitable.
The reckless construction of condominiums without buyers and airports without passengers had to stop.
More generally, investment tends to follow economic growth: companies add new capacity only if there is demand for their products.
A recession almost always implies a disproportionate fall in investment.
For these reasons, determining whether low investment is a cause or a consequence of slow growth is not as easy as it may seem.
Taking push and pull factors into account, DIW, the German economic institute, reckons that the investment gap is real; for the eurozone, it puts the gap at about 2% of GDP, or €200 billion.
That is a significant number, which suggests that there is a case for policy action.
That raises the next issue: what impedes investment, and what can be done to remove such obstacles?
Part of the answer concerns regulation.
For example, investment in efficient energy production and conservation is being held back by pervasive uncertainty about the future path of climate policies.
A European agreement on how to stabilize the price of carbon would help to catalyze private projects.
At the national level, well designed, stable schemes to improve domestic heating efficiency would also be helpful.
More generally, regulatory clarity and predictability are essential to private investment.
The answer is also partly financial.
In Europe, the pre-crisis boom in real-estate investment was fueled by reckless credit flows from Northern to Southern Europe.
Credit rationing has followed, as banks reduced their overburdened balance sheets and were discouraged from risk-taking.
Moreover, money has flowed back to Northern Europe from the distressed periphery.
As a result, credit for, say, a small Spanish company is neither cheap nor abundant.
This calls for immediate action.
Packaging existing loan portfolios and offloading them to non-bank investors, as many have proposed, should be encouraged.
Beyond short-term fixes, the main priority must be to encourage a resumption of savings flows across Europe, but this time in the form of equity, not bank deposits and loans.
For this, Europe needs an adequate regulatory and tax framework.
Official institutions could also be involved in a suitable way.
Oddly, the European Investment Bank, the EU’s financial arm, is authorized to provide only loans and guarantees, not equity investment.
Substitutes should be found.
There are, finally, a few fields where national governments could act directly.
Infrastructure is a case in point, provided that the current interest in investment projects is not used as an excuse to revive Europe’s love for white elephants.
Will it be enough?
It is hard to know.
The EU faces a delicate balancing act between the need to foster investment and the need to remain cautious, especially with public money.
Juncker, for his part, will need to display both firm resolve and sound judgment.
Will Vladimir Putin Bolster the Eurozone?
PARIS – Jacek Rostowski, Poland’s finance minister until last November, recently suggested that Russian President Vladimir Putin would not have dared to annex Crimea if he had not observed Europe agonizing over a solution to the euro crisis.