The suffering and wanton destruction of people’s lives, the despair and absence of human dignity in this region have gone on for too long.
The Palestinians of Gaza – indeed, all those across the region who lead blighted lives without hope – cannot wait for new administrations or international institutions to act.
If the Fertile Crescent is not to become a futile crescent, we must wake up and find the moral courage and political vision for a quantum leap in Palestine. 
Humanizing the Human Genome Project
COLD SPRING HARBOR – Since the human genome was first sequenced in 2000, genome science has accelerated at a remarkable rate.
Rapid advances in DNA-sequencing technology mean that affordable decoding of the human genome is not far away.
In fact, human genomes could be sequenced for as little as $1,000 in the next few years.
Unfortunately, the current biomedical research establishment is entirely unprepared for such a scenario.
Researchers often believe that their mission is to uncover new biology and genetics, and that someone else will translate them to the clinical arena.
Accordingly, many geneticists have worked on “big-science” genomics, including genome-wide association studies focused on common genetic variation in the human species.
But it is widely known that certain mutations can run in families, increasing dramatically the risks of certain diseases – for example, breast cancer, sickle-cell anemia, and cystic fibrosis.
Unfortunately, many human molecular geneticists have abdicated any responsibility for trying to decrease the overall burden of such diseases.
While this trend has many causes – most of which have been debated extensively – one very important factor is rarely discussed.
Scientific research – and biomedical research in particular – largely resembles a race.
Human geneticists, like big-game hunters, specialize in finding disease genes – the “prize.”
Once they succeed, they usually do not continue to develop their findings; instead, they move on to their next target.
Today, scientists are rewarded for how many papers they publish, and in which journals.
In the United States, several major genome-sequencing centers exist primarily to conduct research – including the Centers for Mendelian Genomics, which seek to find the genetic basis of “simple” Mendelian disorders (diseases caused by a single mutation in the structure of DNA).
Many other countries are undertaking similar programs.
But the discoveries and published papers rarely benefit the people who enable this research by donating their blood and other tissue samples.
As Michael Nielsen discusses in his recent book Reinventing Discovery, the “publish or perish” mentality that dominates the field means that many substandard or incomplete papers are published, while those people who are supposed to benefit from the research are often little more than an afterthought.
Indeed, research volunteers rarely receive their genomic data, which betrays the trust that participants place in researchers to use their findings not only to increase the stock of scientific knowledge, but also to deliver actionable results.
The personal genomics and biotechnology company 23andMe has created a useful interface for returning results, which could easily be built upon to deliver complete genome data to participants – as long as the sample collection and sequencing are performed to a sufficiently high clinical standard.
The company’s model laudably calls for research participants to help in the analysis of their own genomes, thereby relieving researchers of the burden of returning all results at once.
With expanding knowledge, analyzing genomes becomes easier.
The hope is that, as technology develops, more researchers will recognize the importance of returning results – especially those that could have a significant medical impact – to participants.
Because there is no regulation requiring that initial sequencing of human genomes be performed to clinical standards, most sequencing does not meet laboratory-test criteria.
Indeed, results are often not reproducible – badly conceived, poorly conducted, or outright fraudulent.
Criteria must therefore be established to ensure that sequencing is performed in an appropriate clinical environment, with rigorous standards in place, including for sample collection.
Researchers today face the wrong incentives, which results in the failure to translate findings into meaningful action for research participants.
Only by improving clinical standards and returning results to participants can human genome sequencing truly serve its purpose – to help humanity.
Human Rights Require Stronger Institutions
PARIS – Sixty years ago this week, the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the first international proclamation of the inherent dignity and equal rights of all people.
To this day, the Universal Declaration remains the single most important reference point for discussion of ethical values across national, ideological, and cultural divides.
Yet the Declaration’s enlightened vision of individual freedom, social protection, economic opportunity and duty to community is still unfulfilled.
Tragically, genocide is happening again, this time in Sudan.
A heightened security agenda since the attacks on the United States in September 2001 has included attempts to legitimize the use of “extraordinary rendition” (the movement between countries of prisoners and suspects without due process of law) and torture.
For women around the world, domestic violence and discrimination in employment are a daily reality.
Minorities suffer stigma, discrimination, and violence in developed and developing countries.
The right to information is denied to millions through censorship and media intimidation.
Poverty is our greatest shame.
At least one billion very poor people, 20% of humanity, are daily denied basic rights to adequate food and clean water.
While gross inequalities between rich and poor persist, we cannot claim to be making adequate progress toward fulfilling the ambitions set down 60 years ago.
As we mark this anniversary, the question is how to protect the inherent dignity and equal rights of all people.
A key part of the answer lies in more effective systems of accountability, so that rights are recognized and laws enforced.
Yet if we take a long, hard look at what has been achieved over the past six decades – and at what remains resistant to all our efforts – then it is also clear that this will not be enough.  
The deepest challenges of discrimination, oppression, injustice, ignorance, exploitation, and poverty cannot be addressed through the law or policy alone.
If we are to make reforms sustainable and ensure that they truly protect human rights, we need effective institutions of government.
Poorly equipped or corrupt institutions are a primary obstacle to the effective protection and promotion of human rights.
In recent years, billions of dollars have been invested by governments, businesses, and private philanthropy in fighting poverty in poor countries.
Millions of people have benefited.
Yet those involved have recognized publicly that without greatly improved institutional capacity – for example, well-resourced and competent local and national health systems – further progress will be limited.
Similarly, billions of people are today unable to access or protect their legal rights because judicial and law enforcement systems are impoverished or lack integrity.
Changing this will require massive investment in courts, judicial officials, police, prison systems, social ministries, and parliaments, as well as in national human rights institutions and other official monitoring bodies.
Nothing on this anniversary is more important than to urge our leaders to recognize the scale of the task and commit to sustained action to build institutional capacities to protect human rights, starting in their own countries.
As world leaders race to address the current global economic crisis, it may seem unrealistic to be calling for large and long-term investments of this kind.
But, while stabilizing the international financial system is important, doing so won’t solve wider challenges of governance.
Human rights cannot be realized in the absence of effective institutions.
Where courts and police are corrupt, over-burdened and inefficient, basic civil rights will be violated.
Where social ministries are under-resourced, disempowered, or lack qualified staff, basic rights to adequate health care, education, and housing will remain unfulfilled. 
Even the world’s richest nation, the United States, struggles to implement much needed reforms for some of its most important social institutions – including its health and education systems.
Think how much more difficult this challenge is for the world’s developing nations.
Making progress is a great test of political maturity.
It is, nevertheless, essential if we are to make rights a reality for all. 
Over the past year, as members of The Elders – a group of leaders formed under Nelson Mandela’s inspiration – we have been working with a range of partner organizations to send a human rights message to the world through the Every Human Has Rights Campaign.
Thanks to this collective effort, tens of thousands of individuals – and millions more through schools, community groups, trade unions, and civil society organizations – have come to identify again, or for the first time, with the goals of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This is reason for hope. 
We have better tools to communicate and demand justice than any generation before us.
We have global goals and shared destinies that connect us.
What is needed now are leadership, resources, a greater sense of urgency, and commitment to the long-term efforts that must dedicated to ensuring that the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration are not only recognized universally, but respected as well.
Humpty Dumpty and Global Financial Imbalances
WASHINGTON, DC: There is an old saying that goes, “If you have only a hammer, everything looks like a nail.”
Nowhere is this clearer than in discussions of the United States’ trade deficit and global financial imbalances, given economists’ tendency to reduce most economic problems to questions of savings. Unfortunately, this focus on savings distorts understanding and distracts from the real challenge of creating mass consumption markets in developing countries.
Within national income accounts, trade deficits represent the excess of a country’s consumption over production.
From an accountant’s perspective, that makes it logical to label trade deficits as negative savings.
Most economists go a step further, asserting that the US deficit is caused by a savings shortage.
But, since one country’s trade deficit is another’s surplus, US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has argued for turning the conventional logic on its head: rather than resulting from a savings shortage, the US trade deficit is the result of a global savings glut – especially in China.
Both stories are flawed.
How does a savings glut translate into exports, given that households do not export?
Likewise, if the US is consuming too much, why has it been closing manufacturing capacity, and why is there so much labor market softness?
Both the savings shortage and savings glut hypotheses confuse accounting outcomes with causes.
Trade deficits reflect transactions between producers and buyers, and those transactions are the result of incentives and price signals.
US consumers buy imports rather than American-made goods because imports are cheaper.
This price advantage is often due to exchange rates in places like China and Japan, whose currencies are undervalued by between 25% and 40%, which often offsets US efficiency advantages.
Undervalued exchange rates are only one of the policies that countries use to boost exports and restrain imports, so that they run trade surpluses, while their trading partners (including the US) run deficits.
Policies aimed at ensuring export-led growth also include export subsidies and barriers to imports.
In the modern era of globalization, export-led growth is supplemented by policies to attract foreign direct investment (FDI), a combination that has been particularly successful in China.
Such FDI policies include investment subsidies, tax abatements, and exemptions from domestic regulation and laws.
These policies encourage corporations to shift output to developing countries, which gain modern production capacity. This increases developing countries exports and reduces their import demand (or increases it at a lower rate than export growth).
Meanwhile, corporations reduce home country manufacturing capacity and investment, which reduces home country exports while increasing imports.
Once again, China provides clear evidence of these patterns, with almost 60% of Chinese exports being produced by foreign corporations.
This story is fundamentally different from the savings shortage and savings glut hypotheses, and it leads to dramatically different policies.
Developing countries need to grow, but nowadays it is easier to acquire capacity and grow through FDI than it is to develop domestic mass consumption markets.
Consequently, rather than facing a savings glut, the global economy faces a problem of demand failure in developing countries.
The challenge is to get corporations to invest in developing countries, but for purposes of producing for local consumers.
That requires expanding markets in developing countries, which means tackling income inequality and getting income into the right hands – an enormous organizational challenge that is off the radar because economists focus exclusively on savings and supply-side issues.
Labor standards, minimum wages, and unions are part of the solution, as they were in countries that developed successfully.
Unions have historically been especially important since they engage in decentralized wage bargaining that tie wages to firms’ productivity.
Consequently, wages are market sustainable.
Government spending can also help, but its role is limited.
Countries that substitute government spending for market spending either generate inflationary budget deficits, or end up with excessively high tax rates that destroy incentives.
But no solution is possible until we abandon the savings shortage and savings glut hypotheses and connect today’s global financial imbalances with global production patterns and inadequate demand in developing countries.
Tortuous claims that saving is merely the flip side of consumption and investment spending are the economic equivalent of Humpty Dumpty’s argument in Through the Looking Glass : “When I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean.”
Humpty-Dumpty Iraq
Iraq’s draft constitution will probably be approved in the referendum to be held on October 15.
But whether it is ratified or not ultimately does not matter, as the constitution – and the whole constitution-making process – is totally out of touch with the realities of a country that no longer exists as a coherent body politic.
The problem is not with the constitution, but with the conventional wisdom – almost an idée fixe – that Iraq is a viable modern nation-state, and that all it needs to make it work properly is the right political institutions.
But this is a fallacy, and responsible leaders should begin to think of alternatives.
The Iraqi state, established in the 1920’s by British imperialist planners (with Winston Churchill in the lead), is a strange pastiche of three disparate provinces of the old Ottoman Empire: Mosul in the north with a Kurdish majority, Baghdad in the center with a Sunni Arab majority, and Basra in the south with a Shia Arab majority.
For their own political reasons, the British put the Sunni Arabs – never more than 25% of the population – in control of the whole country, and even imported a Sunni Arab Hashemite prince to rule over their creation.
Ever since, the country could be held together only by an iron fist: Iraq’s history is replete with Shia, Kurdish, and even Christian Assyrian revolts, all put down in bloody fashion by the ruling Sunni minority.
Throughout its history, modern Iraq has always been the most oppressive of the Arab countries.
Saddam’s rule was only the most brutal in a long line of Sunni regimes.
It was this Sunni hegemony – and not merely that of Saddam’s Ba’athist regime – that was toppled by the United States.
But, given Iraq’s history and demography, the American attempt to refashion the country as a functioning democracy has foundered on three shoals: the Shia majority’s empowerment, the Kurds’s refusal to give up their hard-won de facto mini-state in the north, and the Sunnis’ violent campaign to undermine any system that they do not lead.
In short, the draft constitution is an attempt to square a circle. The Sunni resistance – a guerilla and terrorist war that was well prepared in the last years of Saddam’s rule – will continue to try to subvert any semblance of order representing the current majority Shia-Kurdish coalition.
The Sunnis will go on with their murderous attacks on Shias, Kurds, and the US-led military coalition. They will probably boycott the constitutional referendum and all subsequent elections, just as they have boycotted the previous elections.
After all, given the brutal logic of their long hegemony in Iraq, why should the Sunnis contemplate submitting to a process that is premised on their minority status, particularly when whole areas of the country are under the effective control of the Sunni insurgency?
Similarly, why should the Shias, for their part, submit to Sunni hegemony rather than building up their own political structure in the south, modeled on what the Kurds have already achieved in the north?
Let’s be frank: Iraq is going the way of Yugoslavia as it disintegrated in the early 1990’s.
This should be acknowledged and ultimately welcomed, despite conventional diplomatic norms regarding the inviolability of the territorial integrity of existing states.&#160;
Of course, such norms are helpful.
But once a state disintegrates, as happened in Yugoslavia, no constitutional formulations can save it.
Constitutions works only if all sides have an interest in operating within the proposed framework – and this obviously is not the case in Iraq.
There is nothing sacrosanct in the continued existence of multi-ethnic and multi-religious states if their constitutive groups do not wish to live together.
On the contrary, there are lessons to be learned from the demise of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and even – perhaps especially – Czechoslovakia, which negotiated its break-up without violence.
By contrast, the current Bosnia-Herzegovina is an example of another failed attempt to keep a decrepit multi-ethnic entity alive: it doesn’t work, and the country is held together only by the almost dictatorial power of the international community’s High Representative and the presence of foreign troops.
It is time to face reality: the Kurdish region in the north is functioning in a reasonable way, and it has even been able to allay Turkey’s fears that its existence will aggravate that country’s own Kurdish problem.
With the Shias building their polity in the south, the Sunni areas too should be allowed to go their own way.
This may be more conducive to peace than trying to impose on them a hated occupation or an equally hated Shia hegemony.
The emergence of three states – or highly autonomous regions – instead of a unified Iraq is happening anyway, constitution or no constitution.
Nobody, it appears, can put Humpty-Dumpty Iraq together again.
But it will require courage to acknowledge what is occurring before our eyes, rather than continue to grasp at the chimera of a consolidated Iraqi state.
In fact, to acknowledge the obvious in Iraq is also to recognize that there are grounds for hope.
As in the former Yugoslavia, the separate entities now emerging may stand a better chance of developing a semblance of representative and eventually democratic governance than if Iraq’s warring communities are forced to live together in the prison house that the country has always been for most of its citizens.
A Clash of Western Civilizations
PARIS – Images from the refugee crisis in Europe have juxtaposed smiling crowds in Vienna and Munich with grim, unwelcoming faces in Budapest.
The result has been a surge of commentary about the “two Europes” – one welcoming, one forbidding.
The truth is that disagreements over whether countries should take in refugees are hardly unique to Europe.
The contrast on display is symptomatic of a deep rift within the Western world.
The divide cuts across the United States, the European Union, and Israel – and, equally important, across Jewish and Christian communities.
On one side are politicians like German Chancellor Angela Merkel, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, US President Barack Obama, former Israeli Welfare and Social Services Minister Isaac Herzog, and religious figures like Pope Francis.
On the other are Hungarian Prime Minister Victor Orbán, French nationalist politician Marine Le Pen, US Republican Presidential Candidate Donald Trump, Israeli Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu, the Cardinal of Hungary, Péter Erdő, and legions of other Eastern European clergy.
Each of the camps shares a fundamental outlook on the role refugees play in society.
The first group consists of those who consider democratic values to be more important than ethnic or national identities.
In their view, anyone who abides by a country’s laws can become a full-fledged citizen and contribute to the vitality of his or her adopted country.
According to this view, inclusion of “the other” – people from different countries and cultures – does not destroy national identity; it enriches it with new ideas and behaviors.
Proponents of such cross-fertilization point to outsiders or their descendants who have attained high positions in their adopted countries: a Latino member of the US Supreme Court, German constitutional lawyers of Turkish origin, French prefects whose parents and grandparents arrived from North Africa, British lords and baronesses with roots in Africa and the Caribbean, and Italian writers of Indian descent.
Accordingly, advocates of this worldview regard fences and walls as insults to humanity, proof that those who build and maintain them have no trust in their countries’ vibrancy and strength.
Above all, they adhere to a universal discourse based on international law and ethical, moral, and religious principles.
Christians and Jews in this camp stress that welcoming strangers and people in need lies at the very heart of their respective faiths.
Taking in the needy is an ethical imperative, not a politically conditioned choice.
Despite the fact that most refugees come from Arab lands known for their anti-Semitism and anti-Israel stance, Jewish intellectuals in this camp have been unanimous in welcoming them with open arms.
Meanwhile, Pope Francis has been clear that Christian values include caring for refugees.
On the other side of the divide are those who fear the other as a threat to national identity.
Their gut-level response is to build fences and walls, as long and as tall as possible, whether on the border between Mexico and the US, on Israel’s border with Egypt, or on Hungary’s border with Serbia (or even with fellow EU member Croatia).
It is no coincidence that Hungarian and Bulgarian policymakers have turned to Israeli companies to seek technical advice on how to build their fences.
Members of this camp do not believe that dynamic civil societies can integrate people of different origins within open democratic settings, or that their countries can benefit from welcoming them.
The risk of a few bad apples (Mexican drug dealers, Islamic terrorists, economic migrants, or those wishing to cash in on welfare systems) outweighs any benefits that the vast majority of young and determined newcomers could bring.
Nor does this camp believe in international conventions on the rights of asylum-seekers or the duty of signatory countries to take them in.
Any appeal to human rights is derided as dangerous naiveté, as are references to moral or religious imperatives.
Instead, the emphasis is on protecting the “nation” against foreign viruses.
These views are promoted not only by politicians, but also by leading religious authorities, including the evangelical right in the US, Catholic prelates in Eastern Europe, and Israel’s nationalist rabbis.
This clash of Western civilizations could not be more important.
Those who shut doors and build walls do not belong to the same family as those who welcome the needy in the name of higher values.
The foundational principles of our democratic traditions are at stake – principles that are being weakened by the clash itself.
Keep the Internet Tax-Free
WASHINGTON, DC – When you spark one of the largest protests in Eastern Europe since the fall of communism, you know that you have stirred up the electorate.
That is exactly what the Hungarian government did when it recently proposed an “Internet tax” of 50 euro cents ($0.62) per gigabyte.
More than 100,000 protesters gathered in Budapest, furious at the political symbolism of the tax and its very real economic impact.
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s government quickly backed down.
Hungary’s proposed tax was absurd – akin to assessing fees on reading books or charging people to have conversations with friends.
But the proposal, even if discarded (though Orbán has hinted that he may bring it back in another form), remains worrisome, because it is part of a disturbing trend.
A large number of countries have introduced taxes and tariffs that hamper the adoption and use of information and communications technology (ICT).
All together, 31 countries – including Turkey, Brazil, and Greece – add 5% or more to the cost of ICT, on top of standard value-added taxes.
In Hungary, the proposed tax would have been particularly onerous, because it would raise the cost of mobile data by 5-15% and have an even bigger impact on fixed broadband subscriptions.
For the young and the poor, it would be a significant burden.
A cap of €2.30 per person, hastily proposed after the initial public outcry, and before the proposal was withdrawn, would have done little to ease that burden on low-income Internet users, while drastically reducing the program’s overall revenue.
As the protesters in Budapest pointed out, the proposed tax is wrong for Hungary.
It is wrong for other countries, too.
Cash-strapped governments adopt these taxes because ICT goods and services are an easy target for revenue authorities.
In addition, they are sometimes mischaracterized as luxury products – as if the Internet has not become central to peoples’ lives.
These policies are ultimately self-defeating.
The resulting price hikes impede the adoption and use of ICT, lowering tax revenues from purchases of goods and services.
And the evidence shows an even larger indirect effect: restricting ICT adoption dampens growth.
Ultimately, this has a negative impact on total tax revenues, offsetting any gains from fees on Internet use.
One study found that for every dollar equivalent of tariffs India imposed on imported ICT products it suffered an economic loss of $1.30 from lower productivity.
Taxes on ICT are the modern-day equivalent of eating the grain you were saving to plant next year.
The adoption of ICT drives fundamental technological change, potentially transforming a broad range of industries, as well as people’s daily lives.
For businesses, ICT can improve efficiency and facilitate coordination.
For individuals, it can boost incomes and make everyday life more convenient.
The benefits of ICT goods and services grow significantly as more businesses and consumers start to use them.
Smart government policies, such as subsidies or tax breaks for ICT purchases, boost adoption by helping users who would not otherwise be able to afford them.
Taxing the Internet, like other taxes and tariffs on ICT goods and services, has the opposite effect.
Hungary’s proposed tax was especially pernicious, owing to its poor design.
Because the tax was a flat €0.50 per gigabyte, its share in total ICT spending would rise as the cost of a gigabyte fell – as it is almost guaranteed to do.
The cap on such a tax would prevent the rate from spiraling upward, but rising bandwidths would cause most users to max out quickly, affecting not only the poorest consumers, but also new or small businesses.
Keeping poor people and entrepreneurs off the Internet is no way to fund a government.
Countries would be better off with policies that promote ICT: elimination of taxes and tariffs on ICT products and services, removal of non-tariff barriers like requiring local data storage, and encouragement of digital innovation and transformation in economic sectors through regulatory and procurement reform.
The resulting rise in productivity, competitiveness, and economic growth would establish a far more stable and successful foundation for increasing tax revenues.
The European Union as a whole has done a good job of keeping ICT taxes and tariffs low, despite substantial fiscal difficulties in many countries.
Indeed, the overall non-discriminatory tax regime has been an important boon to ICT adoption, and the EU’s commissioner for the digital agenda spoke out strongly against Hungary’s proposed tax, calling it “a particularly bad idea.”
The only EU country with significant taxes on ICT products and services (around 9%) is Greece, something of a special case in Europe.
The recent actions by Hungarian policymakers show that no country is immune to bad policy ideas.
Governments need revenue, but how they raise it shapes their countries’ economies by encouraging some transactions and discouraging others.
Policies that encourage ICT adoption are the right choice for long-term and inclusive economic growth.
As the case of Hungary showed, ultimately it is up to citizens to hold governments accountable and ensure that tax and tariff policies work for the benefit of all.
Hunting the Higgs
CAMBRIDGE – Fifty years ago, particle physicists faced an unexpected challenge.
Their best mathematical models could account for some of the natural forces that explain the structure and behavior of matter at a fundamental level, such as electromagnetism and the weak nuclear force responsible for radioactive decay.
But the models worked only if the particles inside of atoms had no mass.
How could huge conglomerations of such particles – proteins, people, planets – behave as they do if their constituent parts weighed nothing at all?
Some physicists invented a clever workaround.
They suggested that a type of particle exists that had never been detected; it was eventually named in honor of the British physicist Peter Higgs.
For a half-century, physicists searched for the elusive “Higgs particle.”
Now, following research conducted at CERN, the sprawling particle-physics laboratory near Geneva, the hunt may soon be over.
At first blush, the idea behind the Higgs particle sounds outlandish.
Higgs and his colleagues suggested that every elementary particle really is massless, just as the mathematical models require, and hence all particles would ordinarily zip around at the speed of light.
But suppose that everything around us – every single particle in the universe – is immersed in a huge, unseen vat of Higgs particles.
Whenever most kinds of particles move from point A to point B, they continually bump into Higgs particles, slowing their motion.
When we observe them, they appear to lumber along like holiday shoppers in a crowded store.
From their slow motion, we infer that they have mass.
While a 50-year search for a hypothetical particle reminiscent of a bizarre fairytale might seem quixotic, the Higgs particle stands at the center of the “Standard Model” of particle physics.
Every experimental test of the model so far has matched theoretical expectations.
In some striking examples, the agreement between prediction and measurement has stretched out to twelve decimal places, making the Standard Model the most accurate scientific theory in human history.
The model successfully accounts for three of the four basic forces of nature; only gravity remains beyond its purview.
Higgs particles might have played an even more substantial role at earlier moments in cosmic history.
My own research, along with that of physicists around the world, has focused on what effects Higgs particles might have had just fractions of a second after the big bang – effects that could explain the shape and fate of the universe.
And yet, for all that, we still have no direct evidence that Higgs particles even exist.
According to the Standard Model, Higgs particles scatter off each other, so they, too, should have mass.
The latest research indicates that Higgs particles (if they exist) should be among the most massive critters of the subatomic realm, more than 120 times as massive as the familiar proton.
To produce such a particle in the laboratory requires revving up protons to nearly the speed of light and smashing them together, which the Large Hadron Collider at CERN accomplishes trillions of times per second.
The energetic collisions produce all manner of debris, which physicists carefully track with huge detectors and sift with sophisticated computer algorithms.
Physicists confront two major hurdles in their hunt for the Higgs.
First, they must identify patterns in the debris that could have come from the production and rapid decay of a Higgs particle.
The sought-after signal is well understood in principle, given what we know about the Standard Model.
So is the background noise from all of the other junk that comes flying out when two protons collide with colossal energy.
Physicists searching for a few Higgs-like needles in a mind-bogglingly large haystack must comb their data for anomalies in the debris that cannot be accounted for by known processes.
The second difficulty concerns statistics.
The rules of quantum theory, on which the Standard Model is built, are at root probabilistic.
There will always be statistical flukes in the data, just as any series of coin tosses can produce an unexpected string of seven heads in a row.
To know with confidence that the coin is ordinary, with no hidden features, one must log a sufficiently large number of coin flips and check whether the data include equal numbers of heads and tails over the long run.
After thousands of coin tosses, if the data still show a bias toward heads, one may be justified in thinking that the coin has some unusual properties.
The same holds true for all of the chaff from the protons’ collisions.
Before physicists can claim that their anomalies really come from Higgs particles, they must gather enough data to rule out flukes.
At CERN, two independent teams of physicists recently announced that their data were consistent with detection of a Higgs particle, though there remained a 1-in-2,000 chance that the signal came from mundane, non-Higgs processes.
So the teams will continue smashing protons together, gathering more data, and sifting for signs of a Higgs.
We might not have the Higgs in hand right now.
But the latest news is the strongest indication yet that the 50-year hunt for one of the most fundamental bits of matter might well be coming to a successful conclusion.
The next time the CERN teams call a press conference, it could be weighty news indeed.
Hurricane Sandy and Climate Change
ATHENS, GEORGIA – In the waning weeks of the North American hurricane season – a time when a superstorm is not expected to cause widespread damage to the eastern coast of the United States – Hurricane Sandy is a grim reminder of the menace of extreme weather events.
With the lowest central pressure of the 2012 hurricane season, Sandy may have caused up to $20 billion in damages, making it one of the costliest superstorms in history.
Sandy interacted with a weather system moving toward it from the east, posing difficult challenges for forecasters and nearly unprecedented weather conditions for the region.
A similar storm hit New England 20 years ago.
But Sandy was worse, delivering hurricane-strength winds, drenching rains, and severe coastal flooding throughout the populous mid-Atlantic and northeast corridor.
Some people will, of course, try to link Sandy with climate change.
A similar rush to judgment occurred in the wake of massive tornado outbreaks in the US in recent years, even though the scientific literature does not offer strong support for such a connection.
So, from the perspective of climate change, it is best to take a measured view of Sandy, lest hasty reaction harm scientific credibility.
But that is little cause for comfort.
According to the giant insurance company Munich Re, weather and climate disasters contributed to more than one-third of a trillion dollars in damage worldwide in 2011, and this year’s total may rival that amount.
There is growing evidence of links between climate change and sea-level rise, heat waves, droughts, and rainfall intensity, and, although scientific research on hurricanes and tornadoes is not as conclusive, that may be changing.
Indeed, recent reports by the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and other scientific literature suggest that the intensity of tropical cyclones (that is, hurricanes) will increase as a result of warmer waters.
And our atmosphere and oceans are, indeed, warming, with substantial residual heat stored in the ocean, to be released at some future time.
A few studies have even suggested that tropical cyclones may be “wetter.”
It is quite certain that sea levels have risen over the last century, and continue to rise, in response to changing climate.
And storm surges now ride on these elevated sea levels, amplifying flooding losses where they strike.
Sea surface temperatures along the US northeast coast are about five degrees Fahrenheit above average, which helped to intensify Sandy just prior to landfall.
At this point, it is premature to link the storm’s severity to warmer sea-surface temperatures, because regional variability is known to occur.
But the link certainly is plausible.
Moreover, sea levels along the US northeast coast are rising up to four times faster than the global average, making the region more vulnerable to storm surges and flooding.
And here the bottom line is that any coastal storm system will produce more flooding because of sea level rise.
It should also be noted that an atmospheric weather pattern known as a “block,” a persistent area of high pressure that may have led to record melting in Greenland, was most likely the reason that Sandy moved inland rather than out to sea.
It is too early to tell whether this blocking pattern is a manifestation of weather variability, a short-term climate variation, or the result of climate change.
Advances in numerical weather forecasting during the past several decades have extended our ability to “see” into the future.
In September 1938, before all of these advances, a hurricane devastated much of New England.
No warnings were issued prior to its arrival.
Today, thanks to satellites, weather balloons, supercomputers, and skilled forecasters, we can anticipate hazardous weather up to a week in advance.
Similar advances in climate modeling are occurring, thanks to methodological improvements and better data.
At a minimum, we must ensure that world-class weather and climate-modeling centers have the necessary funding and manpower to implement the most advanced forecasting techniques.
Numerical weather forecasting was invented in the US, but today other countries have developed extremely high modeling capacity.
For example, the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, in Great Britain, was targeting an East Coast landfall for Sandy days ahead of the best American model.
The world will need more cooperation in the coming years, as climate change begins to interact with and exacerbate extreme weather events, in order to gain the lead-time needed to prepare for disasters.
We will also need the collaboration among governments, the private sector, and academia that often leads to improvements in forecasting.
Scientific meetings are key forums for sharing research, vetting new methodologies, and forging new partnerships.
Many occur on an international basis, and we need to encourage such discourse, even in tough times for government budgets.
It is reasonable to ask how well we would be able to predict or assess a storm like Sandy without the knowledge and capacity gained through such international collaboration.
We do not know whether superstorms like Sandy are harbingers of a “new normal” in the uneasy and unpredictable relationship between climate change and extreme weather events.
That does not mean that there is not or cannot be such a connection, but rather that the scientific research needed to prove (or disprove) it must still be conducted.
That is how good science works.
Sandy has provided a powerful demonstration of the need to support it.
Hu’s Chance
Chinese President Hu Jintao’s upcoming visit to the United States, postponed following hurricane Katrina, will be different from previous bilateral meetings.
This time, the countries’ presidents will meet at a time of intensive American attention to the US-China trade balance and other economic issues, such as protection of intellectual property rights.
With China’s US trade surplus reaching $200 billion last year, American sentiment is growing to take strong measures.
Some have suggested that the trade imbalance is related to China’s currency peg to the US dollar.
A recent Congressional bill has called for imposing a 27.5% punitive tariff on Chinese imports.
In fact, the trade imbalance is more complicated than the currency issue per se.
Globalization has strengthened the ability of capital to flow to wherever investment promises the highest returns; likewise, competitive manufactured products from low-wage economies will flow in the other direction.
That is why China fascinates American investors, among others, and why US customers buy Chinese products.
To be sure, the exchange rate has an impact on investment and trade.
But, even with China’s efforts to loosen the renminbi-dollar linkage, it is arguable whether revaluation could save American jobs or improve the US trade balance.
After all, China is not alone: India and other competitive developing countries pose a similar challenge to the US.
Nevertheless, for China’s part, now seems to be a good time to reflect on how to increase its exports’ value-added, as well as focusing on environmental protection and sustainability.
Thus, there is scope for a compromise that recognizes both sides’ legitimate concerns.
The Chinese government is hastening its shopping spree in America these days, pushing up the renminbi’s exchange rate slowly but steadily.
A sensible US policy on China may be to accept gradual currency appreciation, rather than a large revaluation, as America’s economic vitality stems from its own innovation rather than from concessions by the Chinese government.
A more difficult issue for Hu could be intellectual property rights.
China’s recent campaign to crackdown on pirating needs to be encouraged, but far more needs to be done.
However, while the US government and American companies question whether the Chinese are willing and able to enforce such rights, one must put this issue into historical perspective.
Intellectual property protection is related to economic development, so the question should be whether China has reached the stage at which effective protection is possible.
There is a positive side to such problems, however, namely that their very emergence reflects the deepening and broadening of bilateral relations.
Indeed, Sino-US interaction has been so strong that the two presidents met five times last year.
While those meetings also highlighted trade disputes, they also yielded heightened cooperation and significant accomplishments.
For example, the two states share a common interest in anti-terrorism efforts, and they have been collaborating to ensure container security and combat human trafficking.
Their coordinated efforts to divert North Korea peacefully from its nuclear course have also vindicated bilateral cooperation when both sides can define a common security stake.
Similarly, the two countries have a common interest in stabilizing mainland China’s relations with Taiwan.
The current formula, maintaining the status quo, offers the highest common denominator.
With this strategic understanding, there is good reason to expect that Hu’s talks with Bush on Taiwan’s recent termination of the National Unification Council will serve to reduce tensions.
China and the US both have much to gain by thwarting Taiwan’s move toward independence.
Nevertheless, to American eyes, other contentious issues are now emerging in relations with China.
The recently released National Security Strategy outlines three, in particular: China’s global trade expansion, its military transparency, and its relations with “misruling” states.
The political cost of a serious compromise on these matters would be too high for China, but it does no harm to analyze them and find ways to enhance dialogue.
Among the three issues, military transparency seems to be the most sensitive and difficult to address.
Nevertheless, given the large size of China’s armed forces, which currently stands at 2.3 million, a rough calculation would indicate that monthly spending per soldier is at most 2,500 yuan on average – too low to recruit and retain competitive staff.
But if China wants to raise the military budget to improve the quality of its army, the conflict with the demands of fiscal stability could make military transparency important for domestic reasons, and China might no longer view it as being off limits in its relations with the US.
Above all, we must bear in mind the maturation of Sino-US relations in recent years.
A mature bilateral relationship is one in which even difficult issues can be discussed routinely and promptly.
There is no question that such a framework has already been established in relations with the US.
We will now see how Hu uses that framework – and thus what imprint he leaves on the bilateral relationship – in meeting the current challenges.
Low-Hanging Fruit pada Isu Perubahan Iklim
NEW YORK – Bulan depan, negara-negara peserta Protokol Montreal tentang Zat-zat yang Merusak Lapisan Ozon akan bertemu di Kigali, Rwanda, untuk mendiskusikan amendemen atas perjanjian yang bertujuan mengurangi dan menghapuskan penggunaan hidrofluorokarbon (HFC).
HFC, salah satu dari enam kelompok gas rumah kaca “super”, umumnya dipakai pada pendingin ruangan dan lemari es atau mesin pendingin lainnya di seluruh dunia.
Amandemen tersebut akan menjadi anugerah bagi pembangunan berkelanjutan dan bisa menghambat pelepasan emisi penyebab perubahan iklim sebanyak 100-200 miliar ton pada akhir tahun 2050.
Ini cukup memenuhi seperempat jalan dalam pencapaian target batas pemanasan suhu global 2º Celsius, sesuai kesepakatan yang diraih di Paris tahun 2015 lalu.
Protokol Montreal dirumuskan untuk memperbaiki lapisan ozon, sebagai pelindung kehidupan di dunia dari bahaya sinar ultraviolet yang mematikan.
Sejauh ini, Protokol Montreal dinilai ampuh, terbukti dengan 100 bahan perusak ozon tidak lagi digunakan selama tiga dekade terakhir.
Lapisan ozon sedang dalam penyembuhan dan berdasarkan perkiraan terkini, akan pulih pada tahun 2065, juga menghemat triliunan dolar biaya-biaya pelayanan kesehatan dan pertanian secara global.
Perbaikan tersebut dimungkinkan berkat HFC, penggunaan senyawa pengganti klorofluorokarbon (CFC) lain yang lebih ramah ozon, yang mana CFC adalah salah satu bahan dilarang pakai.
Namun, beberapa jenis HFC adalah gas rumah kaca yang 4.000 lebih kuat dibandingkan karbon dioksida, lagi-lagi sumber malapetaka bagi perubahan iklim, apalagi penggunaannya setiap tahun meningkat 10%.
Dengan demikian, fokus pada HFC dalam aksi melawan perubahan iklim sangat masuk akal.
Pertama, pembatasan HCF akan menghasilkan manfaat ekonomi, berkat peningkatan signifikan dalam efisiensi energi yang diwujudkan melalui sistem pendingin udara baru.
Pemakaian sistem pendingin ruangan (AC) lebih efisien akan setara dengan memensiunkan 2.500 pembangkit tenaga listrik ukuran menengah yang memikul beban puncak (peak power plants adalah pembangkit tenaga listrik yang dioperasikan untuk memenuhi kebutuhan tertinggi, seperti di musim panas).
Di Cina, peralihan menuju refrigeran ramah iklim dan peningkatan efisiensi energi pada AC dan sistem pendingin bisa mengurangi emisi yang setara dengan delapan bendungan hidroelektrik Three Gorges.
Di India, transisi tersebut akan sebanding dengan tambahan dua proyek National Solar Mission yang diupayakan pemerintah India, yaitu menggiatkan penetrasi tenaga surya dan pembangunan sejumlah ladang surya baru dan panel surya di atap.
Banyak negara – termasuk Uni Eropa dan Amerika Serikat, serta Belize, Burkina Faso, Kolombia, Mesir, Serbia, dan Yaman – mengakui manfaat besar dan menerapkan langkah sepihak untuk menghapuskan HFC.
Kesepakatan tentang HFC di Kigali nanti akan memberi momentum pada upaya-upaya tersebut dan menyediakan dukungan dana bagi negara-negara berkembang yang ingin beralih ke teknologi terbaru namun belum sanggup membiayainya.
Di kalangan sektor swasta, sejumlah retail raksasa seperti Walmart, Nestle, dan Tesco sudah menjadi bagian dari Consumer Goods Forum dan sepakat untuk mengurangi lalu menghapuskan produk-produk yang mengandung HFC.
Selain itu, PBB dan Greenpeace, melalui prakarsa disebut “Refrigerants, Naturally!” bekerja sama dengan Coca-Cola, Pepsico, Redbull, dan Unilever untuk menjalankan aksi serupa.
Pertemuan di Kigali dirancang untuk menyanggupi amendemen yang solid atas HFC.
Akan tetapi, beberapa negara terutama yang paling panas di dunia sangat khawatir kalau senyawa pengganti yang ramah iklim ini tidak akan berfungsi sebegitu efektifnya pada AC yang penting bagi mereka.
Perjanjian tersebut bisa memberi justifikasi pada negara manapun yang merasa cemas melalui pembebasan sementara, sementara yang lainnya meneruskan penggunaan sistem baru untuk menunjukkan efektivitasnya.
Pemanasan bumi sudah mengakibatkan kesengsaraan pada kelompok penduduk paling rentan di dunia dan sayangnya tidak akan berhenti di situ saja.
Pada akhirnya, semua negara harus mencari jalan ke depan untuk mengurangi HFC dan perubahan iklim, melalui rencana aksi nasional dan target penurunan emisi berdasarkan perjanjian Paris 2015.
Kerangka kerja yang dibentuk melalui kesepakatan serupa seperti Protokol Montreal bisa memudahkannya.
Topik mengenai HFC juga akan menjadi isu pokok dalam konferensi perubahan iklim PBB berikutnya, COP22, yang berlangsung di Marrakesh, Morocco, pada bulan November.
Kami yakin bahwa negara-negara yang bertemu di Kigali paham atas pentingnya amandemen ketentuan-ketentuan yang mengatur HFC, sebab bisa memberi momentum pada agenda lain, seperti dorongan untuk isu Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDG) di Marrakesh.
Jika kita ingin berhasil mengurangi emisi global dengan cepat untuk mencegah eskalasi perubahan iklim semakin memburuk, langkah pertama yang paling masuk akal adalah mengurangi penggunaan HFC.
Hypocrisy on the High Seas?
Thirty years ago, Australian vessels, with the government’s blessing, killed sperm whales off the West Australian coast.
Last month, Australia led international protests against Japan’s plan to kill 50 humpback whales.
Japan, under mounting pressure, announced that it would suspend the plan for a year or two.
The change in public opinion about whaling has been dramatic, and not only in Australia.
Greenpeace began the protests against Australian whaling, and the government appointed Sydney Frost, a retired judge, to head an inquiry into the practice.
As a concerned Australian and a philosophy professor working on the ethics of our treatment of animals, I made a submission.
I did not argue that whaling should stop because whales are endangered. I knew that many expert ecologists and marine biologists would make that claim.
Instead, I argued that whales are social mammals with big brains, capable of enjoying life and of feeling pain – and not only physical pain, but very likely also distress at the loss of one of their group.
Whales cannot be humanely killed – they are too large, and even with an explosive harpoon, it is difficult to hit the whale in the right spot.
Moreover, whalers do not want to use a large amount of explosive, because that would blow the whale to pieces, while the whole point is to recover valuable oil or flesh.
So harpooned whales typically die slowly and painfully.
Causing suffering to innocent beings without an extremely weighty reason for doing so is wrong.
If there were some life-or-death need that humans could meet only by killing whales, perhaps the ethical case against it could be countered.
But there is no essential human need that requires us to kill whales.
Everything we get from whales can be obtained without cruelty elsewhere.
Thus, whaling is unethical.
Frost agreed.
He said that there could be no doubt that the methods used to kill whales were inhumane – he even described them as “most horrible.”
He also mentioned “the real possibility that we are dealing with a creature which has a remarkably developed brain and a high degree of intelligence.”
Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser’s conservative government accepted his recommendation that whaling be stopped, and Australia soon became an anti-whaling nation.
While Japan has suspended its plan to kill humpback whales, its Japanese whaling fleet will still kill about 1,000 other whales, mostly smaller minke whales.
Japan justifies its whaling as “research,” because the International Whaling Commission’s rules allow member nations to kill whales for such purposes.
But the research seems to be aimed at building a scientific case for a resumption of commercial whaling; so, if whaling is unethical, then the research itself is both unnecessary and unethical.
Japan says that it wants the discussion of whaling to be carried out calmly, on the basis of scientific evidence, without “emotion.”
The Japanese think that humpback whale numbers have increased sufficiently for the killing of 50 to pose no danger to the species.
On this narrow point, they might be right.
But no amount of science can tell us whether or not to kill whales.
Indeed, Japan’s desire to continue to kill whales is no less motivated by “emotion” than environmentalists’ opposition to it.
Eating whales is not necessary for the health or better nutrition of the Japanese.
It is a tradition that they wish to continue, presumably because some Japanese are emotionally attached to it.
The Japanese do have one argument that is not so easily dismissed.
They claim that Western countries object to whaling because, for them, whales are a special kind of animal, as cows are for Hindus.
Western nations, the Japanese say, should not try to impose their cultural beliefs on them.
The best response to this argument is that the wrongness of causing needless suffering to sentient beings is not culturally specific.
It is, for example, one of the first precepts of one of Japan’s major ethical traditions, Buddhism.
But Western nations are in a weak position to make this response, because they inflict so much unnecessary suffering on animals.
The Australian government strongly opposes whaling, yet it permits the killing of millions of kangaroos each year – a slaughter that involves a great deal of animal suffering.
The same can be said of various forms of hunting in other countries, not to mention the vast amount of animal suffering caused by factory farms.
Whaling should stop because it brings needless suffering to social, intelligent animals capable of enjoying their own lives.
But against the Japanese charge of cultural bias, Western countries will have little defense until they address the needless animal suffering in their own backyards.
Stopping a Dirty Bomb
VIENNA – Nuclear terrorism is, in the words of US President Barack Obama, “the gravest danger we face.”
But while few would dispute this characterization, the world has unfinished business in minimizing the threat.
Ten years after world leaders agreed to amend the landmark 1987 Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) to make it harder for terrorists to obtain nuclear material, the new measures have yet to enter into force.
The resulting vulnerability needs to be addressed urgently.
In July 2005, signatories to the CPPNM agreed to amend the Convention to address the risk of terrorism more effectively.
The new measures that were introduced would make it more difficult for terrorists to cause a widespread release of radioactive material by attacking a nuclear power plant or detonating a radioactive dispersal device – commonly known as a dirty bomb.
But before the amendment can enter into force, two-thirds of the 152 signatories to the original convention must ratify it.
While significant progress has been made – in July, the US, Italy, and Turkey did so – at least 14 more countries are needed.
The fact that there has never been a major terrorist attack involving nuclear or other radioactive material should not blind us to the severity of the threat.
There is evidence that terrorist groups have tried to acquire the material needed to construct a crude nuclear explosive device, or a dirty bomb.
In 2011, for example, Moldovan police seized highly enriched uranium from a group of smugglers who were trying to sell it.
The smugglers, exhibiting a worrying level of technical knowledge, had tried to evade detection by building a shielded container.
In this case, the story ended happily.
Thanks to efforts by Moldova, with the assistance of the International Atomic Energy Agency, to boost its nuclear security capabilities, the material was identified and confiscated, and the smugglers were arrested.
There is no way to know whether the smuggling effort uncovered in Moldova is an outlier or the tip of a very large iceberg.
But one thing is certain: the amount of nuclear material in the world is increasing.
Since 1999, the amount of such material being used for peaceful purposes has increased by 70% – a trend that will continue as the use of nuclear power grows.
It is essential that effective measures are in place to ensure that these materials are not misused or misplaced, whether accidentally or intentionally.
Since 1995, the IAEA’s member states have reported nearly 2,800 incidents involving radioactive material escaping regulatory control.
Although only a handful of these incidents involved material that could be used to make a nuclear explosive device, a relatively small amount of radioactive material could be combined with conventional explosives to create a dirty bomb.
Such a weapon could be capable of killing many people, contaminating large urban areas, and sparking mass panic.
Much has been achieved in the secure management of nuclear material since the attacks on the United States in September 2001 prompted a renewed focus on the risks of terrorism.
Many countries have instituted effective measures to prevent the theft, sabotage, or illegal transfer of nuclear or other radioactive material, and security at many nuclear facilities has been improved.
But much more needs to be done.
The original Convention focused only on the international transport of nuclear material, and did not cover the protection of nuclear facilities.
The amendment adopted ten years ago would oblige countries to protect nuclear facilities and any nuclear material used, stored, or transported domestically.
It would expand cooperation on locating and recovering stolen or smuggled nuclear material and coordinate the response to any attack on a nuclear facility.
It would also make nuclear trafficking a criminal offense and require signatories to cooperate on improving national systems of physical protection and minimizing the consequences of sabotage.
Protecting nuclear material is not just an issue for countries that use nuclear power.
Terrorists and criminals will try to exploit any vulnerability in the global security system.
Any country, in any part of the world, could find itself used as a transit point – just as any country could become the target of an attack.
Effective international cooperation is critically important.
The consequences of a major security failure could be a catastrophe that transcends borders.
All countries must take the threat of nuclear terrorism seriously.
The single most effective way to do so would be to ensure that the amendment to the CPPNM enters into force as soon as possible.
America’s Late Imperial Dilemma
NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama is under attack – from so-called liberal hawks, more or less to the left of center, as well as from active interventionists on the right – for being a weak president, leading a war-weary (even world-weary) America in retreat.
Obama’s critics, whether on the left or the right, believe that the United States has a unique calling to impose its will on the world.
The only difference is that the former justify their views with talk of democracy and human rights, while the latter do not need any such justification, because, after all, America is the greatest country on earth.
Either way, the premise that the US should lead forcefully rests on the idea that without a benevolent hegemonic power to police the world, chaos will ensue and more malevolent forces will take over.
This opinion was expressed most clearly in a recent article by the conservative foreign-policy thinker Robert Kagan.
Kagan’s argument is that other countries cannot be relied upon to behave responsibly without strong US leadership.
Like other hawks, he warns not only that dictators will behave badly if given the chance, which is certainly plausible, but also that democratic allies need to be kept in their place by a firm hegemonic hand.
In East Asia, for example, China must be “hemmed in” by strong US allies.
But if Japan, America’s main ally in the region, were “much more powerful and much less dependent on the United States for its security,” it, too, should not be trusted.
Kagan may be right in thinking that a precipitous US retreat from East Asia could have dangerous consequences.
But this argument has the familiar whiff of the late stages of empire.
The European imperial powers of the twentieth century would periodically hold out the distant prospect of independence to their colonial subjects – but not yet, not before they were ready, not before their Western masters had educated them to take care of themselves responsibly.
How long this education might take was anybody’s guess.
That is the paradox of imperialism.
As long as the colonized are under the imperial cosh, they can never truly be ready, because the authority to run their own affairs, responsibly or not, was taken away from them.
Empires can impose order and stability for a long time; but imperialists – rather like many Americans today – become tired, and their subjects grow restless.
The imperial order becomes brittle, and, as Kagan rightly notes, when the old order finally breaks down, mayhem often follows.
That happened in India in 1947, when the British left, Pakistan broke away, and roughly a million Hindus and Muslims died in mutual slaughter.
But does this really mean that the British Raj should have lasted longer?
If so, how much longer?
It is just as plausible to argue that prolonged imperial rule could have made ethnic tensions worse.
After all, those tensions were largely the result of colonial divide-and-rule policies.
So it is today, to some degree, with Pax Americana – a kind of imperial world order that was never a formal empire.
Compared to most previous empires, it was relatively benign, though it is too easily forgotten how often the leader of the “Free World” subverted elected leaders and supported dictators, as in Chile, South Korea, El Salvador, Argentina, Indonesia, Guatemala, and so on.
The much-vaunted “liberal order” policed by the US was a product of World War II and the Cold War.
Germany and Japan had to be kept down, the Communist powers had to be contained, and the old countries of Europe had to learn to live with one another under unifying pan-national institutions.
All of this was made possible by American money and military might.
As a result, the Free World, in Western Europe and East Asia, became a US dependency.
This cannot go on forever.
Indeed, the arrangements are already fraying.
But then comes the old imperial paradox.
The longer others remain dependent on the US, the less capable they will be of taking care of their own affairs, including their security.
And, like an authoritarian parent, the US itself, despite its admonitions to its allies to pull their weight, is often loath to let go of its increasingly unruly dependents.
When a new government came to power in Japan in 2009 and tried to break the postwar mold by initiating better relations with China and seeking to reduce its dependence on the US, the Obama administration sought to undermine this effort.
The informal empire would not stand for that kind of insubordination.
In his recent foreign-policy speech at the US Military Academy at West Point, Obama barely mentioned East Asia.
But if any region would benefit from the Obama doctrine, which promises to shift from military to more political approaches to regional problems, it is East Asia.
Still, Obama’s instincts are right.
At least he has recognized the limits of America’s power to impose a global order by force.
His success as a president rests less on the good things he has done (although he has done plenty) than on the stupid things he has avoided, like getting into more unnecessary wars.
This does not resolve the late imperial dilemma of how to reduce dependency on the hegemon without causing more tyranny and violence.
But that painful and risky process will have to be launched eventually, and it will be better served by Obama’s brand of caution than by the tough talk of his critics.
East Asia’s Sins of the Fathers
NEW YORK – One way to look at the growing military tensions over a few tiny islands in the East China Sea is to see in recent events a straightforward case of power politics.
China is rising, Japan is in the economic doldrums, and the Korean peninsula remains divided.
It is only natural that China would try to reassert its historical dominance over the region.
And it is just as natural for Japan to feel nervous about the prospect of becoming a kind of vassal state (the Koreans are more accustomed to this role, vis-à-vis China).
Being subservient to American power, as Japan has been since 1945, was the inevitable consequence of a catastrophic war.
Most Japanese can live with that.
But submission to China would be intolerable.
And yet, because East Asian politics remains highly dynastic, a biographical explanation might be just as useful.
Shinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister, is the grandson of Nobusuke Kishi, once the top industrial bureaucrat of wartime Japan.
Imprisoned by the Americans as a war criminal in 1945, Kishi was released without trial at the beginning of the Cold War, and was elected Prime Minister as a conservative in 1957.
Kishi was a nationalist with fascist tendencies during the 1930’s and 1940’s.
After the war, an equally deep aversion to Communism made him a staunch ally of the United States; Richard Nixon became a close friend.
His lifelong quest was to revise the pacifist Japanese constitution, written by the Americans just after the war, and turn Japan into a proud military power once more.
Abe’s greatest wish is to complete the project that eluded his grandfather: abandon constitutional pacifism and bury the war crimes of Kishi’s generation, while remaining allied with the US against China.
As a right-wing nationalist, Abe feels compelled to resist the dominance of China, if only rhetorically for the time being.
One of Kishi’s greatest Cold War allies – apart from Nixon – was the South Korean strongman President Park Chung-hee, who came to power in a military coup a year after Kishi resigned as prime minister.
Park, too, had a dubious wartime career.
Under the Japanese name of Takagi Masao, he served as an officer in the Japanese Imperial Army.
He graduated from a military academy in Manchuria, where Kishi had once ruled over an industrial empire that was built on Chinese slave labor.
Like Kishi, Park was a nationalist.
But, apart from his sentimental wartime connections to Japan, his anti-Communism was incentive enough to continue warm relations with the imperial power that had brutally colonized Korea for a half-century.