Muslims have a particular responsibility here.
Within their communities, or in social frameworks, they have an opportunity that others do not.
Non-Muslims rarely have much contact with Muslims who are in the process of becoming radicalized, and in any case their arguments would not be well received.
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands, in particular, have notched up a number of positive civic-engagement projects involving Muslims.
In Germany, we intend to facilitate and support similar contacts with Muslim groups.
But Europe and the Western world must also cooperate more closely with key Muslim countries.
We need Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Maghreb countries as partners in the fight against Islamist terrorism, and that means improved operational cooperation between security authorities.
These countries have a clear interest in maintaining their stability.
They should be anxious to allow terrorist groups as little room for development as possible.
At the same time, it is in our interest to obtain from them as much important information about terrorist structures and activities as we can.
Improved cooperation should not stop there.
We need to establish an extended dialogue with Muslim countries, particularly those from which immigrants come, and convince them to accept that their own Islamic authorities have a special responsibility in fighting radicalization.
We need each other, and in many areas we can make a difference only if we act together.
Greece’s Bogus Debt Deal
PRINCETON – The process of official forgiveness of Greek debt has begun.
Referred to as “official sector involvement” (OSI), it includes several initiatives aimed at reducing Greece’s debt/GDP ratio to 124% in 2020, from roughly 200% today.
Even as the deal was announced, however, newspaper reports suggested that officials recognized that the measures would be insufficient to meet the target; further negotiations on additional steps would be needed at a politically more convenient moment.
The economist Larry Summers has invoked the analogy of the Vietnam War to describe European decision-making.
“At every juncture they made the minimum commitments necessary to avoid imminent disaster – offering optimistic rhetoric, but never taking the steps that even they believed could offer the prospect of decisive victory.”
This strategy needs to be inverted – and Greece offers a real opportunity to get ahead of the curve.
Instead of driblets of relief, a sizeable package, composed of two elements, is the way forward.
First, as Lee Buchheit, the attorney who oversaw the Greek private restructuring, has proposed, maturities on official Greek debt could be greatly extended.
A simple structure would be to make all debt payable over 40 years, carrying an interest rate of 2%.
This would move Greece and its official creditors beyond the continuous angst that now prevails.
The second element of the debt-relief package would be more innovative: If Greece’s economy performs well, the generous extension of maturities can be clawed back or the interest rate raised.
A formula for this could be linked to the debt/GDP ratio – a scheme with advantages that transcend the Greek case.
The idea of linking debt relief to a country’s debt/GDP ratio has been around for a while, but has never gained significant acceptance.
Applying it in Greece would be a highly visible test; if successful, it would set a valuable precedent.
Why bother?
Because the very premise of the current deal and the expectations it sets out are wrong.
First, the notion that there is a smooth transition path for the debt/GDP ratio from 200% to 124% is fanciful.
Second, even if, by some miracle, Greece did reach the 124% mark by 2020, the claim that its debt will then be “sustainable” is absurd.
Thus, continuing down this path will further erode policymakers’ credibility – not that they seem to care – while imposing on the rest of the world a persistent sense of crisis and uncertainty, with real financial and economic costs.
Make no mistake: policymakers’ track record on forecasting Greek economic performance during the crisis has been an embarrassment.
In May 2010, the International Monetary Fund projected – presumably in concurrence with its European partners – that Greece’s annual GDP growth would exceed 1% in 2012.
Instead, the Greek economy will shrink by 6%.
The unemployment rate, expected to peak this year at 15%, is now above 25% – and is still rising.
The debt/GDP ratio was expected to top out at 150%; absent the substantial write-down of privately held debt, which was deemed unnecessary, the ratio would have been close to 250%.
In September 2010, four months after the official Greek bailout was put in place, the IMF issued a pamphlet asserting that “default in today’s advanced economies is unnecessary, undesirable, and unlikely.”
The conclusion was that official financing would carry Greece past its short-term liquidity problems.
Calls for immediate debt restructuring went unheeded.
Six months later, after substantial official funds had been used to pay private creditors, the outstanding private debt was substantially restructured.
Such were the errors committed over short time horizons.
Relatively speaking, 2020 is an eternity away.
Even assuming better forecasts, the projection of 124% could be a gross underestimate.
The precision of the numbers underpinning the deal is a façade, if not a reflection of an alternate reality.
And, again, even if Greece somehow did achieve the 124% milestone, its debt would still not be sustainable.
At that point, Greece would merely be where it started in May 2010.
The most reasonable comparison is with Latin American countries during their debt crises in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
Despite significantly lower debt/GDP ratios and continuous debt restructuring, they eventually needed the large debt reduction that came with the issuance of Brady bonds to achieve some breathing room.
Getting ahead of the curve will give Greece a realistic chance of controlling its own destiny.
It will also be a reminder of the dangers of rushing in with official money where private debts have become unsustainable.
The US public is deeply troubled by the accumulation of public debt, and the Republican opposition has been extremely successful in blaming the Crash of 2008 – and the subsequent recession and high unemployment – on government ineptitude, as well as in claiming that the stimulus package was largely wasted.
There is an element of truth in this, but it is one-sided.
The Crash of 2008 was primarily a market failure, for which US (and other) regulators should be faulted for failing to regulate.
But, without a bailout, the financial system would have remained paralyzed, making the subsequent recession much deeper and longer.
True, the US stimulus package was largely wasted, but that was because most of it went to sustaining consumption rather than to correcting the underlying imbalances.
Where the Obama administration went wrong was in how it bailed out the banking system: it helped banks earn their way out of a hole by purchasing some of their bad assets and supplying them with cheap money.
This, too, was guided by political considerations: it would have been more efficient to inject new equity into the banks, but Obama feared accusations of nationalization and socialism.
That decision backfired, with serious political repercussions.
The public, facing a jump in credit card charges from 8% to nearly 30%, saw banks earning bumper profits and paying large bonuses.
The Tea Party movement exploited this resentment, and Obama is now on the defensive.
The Republicans campaign against any further stimulus, and the administration now pays lip service to fiscal rectitude, even if it recognizes that deficit reduction may be premature.
I believe that there is a strong case for further stimulus.
Admittedly, consumption cannot be sustained indefinitely by running up the national debt; the imbalance between consumption and investment must be corrected.
But to cut government spending at a time of large-scale unemployment would be to ignore the lessons of history.
The obvious solution is to distinguish between investments and current consumption, and increase the former while reducing the latter.
But that seems politically untenable.
Most Americans are convinced that government is incapable of efficiently managing investments aimed at improving the country’s physical and human capital.
Again, this belief is not without justification: a quarter-century of calling the government bad has resulted in bad government.
But the argument that stimulus spending is inevitably wasted is patently false: the New Deal produced the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Triborough Bridge in New York, and many other public utilities still in use today.
Moreover, the simple truth is that the private sector is not employing available resources.
Obama has been very friendly to business, and corporations are operating very profitably.
But, instead of investing, they are building up liquidity.
Perhaps a Republican victory will boost their confidence, but in the meantime investment and employment require fiscal stimulus (monetary stimulus, by contrast, would be more likely to stimulate corporations to devour each other than to hire workers).
How much government debt is too much is an open question, because tolerance for public debt is highly dependent on prevailing perceptions.
The risk premium attached to the interest rate is the critical variable: once it starts rising, the existing rate of deficit financing becomes unsustainable.
But the tipping point is indeterminate.
Consider Japan, with a debt-to-GDP ratio approaching 200% – one of the highest in the world.
Yet ten-year bonds yield little more than 1%.
Japan once had a high savings rate, but its current savings rate is about the same as in the US, thanks to an aging and shrinking population.
The big difference – that Japan has a trade surplus and the US has a deficit – is not important as long as China’s currency policy obliges it to accumulate dollar assets in one form or another.
The real reason why Japanese interest rates are so low is that Japan’s private sector has little appetite for investing abroad and prefers ten-year government bonds at 1% to cash at 0%.
With the price level falling and the population aging, the Japanese consider the real return attractive.
As long as US banks can borrow at near zero and buy government bonds without having to commit equity, and the dollar does not depreciate against the renminbi, interest rates on US government bonds may well be heading in the same direction.
That does not mean that the US should maintain the discount rate close to zero and run up government debt indefinitely.
Once the economy starts growing again, interest rates will rise – perhaps precipitously, if the accumulated debt is too large.
But, while that would choke off the recovery, premature fiscal tightening would do so sooner.
The right policy is to reduce imbalances as quickly as possible while minimizing the increase in the debt burden.
This can be done in several ways, but the Obama administration’s stated goal – halving the budget deficit by 2013 while the economy is operating far below capacity – is not one of them.
Investing in infrastructure and education makes more sense.
So does engineering a moderate rate of inflation by depreciating the dollar against the renminbi.
What stands in the way of this agenda is not economics, but misconceptions about budget deficits that are being exploited for partisan and ideological purposes.
Preparing for President Trump
LONDON – As America’s friends and allies look on in astonishment at the all-but-certain prospect of a contest between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump in November’s US presidential election, they need to do more than just wring their hands.
They must hope for the best but prepare for the worst.
The crucial point about the 2016 election is not just that a reality-TV star and property magnate who has never held elected office has emerged as the presumptive Republican candidate.
It is the enormous difference that a victory by Trump would make for the rest of the world compared with a victory by Clinton.
In every US presidential election in modern times, America’s friends and allies have had their private preferences.
But never before have the Democratic and Republican candidates been as different as chalk and cheese.
There was no unbridgeable gulf between Reagan and Carter, or Clinton and Bush, or Bush and Gore, or Obama and McCain.
There is between Trump and Clinton.
To the rest of the world, Clinton represents continuity, and Trump means dramatic change.
Just how dramatic cannot be known, but the normal assumption that candidates play to their party’s core supporters during the primary season but then tack to the center for the general election cannot be relied on in Trump’s case.
His is an abnormal candidacy.
That is why preparation makes sense.
Trump confirmed in his speech on foreign policy to the Center for the National Interest in Washington, DC, on April 27 that “America First” would be the overriding theme of his administration.
He would reject multilateral trade deals and institutions, take a much tougher line on illegal immigration, and forge a new approach to defense and security alliances.
Trump declared in that speech that he wants the United States to be “predictably unpredictable,” but he also made it clear that he won’t abandon his basic position.
Allies will have to pay more for their defense.
And they can expect tough measures by his administration if they have an enduringly large bilateral trade surplus with the US.
Regional deals, such as the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between the US, Mexico, and Canada, are a “total disaster” that have tied America’s hands.
So the best assumption is that they would be scrapped.
So how can friends and allies prepare for a President Trump?
Discreetly, of course.
But the author of the 1987 bestseller The Art of the Deal would surely agree that sound preparation is the essence of striking a good bargain.
If Trump finds evidence of it after having won the White House, he would likely admire his counterparts for it, even if secretly.
There are two sorts of things that friends and allies can and should do to prepare for the worst.
One is to make themselves stronger and thus better able to stand up to a bully.
The other is to shore up their alliances and friendships with one another, in anticipation of an “America First” rupture with old partnerships and the liberal international order that has prevailed since the 1940s.
A weak Japan and a fractious collection of 28 countries in the European Union would be a tempting target for President Trump.
A Japan that had, over the next 12 months, truly embraced the growth-enhancing strategy of liberalization that has often been promised by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe would be in a stronger position.
So would European countries that dropped their obsession with fiscal austerity and used public-investment programs to kick-start growth and reduce unemployment.
Such moves, which are needed in any event, would make it easier to start on the task of building stronger alliances – which may well become essential.
If a Trump administration seeks to scrap NAFTA, Canada and Mexico will need to make common cause.
That may mean being ready to spend more on their own defense – a demand by Trump that is not unreasonable.
It will also mean being sufficiently united to avoid being picked off singly by an American bully.
And yet European solidarity is fraying, to say the least, thanks to the migrant crisis and the economic aftermath of the 2008 financial crash.
On June 23, British voters could make the situation far worse if they vote in their referendum to leave the EU.
To strengthen Britain, and the EU itself, in anticipation of Trump, they would be well advised to vote to stay in.
Asia has not been known for its solidarity.
It has depended, perhaps excessively, on American influence to balance its rivalries.
Japan, for example, has close ties with Southeast Asian countries but no formal security relationships with them.
Both Japan and its nearest neighbor, South Korea, have longstanding security treaties with the US, but are hostile to each other.
Given the possibility of trade wars, currency wars, and a renunciation of long-held security alliances within the next 9-12 months, it is time to put regional solidarity ahead of old enmities and the forces of fragmentation.
America’s friends and allies need to start preparing for a less friendly America.
Prescription Financial Products
NEW DELHI – One positive fallout of the financial crisis of 2007-201? is our realization that financial products can be as complex and dangerous as drugs.
This realization has led to innovative ideas and experimentation with new laws, regulations, and institutions around the world.
In India, the government has announced the establishment of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) to address inter-regulatory coordination issues and provide macro-prudential supervision.
In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, and new initiatives to monitor the safety of financial products, could alter the architecture of finance.
Several proponents of these new ideas have openly used the analogy with drugs.
It has been argued that if, in 2007, the US had a Financial Products Safety Commission akin to its Food and Drugs Administration, the market would not have been flooded with “teaser” mortgages that entangled millions of households in chains of predatory credit.
What is especially sophisticated about the new ideas cropping up in the US, Europe, India, China and elsewhere is the recognition that, as with drugs and toys, it is impossible to say in advance which financial products we should allow and which we should not, because we cannot conceive of all the products that can and will come to market.
Hence, the need for a judgmental body that can look at a new product and form an opinion about its desirability.
Indeed, there is a worrying aspect to the new plans: they must tread a narrow path between reckless freedom for financial institutions, which contributed to the recent global financial crisis, and over-caution, which can suffocate innovation and create inefficiencies.
Consider a teaser loan, which initially charges low or even no interest, with much higher rates kicking in at a later date.
To be sure, this is a dangerous product, and it did cause many families to fall into an unsustainable debt trap.
But such loans can be of great value to sophisticated firms and households that may have good reason to believe that their future earnings will be higher than their current earnings. Such entities would be able to make investments that would not be possible otherwise.
This is just one example.
It is impossible to anticipate the numerous financial products that human ingenuity can create, and that can be dangerous to use but of great value to some.
The risk created by many of the regulatory measures under consideration in today’s crisis-scarred world is that they may end up over-regulating our markets to the point of blocking the emergence of valuable new products.
But there is a way out of this conundrum. In creating new financial regulations, we need to take the medical analogy one step further – by creating the equivalent of the prescription.
Instead of banning or freely allowing all dangerous products, we need to identify products that are valuable to some customers but not all – call them “prescription financial products” – and create a body of registered finance professionals (RFPs) who are empowered to certify the purchase of these products by individuals.
For example, you are planning to buy a house.
Your local bank offers you what is certified to be a teaser loan – a prescription product.
You can take such a loan provided that an RFP approves such a contract.
In brief, just as we do not ban steroids because they are dangerous, but require that buyers have a valid prescription, we should institutionalize caution in how financial products can be used – and by whom.
This option could vastly shorten the list of products that will need to be banned outright.
We should, however, avoid the medical convention whereby each product is either over-the-counter or prescription, regardless of who is buying the product.
In order to keep the system lean, there should be a provision for exempting some individuals and firms – those sophisticated enough to handle their own affairs, or well off enough to deal with financial failure – from the requirement of an RFP’s approval before buying a prescription financial product.
The reason I argue for this provision is my positive experience in India, having recently moved here from the US.
A few months ago, I went to meet the owner of our local drugstore.
Without encumbering him with any prescription, I told him somewhat sheepishly that I was going on an extended foreign trip and wanted to keep a precautionary strip of antibiotic tablets with me.
He looked me up and down, sized me up, and then said, “Since you are going for so long, I would suggest you keep two strips.”
President Bush Goes Soft
The first term of George W. Bush’s presidency was marked by unilateralism and military power.
The United States was the world’s only superpower, so others had to follow.
The result was a dramatic decline in America’s “soft” or attractive power.
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld said he did not know what soft power was.
Now it is back in fashion in Washington.
Bush’s second inaugural address was devoted to the power of liberty and democracy.
Such rhetoric is not new to American presidents.
Harry Truman spoke of defending free people everywhere, and Woodrow Wilson spoke of promoting democracy.
The neo-conservatives in Bush’s first administration were in that tradition, but ignored the fact that both Wilson and Truman were also institution-builders who consulted other countries.
In dropping that half of Wilson’s approach, they stepped on their own message, reducing its effectiveness.
The tone at the beginning of the second Bush administration is different.
As Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said recently in Paris: “I use the word ‘power’ broadly, because even more important than military and indeed economic power is the power of ideas, the power of compassion, and the power of hope.”
Bush not only chose to visit Brussels, the capital of the European Union, on his February trip to Europe, but stated that what “we seek to achieve in the world requires that America and Europe remain close partners.”
Even Rumsfeld is trying to be conciliatory!
Will Bush’s new approach succeed?
On a recent trip to Europe, I encountered both encouragement and skepticism.
Many people welcomed the new tone, but wondered if it was simply sugarcoated cynicism.
Words must be matched by deeds before people are convinced.
One place to look to see if deeds are forthcoming is in Bush’s latest budget.
The budget cuts discretionary spending (other than defense and homeland security) by nearly 1%, and slashes as many as 150 domestic programs.
Yet, in this climate of fiscal stringency, he calls for increased contributions to international organizations, the Millennium Challenge Account to provide assistance to countries with a commitment to making progress in poverty reduction, and the Global HIV/AIDS Initiative.
Bush’s new budget also includes an increase in funding for public diplomacy.
The allocation for the State Department’s educational and cultural exchange programs, including overseas research centers, libraries, and visitor programs, is boosted by nearly 25%.
As Bush’s budget request to Congress puts it, “Rarely has the need for a sustained effort to ensure foreign understanding for our country and society been so clearly evident.”
This comes after a first term in which public diplomacy was a neglected stepchild, and a Pentagon advisory panel summed up the situation as a “crisis.”
Even with these increases, there is a long way to go to improve America’s standing.
A recent non-partisan report by the Public Diplomacy Council called for a new Agency for Public Diplomacy within the State Department, 24-hour English-language broadcasts by the Voice of America, and a fourfold budget increase over the next five years.
The Bush administration still has much to do in promoting ideas, but early indications suggest a change from the neglect of the first term.
But it will not be enough for Bush to start his second term with grand rhetoric about values and increased investment in public diplomacy.
A country’s attractiveness or soft power stems partly from its culture and values (where they are attractive to others), but it also grows out of a country’s policies when they are seen as legitimate, consultative, and inclusive of the interests of others.
Unless the policies fit the values, the discrepancy will give rise to charges of hypocrisy.
At a minimum, Bush will need to pursue policies – in a more consultative manner – that seek a political solution in Iraq and progress in the Israel-Palestine peace process.
Here too, the early signs are encouraging.
The 60% turnout in the January elections and the scenes of Iraqis risking their lives to vote has led to hopes that a political settlement in Iraq may be possible.
The elections are but a first step; the insurgency continues; civil war remains possible.
Nonetheless, the elections may have softened some of the sense of illegitimacy that has clouded Bush’s Iraq policy.
Similarly, with regard to the Middle East peace process, the replacement of Yasir Arafat by Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian elections, and the meetings between Abbas and Ariel Sharon suggest progress.
On difficult nuclear issues, such as North Korea and Iran, Bush has pursued multilateral consultation and coordination with other powers.
Of course, this still leaves unresolved other multilateral issues, like the International Criminal Court and global climate change.
There is little prospect that Bush will reverse his rejection of the Kyoto Treaty, but it will be interesting to see how far he accommodates Prime Minister Tony Blair’s efforts to make climate change a priority during Britain’s period as chair of the Group of Eight major economies.
It is much too early for a verdict on Bush’s second term policies.
As he looks ahead to the verdict of history, he seems to realize that hard power alone will not consolidate his reputation, but he remains hostage to incidents and accidents that could drive even his best-laid plans off course.
Nonetheless, the most striking thing at this point in Bush’s second term is his belated discovery of the importance of diplomacy and soft power.
Reforming or Deforming the Fed?
BERKELEY – The silly season that is a presidential election campaign in the United States has taken a particularly absurd turn as the candidates offer their proposals for monetary-policy reform.
This is not the first time, of course, that presidential candidates have proposed changing how US monetary policy is conducted.
But the radical, sometimes harebrained, nature of the current crop of schemes is exceptional by historical standards.
Why such proposals appeal to the candidates and potential voters is no mystery.
Since the financial crisis, the US Federal Reserve has taken a series of unprecedented steps, cutting interest rates to zero, massively expanding its balance sheet, and bailing out troubled financial institutions.
Those measures were intended to treat the economy’s ills, but their very association with those ills encourages the belief that they are somehow the underlying cause.
Likewise, the Fed’s participation in rescues of troubled financial institutions is criticized for favoring Wall Street over Main Street.
And, separately, the Fed is slammed for creating inequality, first by keeping interest rates low, which hurts those on fixed incomes, and now by raising rates, which keeps a lid on wage growth.
Clearly, the Fed just can’t win – and for reasons that have nothing to do with current monetary policy.
Two of the most deep-seated features of American political culture – with roots extending back to the eighteenth century – are suspicion of powerful government and distrust of concentrated financial power.
The Fed is the single institution that best encapsulates those fears.
Thus, we have proposals by Republican candidates Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, and Mike Huckabee to require the Fed to maintain a fixed dollar price of gold.
To call these actual proposals is a bit generous.
The proponents do not specify whether the Fed would be obliged to provide gold at this price to all comers, as before 1933, or only to foreign governments, as between 1945 and 1971.
Nor do they explain whether that obligation could be suspended in an emergency, as in those earlier eras.
More fundamentally, they fail to explain what is special about gold aside from its talismanic quality.
They do not clarify why the Fed should focus on stabilizing the price of this particular metal, rather than on the price of a representative basket of goods and services.
Indeed, if the critics focused on the latter, they could give their proposal a name.
They could call it “inflation targeting.”
Proposals for a “Taylor rule” are more serious, if only because such a rule, first described by Stanford University economist John Taylor, links the policy interest rate to just such a representative basket of goods and services, namely the consumer price index, while adjusting for the rate of unemployment.
But the rule is merely a formula purporting to explain why the Fed set its policy interest rate as it did in the 1980s and early 1990s, the period Taylor considered in his original study.
Indeed, a Taylor rule is a guide for desirable policy only if one thinks that the policies followed in that period were desirable, or, more to the point, that similar policies will be desirable in the future.
It provides no direct way to address other concerns, such as financial stability, which most people will agree should, in light of recent events, figure more prominently in monetary-policy decisions.
Some of the reform proposals by Bernie Sanders, a contender for the Democratic nomination, also deserve to be taken seriously.
The fact that three of the nine directors of the Fed’s regional reserve banks are private bankers is an anachronism that creates the appearance, and potentially the reality, of a conflict of interest.
Sanders’ suggestion that the US president, rather than their own directors, nominate the regional reserve banks’ presidents is also worthy of consideration.
It is important to recall that the peculiar arrangements prevailing today were designed to overcome the financial sector’s opposition to the establishment of a central bank when the Federal Reserve Act was passed in 1913.
This, clearly, is no longer the problem; on the contrary, the financial sector today is one of the Fed’s last staunch defenders.
Other proposals by Sanders are more dubious.
For example, to release full transcripts six months after Fed meetings would guarantee a scripted debate.
Meaningful discussion would simply move to the anteroom.
The result, perversely, would be a decline in policy transparency.
Above all, Sanders’ recent statements betray a disturbing inclination to interfere in the conduct of monetary policy.
The Fed, he argues, should not have raised interest rates in December in response to “phantom inflation.”
He may be right.
But it is not the role of the US president to tell the Fed how to manage its policy rate.
The independence of the central bank is an essential cornerstone of effective monetary policy.
Even – or especially – an aspiring president should be sensitive to this fact.
The Trumping of US Foreign Policy
DENVER – The United States’ presidential campaign, already long and tumultuous, will no doubt become even more so in the coming months, as the two parties’ nominees, now officially selected, face off ahead of November’s election.
But voters will have a clear choice before them, especially with regard to foreign policy.
The Democratic Party’s nominee, Hillary Clinton, promises continuity.
A Clinton administration would remain a willing partner to America’s friends and allies, and it would make clear to America’s adversaries that the broad tenets of US foreign policy will not change.
Current US policy, rooted in strength and guided by pragmatism, has been generally successful in ensuring peace and stability for decades.
Quite a different vision has emerged on the Republican side, with the nomination of Donald Trump.
And yet the candidate is a secondary issue – a symptom of the rapid transformation of the Grand Old Party itself, which has been a bewildering spectacle for American and foreign audiences alike.
The GOP establishment spent the primary season wringing its hands, asking how something like the Trump candidacy could happen.
For example, in March 2016, hundreds of Republican advisers, representing a broad spectrum of foreign-policy views, signed an open letter expressing their opposition to Trump.
While some of these advisers may come to support him this fall, having been “reassured” of his commitment to their views, most will not.
The GOP has produced a presidential candidate with such a dim view of America’s prospects that he thinks the country has entered an abyss from which it may never emerge.
While much of the world still looks to the US for wise international leadership, the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, where Trump was formally nominated, projected nothing but fear and loathing.
One of the more striking elements of Trump’s speech at the convention was his attack on the last Republican administration.
He characterized George W. Bush as a co-conspirator with Hillary Clinton in various foreign entanglements, such as wars and, worse, trade deals.
Throughout his entire address, however, Trump made no reference to the rest of the GOP’s 162-year legacy.
Abraham Lincoln?
Forget him.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower, a war hero and president who built the interstate highway system that Trump tells us is dangerously dilapidated?
Never heard of him.
And the delegates seemed to have no problem with these omissions, roaring in approval at every aggressive jab and apocalyptic warning.
Few took Trump, a reality-television star who has never held public office, seriously until he started winning primaries.
Now he is the Republican Party’s nominal head and presidential standard-bearer.
How did this happen?
Ronald Reagan, the modern-day GOP’s patron saint, once said that government is the problem, not the solution, a dictum that embodied the anti-government animus that has defined the party ever since.
It is now a baked-in irony that any Republican running for office would just as soon do away with the government than actually serve in it.
Small wonder, then, that Republican voters would nominate someone who had never served in government.
National defense has always been the sole exception to this anti-government view.
But even on that issue, the GOP has changed.
Trump has indicated that he would flout America’s NATO obligations, disregard institutions of global governance, and treat negotiations with other countries as ceremonies of surrender to US positions, rather than two-way deliberations.
And yet, if the GOP foreign-policy establishment wants to understand where a candidate like Trump came from, its members would do well to look at the behavior of some within their own ranks.
Those, like Max Boot, who have often called for the unilateral use of force in global trouble spots, paved the way for him, even if they do not today support him.
And others have helped him during his barroom-brawl campaign, as he turns civil policy disagreements into ad hominem attacks.
According to pollsters and pundits, Trump will most likely lose in November.
If the last eight years wasn’t enough for Republicans to fix their party, perhaps another four or eight will suffice.
One hopes they succeed.
American democracy – and US foreign policy – needs at least two major parties, not one in the mainstream and the other on the extreme fringe.
A Presidential Truthfulness Oath
CAMBRIDGE – On January 20, 2017, Donald Trump will be sworn in as the 45th president of the United States.
I say “sworn in,” rather than “assume the presidency,” because, under Section I of Article II of the US Constitution, Trump cannot actually become president unless he takes an oath of office, publicly committing himself to uphold the Constitution and perform to the best of his ability while in office.
That is, of course, the case for all presidents.
But, given how Trump comported himself during the campaign, it is particularly meaningful in his case.
Until now, Trump has made no effort to behave in an honest or reliable way.
Technically, he didn’t have to.
The US does not require any sworn statements from the men and women who run for president, nor does it have any enforceable code of behavior or constraints on the kind of rhetoric that can be used.
Candidates may conduct themselves however they see fit.
This approach is based on the assumption that we can trust the candidates’ judgment.
People seeking the country’s highest office should know how to balance the political imperative of winning votes with a sense of responsibility for the feasibility of – and reasoning behind – their policy promises.
By and large, experience has vindicated this view.
The US has had the good fortune of choosing largely from among presidential aspirants who adhere to generally accepted norms.
With Trump, it seems that fortune has turned into bankruptcy.
During his primary and general election campaigns, Trump lied incessantly about himself, his businesses, his opponents, other countries’ behavior and motivations, America’s electoral system, the size of trade deficits, the actions of the Federal Reserve, and data on everything from labor to crime (to name a few examples).
Moreover, many of Trump’s campaign promises – building a Mexico-funded wall on America’s southern border, bringing back lost manufacturing jobs, deporting millions of illegal immigrants – are patently impossible to implement.
Mitt Romney, the Republican Party’s presidential nominee in 2012, was right when he called Trump “a phony, a fraud,” a candidate whose promises are “worthless.”
But while these traits are clearly problematic, they obviously have not hurt Trump’s political career.
Trump convinced a sizable portion of the electorate to ignore – if not condone – his flagrant policy reversals and lack of knowledge.
Even Romney himself bowed to Trump in the end, meeting with the president-elect a couple of weeks after the election, reportedly in search of a cabinet position.
This has to be one of the most sobering lessons from this past year: outrageous lies and hollow promises can win even the most consequential elections.
And adhering to basic norms of decency – facts can be massaged, but not manufactured, and promises must be plausible, if vague – can lose them.
Trump’s opponent in the campaign, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, learned that the hard way.
During the campaign, Clinton often quoted First Lady Michelle Obama: “When they go low,” she would declare, “we go high.”
But when your opponent goes as low as Trump, “going high” is like choosing, in a classic prisoner’s dilemma, to remain loyal to your partner in crime, who, sitting in the next room, is cutting a deal to testify against you.
When you “go high” in such circumstances, you get what game theorists call a “sucker’s payoff.”
Candidates should never be put in such a position.
Instead, we must make sure that all candidates adhere to a basic code of conduct.
One simple way to do that would be to demand that all presidential candidates, beginning in 2020, take an oath to be truthful, responsible, and transparent in their campaign rhetoric and conduct.
In American society and political culture, the oath has a rare status.
Testifying in a court of law or before a committee of the US Congress, witnesses “solemnly swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.”
Doctors take the “Hippocratic Oath,” pledging first to do no harm.
Students at many universities swear to uphold an honor code.
And Trump will not be alone in taking his oath next month: at around the same time, new members of the US Congress and Trump’s cabinet will make a similar pledge.
Given this reverence for oaths, it is reasonable to assume that taking a truthfulness oath before initiating a campaign for public office would have some impact on candidates’ approach.
There is nothing partisan about this proposal; many Republicans were victims of Trump’s unbridled campaign style before Clinton was in his crosshairs.
The public and the media could use the oath as a tool for assessing – and holding accountable – would-be leaders.
And candidates would stand to gain a competitive advantage against opponents who refuse to take the oath.
Implementation would not be difficult.
While the presidential oath is required by the US Constitution, a candidates’ oath wouldn’t have to be.
Political and market pressure would be enough, if print, television, and social media simply refused to carry campaign advertisements from candidates who refused to take the oath.
The political advantage should not go to the most mendacious candidate.
For the sake of democracy, we must take action to solidify basic norms of decency and transparency in vital election campaigns.
We can start with the modest step of demanding a truthfulness oath from all future presidential candidates.
Taking Monetary Policy to the People
LONDON – The United Kingdom was late to adopt central-bank independence, because then-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher firmly opposed allowing unelected bankers to control interest rates.
She famously asserted that she would never hand that control away, and the Bank of England was not set free until 1997, when Tony Blair’s first Labour government was elected.
The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street, as the BoE is known, was 303 years old before she was allowed to make her own decisions – and her own mistakes.
While both the US Federal Reserve and the German Bundesbank had long been independent, most other European countries followed suit only in the run-up to establishing a monetary union.
For its part, the Bank of France had, since Napoleon, been left “in the hands of the government, but not too obviously so.”
For the last 20 years, central-bank independence has marked a kind of “end of history” for monetary policy, after many other regimes were tried and failed.
In the years before the 2008 global financial crisis, independent central banks were seen as successful in controlling inflation; and countries with sizable fiscal deficits were especially enthusiastic about central-bank independence because they benefited from lower long-term interest rates.
Central banks that also regulate the banking industry were asked tough questions about their insouciance in the face of rapid credit expansion, but they were widely praised for their prompt and decisive response when trouble hit.
But the period of monetary-policy consensus may be coming to an end.
In the United States, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has challenged Fed governors’ independence, and made it clear that he would quickly replace the Fed’s leadership were he elected.
In Europe, the European Central Bank’s quantitative-easing policies have been widely criticized, and ECB President Mario Draghi recently had to defend his approach before a highly critical German Parliament.
British politicians have also begun to protest, even though criticizing the BoE was long considered tantamount to blaspheming in church.
British Prime Minister Theresa May, in a recent speech before the Conservative Party Conference, noted that “monetary policy has had some bad side effects.
People with assets have got richer.
People without them have suffered … a change has got to come.
And we are going to deliver it.”
William Hague, an influential former Conservative leader, was even more blunt when he recently issued a not-so-veiled threat: if central banks do not “change course soon, they will find their independence increasingly under attack.”
In that case, he added, “the era of their much-vaunted independence will come, possibly quite dramatically, to its end.”
While May has denied any split between her government and BoE Governor Mark Carney, it is clear that monetary policy has become a subject of political debate for the first time in 20 years.
In response to these heretical outbursts, Carney has sounded emollient and understanding; and Draghi has laudably engaged with his critics’ arguments.
But they are unlikely to agree that central-bank independence is “not debatable.”
They will likely ask for more humility from the technocrats, because what politicians give, they may take away.
Just because they are debating the social implications of monetary policy does not necessarily mean that they are questioning the legitimacy of those who set the dials.
To be sure, this is delicate territory.
There is a powerful argument to be made that central banks, insulated from short-term political pressures, have been careful stewards of price stability, and have served the global economy well.
It is not obvious that returning to politically administered interest rates would have any benefits beyond the immediate term.
Still, we must accept that central banks’ large-scale quantitative easing takes them into uncharted territory, where the boundary between monetary and fiscal policy is blurred.
In the UK, for example, the Treasury decides on the level of economic intervention, while the BoE determines the timing and method of implementation.
So, the central bank’s independence is not absolute.
Central bankers must demonstrate that they understand the political pressures and unusual circumstances that zero, or even negative, interest rates create.
Savers are bitterly complaining that they are being penalized for their prudence; refusing to debate this and other implications of current monetary policies is not an acceptable response.
Independence demands higher degrees of accountability and transparency, whereby policies are explained to the public.
To its credit, the BoE has been showing the way forward with a series of open forums around the UK.
Taking monetary policy to the people is time-consuming, but it is essential if the necessary political consensus to sustain independence is to be maintained.
Tolerance or War
WASHINGTON, DC – Throughout history, mistreatment of minorities – whether ethnic, religious, linguistic, cultural, regional, ideological, sexual, or other – has fueled violence and devastated societies worldwide.
Egregious cases in the last century include the Holocaust in Nazi Germany, the Khmer Rouge killing fields in Cambodia, and the genocide in Rwanda.
The abuse of minorities, and reactions to it, often are linked to fault lines in conflicted societies.
Minorities tend to experience economic inequality and political marginalization.
This negative trend shows no sign of waning.
While international treaties, national laws, more and stronger institutions, improved education, and efforts by organized religious groups to foster respect for minorities can help to ameliorate the problem, collective efforts have so far fallen woefully short.
The problem will not disappear until people stop tolerating intolerance.
And recent history – from the indiscriminate killings by the Lord’s Resistance Army in central and eastern Africa to the attacks against Christians by the Pakistani Taliban – shows that bigotry remains deeply embedded.
Moreover, globalization and instantaneous communication technologies have made it impossible to contain conflict within national borders.
Domestic economic and political grievances can now buttress discontent across regions and continents.
Ethnic conflict in countries such as Kenya, Sudan, Sri Lanka, and the former Yugoslavia underscores the challenge of reducing – and eventually eliminating – intolerance.
But some other multiethnic societies such as Tanzania and Burkina Faso have largely escaped communal conflict.
Others, including Belgium and Cameroon, have avoided serious conflict, but have experienced significant acrimony over the treatment of linguistic and regional minorities.
And, in different periods, Lebanon has managed and mismanaged official policy toward religious and ethnic minorities.
Understanding the factors at play in these countries can help policymakers and religious and civil-society leaders to address intolerance.
Intolerance emanating from organized religion is perhaps the most inexcusable.
On the one hand, all organized religions teach peace and love for others, and they have often intervened successfully to prevent or mitigate conflict.
On the other hand, at certain times in their history, organized religions have allowed, encouraged, and even propagated hatred and violence.
And fringe elements often use religion to espouse violence against particular groups.
In recent decades, Roman Catholic and Protestant leaders failed to speak out early and effectively against the genocide in Rwanda.
Similarly, rather than condemning the adoption of terrorist tactics by the Taliban in Afghanistan, Boko Haram in Nigeria, and al-Shabaab in Somalia, and the destruction of Sufi shrines in Mali by Ansar Dine, a radical Islamist sect, Muslim leaders have remained largely silent.
While none of these groups represents a majority point of view, they do exert significant influence and probably believe that they are acting in the interest of the majority.
Developments following the Arab Spring might provide some indication of the prospects for religious tolerance.
In Egypt, with its 10% Coptic Orthodox Christian minority, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi won the presidency in a free and fair election, after which Morsi resigned from the party, saying that this would allow him to represent all Egyptians more effectively, and promised that he would respect minority rights.
Yet subsequent actions designed to give him unprecedented executive power raise concerns about these early positive steps.
By protecting minorities, Morsi could demonstrate to other governments and political movements the importance of minority rights and encourage them to behave likewise.
But it remains to be seen whether his Islamist political base, including hardline Salafists, who won some 20% of the parliamentary vote, will be tolerant of the Christian minority in the months and years to come.
Syria will be an even more important test.
The Alawites, who comprise only 11% of the population, dominate President Bashar al-Assad’s crumbling regime.
While the ruling minority has been generally tolerant of Christians, Kurds, Druze, and Turks, who together comprise 29% of the population, the regime has long oppressed the Sunni majority.
If a Sunni-controlled government replaces the current leadership, its decision to protect minorities’ rights would be particularly encouraging.
Democratic governments are often perceived as more respectful of minorities, given that, unlike autocratic regimes, a democratic system with an elected legislature, independent judicial system, strong civil society, and free press provides citizens with opportunities to express their views and pursue justice.
But, while democracies do have a better record of protecting minorities, a democratic system does not guarantee respect for minorities any more than autocracy ensures their repression.
An enlightened autocrat can be just as protective of minority rights as a solidly democratic government.
That said, when it comes to respecting minority rights, democracies have a far better record than autocracies.
This is one of the main reasons why, throughout history, democracies have rarely fought each other.
This commentary is part of the Carnegie Council Centennial projects.
Preventing Toxic Stress in Children
Cambridge – What if political leaders around the world could improve school achievement and job readiness, reduce crime, and extend healthy life expectancy – but the results would not be seen until after they left public office?
Would they have the political courage to act now in the best long-term interest of their people?
Or would they become mired in ineffective, poorly-funded attempts to obtain quick results, and then say it couldn’t be done?
Thanks to a remarkable convergence of new scientific knowledge about the developing brain, the human genome, and the effects of early experiences on later learning, behavior, and health, these are not hypothetical questions.
We have the knowledge to secure our future by improving the life prospects of all our young children.
What is needed now is political vision and leadership.
Scientists can now credibly say that the early childhood years – from birth to age 5 – lay the foundation for later economic productivity, responsible citizenship, and a lifetime of sound physical and mental health.
Conversely, deep poverty, abuse, neglect, and exposure to violence in early childhood can all lead to toxic stress.
In contrast to normal or tolerable stress, which can build resilience and properly calibrate a child’s stress-response system, toxic stress is caused by extreme, prolonged adversity in the absence of a supportive network of adults to help the child adapt.
When it occurs, toxic stress can actually damage the architecture of the developing brain, leading to disrupted circuits and a weakened foundation for future learning and health.
The lasting, neurobiological effect on young children who experience toxic stress leads to a far greater likelihood of anti-social behavior, lower achievement in school and at work, and poor physical and mental health – all of which society addresses at great cost.
Deep poverty is but one risk factor for toxic stress and its long-term consequences.
The greatest harm comes from the cumulative burden of multiple risk factors, including neglect, abuse, parental substance abuse or mental illness, and exposure to violence.
With each additional risk factor, the odds of long-term damage to brain architecture increase.
Neuroscience and the biology of stress help us to begin to understand how poverty and other adversities are literally built into our bodies.
Prolonged activation of the body’s stress system during early development can damage the formation of the neural connections that comprise our brain architecture and set our stress-response system at a hair-trigger level.
We can thus comprehend why children born into such circumstances have more problems in school, are more likely to commit crimes, and are more prone to heart disease, diabetes, and a host of other physical and mental illnesses later in life.
By addressing the circumstances that can produce toxic stress – always asking, “How can we best protect our children?” – local, national, and global leaders would improve not only the life prospects of their youngest citizens, but also outcomes for their societies.
A wide range of policies and practices that support positive relationships and quality learning experiences – at home, in early care and education programs, and through targeted interventions – can have a positive impact if based on solid evidence and matched to the specific needs they are expected to address.
Beyond their short-term benefits to individuals, extensive economic analysis also has demonstrated significant financial benefits to society for years to come. Science points to three things that we can do to level the playing field:
·        Make basic medical services and early care and education available to all young children;
·        Provide greater financial support and rich learning experiences for young children living in poverty; and
·        Offer specialized services for young children experiencing toxic stress from difficult life circumstances.
The scientific principles of early childhood development do not vary by family income, program type, or funding source.
In advanced countries, programs that screen for adversity and respond to the specific health and developmental needs of individual children and families can yield benefits that far exceed their costs.
In developing countries, shifting the focus of international investments from an exclusive focus on child survival to an integrated approach to early childhood health and development offers greater promise than addressing either domain alone.
Children burdened by significant economic insecurity, discrimination, or maltreatment benefit most from effective interventions.
Neuroscience, child development, and the economics of human capital formation all point to the same conclusion: creating the right conditions for early childhood development is far more effective than trying to fix problems later.
Finally, leadership is about more than smart economic decisions. It is also about moral responsibility, wisdom, judgment and courage – and about leveraging knowledge to promote positive social change.
The negative consequences of poverty and other forms of adversity are not inevitable.
The gap between what we know and what we do is growing and increasingly unconscionable.
The time for leadership on behalf of vulnerable children is now.
Preventive Diplomacy, Not Pre-Emptive Strikes
Finally, the United Nations Security Council has unanimously agreed a resolution to end the crisis in Lebanon.
Now, the first priority must be a full and immediate ceasefire to end the suffering of unarmed civilians and make way for peace.
The international community must be guided in their actions by a common conviction that violence is never a viable solution.
We, the authors of this article, as well as the organization we represent, the Socialist International, have always defended Israel’s right to exist and defend itself.
We wish to see Israeli citizens living in peace and security alongside all their neighbors.
We have consistently condemned attacks that target innocent Israelis.
Israel claims its actions in Gaza and Lebanon are designed to safeguard its own security.
However, indiscriminate use of force and continued occupation will never give Israel lasting security.
The response to Hezbollah’s initial aggression, as well as Israel’s military response in Gaza, is disproportionate.
The devastation in Lebanon will take generations to repair, not only materially, but also psychologically.
Hezbollah, which claims it is fighting for Lebanese independence and sovereignty, also bears responsibility for unacceptable aggression, placing the lives of innocent Israelis and Lebanese at stake.
We are convinced that the way these policies are carried out will only deepen mistrust, heighten polarization, and embed hatred between neighbors who have to learn to live with each other.
A military solution is not viable.
War is strengthening the hand of those who regard terror as the only effective weapon, thus creating a breeding ground for more violence, insecurity, and extremism across the Middle East.
With moderates being marginalized, the long-term effect will be to undermine democratization efforts in the region.
Innovative and bold diplomatic initiatives for peace must be launched as an alternative to the logic of military force.
This has happened before.
The Gulf War led to the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991 and the subsequent Oslo accords between the PLO and Israel in 1993.
This crisis, too, can be a stepping-stone for a long-term political solution involving all parties in the Middle East.
Today’s incoherent, piecemeal strategies will not break the cycle of violence.
As well as taking collective action to stop the war in Lebanon and Gaza, key players like the “quartet” – the UN, the United States, the European Union, and Russia – must develop a comprehensive security framework for the Middle East.
The international community should demand the immediate start of negotiations towards the creation of a Palestinian state and push for direct negotiations on a peace agreement between Israel and Syria.
If the international community is to remain credible, a regional initiative for collective security – a Madrid II – needs to be taken.
This presupposes the engagement of all parties, including Syria and Iran, as well as all political and religious groups.
A strategy of isolation has resulted in a dangerous alliance of convenience among extremist forces excluded from political processes and power structures.
Unless leading actors have ownership of local solutions, peace will never be sustainable.
If we hope to halt violent extremism, we must engage religious and militant groups in dialogue and address the root causes of violence.
Both the PLO and Israeli militant groups active at the time of Israel’s creation moved away from violence once the international community engaged them.
Likewise, influential groups such as Hamas, the legitimate winner of the Palestinian elections, cannot be eliminated by military force, however powerful, nor exorcised by decree.
For their part, radicalized groups must renounce violence and accept international principles and laws.
Causing loss of lives does not contribute to the present or future welfare of the people of the region.
There is currently no guarantee that a political truce with Hamas or Hezbollah would result in a renunciation of their absolutist vision.
Nonetheless, there can be a diplomatic process with rights and obligations.
To secure lasting peace, the key is to develop political mechanisms that allow space for moderation and democracy.
We therefore must support political alternatives to violent extremism.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’ initiative to unite the Palestinian leadership may lead to greater moderation on the part of Hamas and create real prospects for the negotiation of a two-state solution.
If this effort is successful, the international community must cooperate fully and swiftly with the Palestinian Authority.
Our appeal is for preventive diplomacy rather than pre-emptive strikes.
This policy of inclusion rather than exclusion is based on political pragmatism and the belief that this carnage can and must stop.
To save innocent people from paying with their lives, the world’s leaders must act quickly and boldly.
The Socialist International is committed to working hard with its partners in the region to make peace in the Middle East a reality.
The Limits of Oil’s Rebound
LONDON – For the first time since last October, the price of a barrel of oil has broken through $50.
So it seems a good time to update the analysis I presented in January 2015.
Back then, I argued that $50 or thereabouts would turn out to be a long-term ceiling for the oil price.
At the time, with crude prices still above $60, almost everyone believed that $50 would be the rock-bottom floor.
After all, futures markets predicted prices of $75 or higher; the Saudi and Russian governments needed $100 to balance their budgets; and any price much below $50 was considered unsustainable, because it would put the US shale-oil industry out of business.
As it happened, the price of Brent crude did fluctuate between $50 and $70 in the first half of last year, before plunging decisively below $50 in early August, when it became obvious that the lifting of sanctions against Iran would unleash a massive increase in global supply.
Since then, $50 has indeed proved to be a ceiling for the oil price.
But now that this level has been exceeded, will it again become a floor?
That seems to be what many investors are expecting.
Hedge funds and other “non-commercial” speculators have increased their long positions to an all-time high of 555,000 of the main oil contracts traded on the New York futures market, compared to the previous record of 548,000 contracts, set just before the oil price peaked at $120 in June 2014.
The return of speculative enthusiasm is usually a reliable sign that the next big price move will probably be down.
More important, the fundamental arguments are more compelling than ever that $50 or thereabouts will continue to be a price ceiling, rather than a floor.
The case begins, as it did in January 2015, by observing that the oil market is no longer controlled by the monopoly power of OPEC (or the Saudi government and OPEC).
Because of new sources of supply, advances in energy technology, and environmental constraints, oil is now operating under a regime of competitive pricing, like other commodities do.
This is what happened for two decades from 1985 to 2004, and, as the chart below shows, trading in the spot market during the past 18 months has been consistent with this idea.
So has trading in the futures market: oil for delivery in 2020 has fallen to $56, from $75 a year ago.
If this competitive regime continues, the price of oil will no longer be determined by the needs and desires of oil-producing governments.
Saudi Arabia or Russia may want, or even “need,” an oil price of $70 or $80 to balance their budgets.
But oil producers’ need for a certain price does not mean that they can achieve it, any more than iron-ore or copper producers can achieve whatever price they “need” to keep paying the dividends their shareholders expect or want.
Similarly, the fact that many debt-burdened shale producers will go bankrupt if the oil price stays below $50 is no reason to expect a rebound.
These companies will simply lose their oil properties to banks or competitors with stronger finances.
The new owners will then start to pump oil again from the same acreage, provided prices are above the marginal cost of production, which will now exclude any interest payments on loans that are written off.