Only a government that is sufficiently powerful, in terms of legal authority and solvency, can do so.
Unfortunately, in the international arena these two conditions are almost never met.
Empowering the IMF to take over failed international banks would fill this gap – and chase away our worst nightmare.
Winning the Too-Big-to-Fail Battle
CAMBRIDGE – Headlines about banks’ risks to the financial system continue to dominate the financial news.
Bank of America performed poorly on the US Federal Reserve’s financial stress tests, and regulators criticized Goldman Sachs’ and JPMorgan Chase’s financing plans, leading both to lower their planned dividends and share buybacks.
And Citibank’s hefty buildup of its financial trading business raises doubts about whether it is controlling risk properly.
These results suggest that some of the biggest banks remain at risk.
And yet bankers are insisting that the post-crisis task of strengthening regulation and building a safer financial system has nearly been completed, with some citing recent studies of bank safety to support this argument.
So which is it: Are banks still at risk?
Or has post-crisis regulatory reform done its job?
The 2008 financial crisis highlighted two dangerous features of today’s financial system.
First, governments will bail out the largest banks rather than let them collapse and damage the economy.
Second, and worse, being too big to fail helps large banks grow even larger, as creditors and trading partners prefer to work with banks that have an implicit government guarantee.
Too-big-to-fail banks enjoy lower interest rates on debt than their mid-size counterparts, because lenders know that the bonds or trading contracts that such banks issue will be paid, even if the bank itself fails.
Before, during, and just after the 2007-2008 financial crisis, this provided an advantage equivalent to more than one-third of the largest US banks’ equity value.
Bailouts of too-big-to-fail banks are unpopular among economists, policymakers, and taxpayers, who resent special deals for financial bigwigs.
Public anger gave regulators in the United States and elsewhere widespread support after the financial crisis to set higher capital and other safety requirements.
And more regulatory changes are in the works.
New studies, including important ones from the International Monetary Fund and the US Government Accountability Office, do indeed show that the long-term boost afforded to too-big-to-fail banks like Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, and Bank of America is declining from its pre-crisis high.
This is good news.
The bad news is that US bank representatives cite these studies when claiming, in the financial media and presumably to their favorite members of Congress, that the too-big-to-fail phenomenon has been contained and that the time has come for regulators to back off.
This is a dangerous idea, for several reasons.
For starters, the IMF’s research and similar studies show that the likelihood of a bailout over the life of the bonds already issued by banks is indeed now lower.
But the studies do not specify why.
Lower bailout risk could reflect the perception that the regulation already in place is appropriate and complete.
Or bond-market participants may expect that new regulations, like the stress tests, will finish the job.
The studies could be telling us that investors believe that regulators are on the case and have enough political support to implement further safeguards.
Or they could think that the economy is currently strong enough that the banks will not fail before the bonds are paid off in a few years.
The second reason why such studies should not deter regulators from continued intelligent action is that the research focuses on long-term debt.
But that is not the right place to look nowadays, because regulators are positioning long-term debt to take the hit in a meltdown, while making banks’ extremely profitable – and far more volatile – short-term debt and trading operations more certain to be paid in full.
As a result, traders choose too-big-to-fail banks, rather than mid-size institutions, as counter-parties for their short-term trades, causing the large banks’ trading books – and, hence, their profits – to surge.
Measuring the boost to short-term debt is not easy.
But it is most likely quite large.
The major banks’ recent effort, led by Citigroup, to convince the US Congress to repeal a key provision of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that would have pushed much of their short-term trading to distant affiliates (which are not too big to fail) reinforces this interpretation.
The banks know that they will receive more business if they run their trading desks from the part of their corporate group that has the strongest government backing.
The third reason to be wary of bankers’ confidence that the regulatory job is complete is that once they believe it, they will behave accordingly – less frightened of failure and thus willing to take on more risk.
That seems to have been the case before the financial crisis, and there is no business or psychological reason to think that it will not happen again.
Regulators must not be deterred by bank lobbying or studies that measure neither the short-term boost afforded by a bank’s too-big-to-fail status nor how much of the perception of increased safety can be attributed to the regulations in place and the expectation of additional good regulation.
In the absence of such studies, regulators must use their own judgment and intelligence.
If “too big to fail” also means “too big to regulate,” the perception of increased safety will not last long.
Central Bank Confidential
LONDON – In 1993, the economists Alberto Alesina and Larry Summers published a seminal paper that argued that central bank independence keeps inflation in check, with no adverse consequences for economic performance.
Since then, countries around the world have made their central banks independent.
None has reversed course, and any hint that governments might reassert political control over interest rates, as happened recently in India, are met with alarm in financial markets and outrage among economists.
In truth, however, there are many degrees of independence, and not all nominally independent central banks operate in the same way.
Some monetary authorities, like the European Central Bank, set their own target.
Others, like the Bank of England (BoE), have full instrument independence – control over short-term interest rates – but must meet an inflation target set by the government.
There are differences, too, in how central banks are organized to deliver their objectives.
In New Zealand, the bank’s governor is the sole decision-maker.
At the US Federal Reserve, decisions are made by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), whose members – seven governors and five presidents of the Fed’s regional reserve banks – enjoy varying degrees of independence.
The ECB does not publish voting records and seeks consensus at the meetings of its General Council.
By contrast, the BoE’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has nine members, four of whom are appointed from outside the bank, and all votes are individually recorded; nobody is allowed to hide behind an institutional view.
The Fed does not keep a voting record, but “dissents” from its major decisions are noted (these were almost unheard of when Alan Greenspan was Chairman, but have since become more common).
There are differences, too, in the relationship between policymakers and their staff, which also influences a central bank’s independence.
At the Fed, the staff present their own economic forecasts to the FOMC, without input from the policymakers who set the interest rate.
At the BoE, the MPC is responsible for official forecasts, which it publishes in its Inflation Reports.
That is helpful in influencing expectations, because a range of different views from the central bank could confuse the private sector; but it carries the risk of institutional groupthink.
Groupthink can be particularly dangerous if the central bank is also the banking supervisor, as the 2008 global financial crisis demonstrated.
In 2006, every central bank that published a financial stability report (in other words, most of them) concluded that their country’s banking system was in fine shape: well-capitalized and endowed with robust governance and strong risk management.
It seems unlikely that not a single central bank analyst was the least bit worried about the massive growth in credit and leverage at the time.
Economists at the Bank for International Settlements – an organization of central banks – were laying out the risks very starkly.
And yet not a dissenting voice was heard from the world’s small army of central bank economists.
Central banks may have been independent vis-à-vis their countries’ governments, but internally it was very difficult to stray from the party line.
There is, of course, a balance to be struck between tight institutional discipline and letting a hundred intellectual flowers bloom.
A central bank is not a university economics department, where diversity is almost invariably a source of strength.
External observers are bound to try to read policy messages between the lines of any publication, which may not always help the bank to achieve its objectives.
That said, there is clearly room for allowing more heterodox thinking.
So it is encouraging that the BoE is experimenting with a platform that enables a wider variety of views to be heard: a blog called Bank Underground (a reference to the Tube station beneath the Bank’s headquarters) that publishes posts by junior staff challenging – or supporting – prevailing policy.
In a matter of weeks, Bank Underground already has established itself as a fertile source of provocative ideas.
One post in the middle of August (when the Bank’s top cats were certainly away, allowing free rein to the mice) pointed to some of the weaknesses in banks’ internal capital models, which are at the heart of the Basel 3 capital-requirements regime.
The author, a BoE employee named Tobias Neumann, argued that incorporating more data into the models could lead them to pick up noise and mistake it for an important signal.
As a result, he concluded, highly complex models may regularly yield misleading information.
Another post, published in July, explicitly challenged the BoE’s “official” view that as the economy recovers, we can expect non-financial companies to begin to run down their cash balances to fund investment.
The authors, Katie Farrant and Magda Rutkowska, suggest that corporate behavior may have changed as a result of the financial crisis, as difficulties in accessing bank financing led them to increase their cash buffers permanently.
If true, this has important implications for the financial system, and especially for banks.
In its short life, Bank Underground has already proved its worth.
The BoE’s governor, Mark Carney, deserves great credit for allowing us to peer through a small crack in the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street’s façade (assuming, of course, that the blog is not a wholly unlicensed initiative!).
Perhaps we will eventually see the emergence of a rival Fed Subway blog, though I am not optimistic about the prospects for an ECB U-Bahn blog anytime soon.
In the meantime, I plan to spend more time underground.
The light seems to be better there.
Bankruptcy Comes to China
BEIJING – China’s businessmen have always needed resilience, but now they must become accustomed to the specter of bankruptcy.
For China now has a bankruptcy code with teeth, and the country’s courts are beginning to enforce it with rigor.
Bankruptcy legislation in China started right after Deng Xiaoping launched his pro-market reforms three decades ago.
The Law on Enterprise Bankruptcy (Trial Implementation), the first of its kind, was enacted in 1986.
Its execution, however, was crippled by its very narrow scope for application, the absence of corresponding laws governing corporate restructuring, excessive government intervention, incompatibility with the policy-based bankruptcy procedure then in place, technical errors, and a general inability to make the code operational.
So, in 2006, a revised version of the law was enacted, marking an important milestone in China’s efforts to build an effective legal system as it moves towards a market economy.
Compared with the original bankruptcy code, the 2006 code is firmly rooted in the needs of a market economy.
First, it aims to ensure that obligations are fairly and regularly met when a debtor becomes financially insolvent.
Thus, it seeks to protect the lawful rights of both creditors and debtors.
The legislation also imposed a deadline to abolish “policy-based bankruptcy” – the practice adopted by the State Council to liquidate loss-making state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and resettle laid-off employees. Unlike the Bankruptcy Law, the administrative procedure has a different hierarchy of liquidation priorities: what a bankrupt SOE owes to its employees and the resettlement charges must be covered first and foremost by its total assets, including the enterprise’s collateral, in order to reduce dependence on local governmental budgets.
Yet this process leaves the rights of creditors undefended, eliciting widespread criticism.
The new Enterprise Bankruptcy Law redefines its scope of application to preclude overlap with other laws like the Social Security Law and the Labor Law.   Indeed, resettlement of laid-off SOE employees, and other social implications of layoffs, should now be addressed primarily by government through the social safety net, rather than as part of the bankruptcy process.
The new code also introduces the concept of “administrative receivership,” whereby lawyers, certified accountants, and other intermediaries act as managers of enterprises undergoing bankruptcy.
The procedure abolishes the Liquidation Team, a long-standing regime that many alleged was unjust, aggressive in administrative intervention, unprofessional, and unaccountable.
In order for this part of the law to go ahead, the Supreme People’s Court issued judicial interpretations that set out who can be designated a company receiver and the amount and type of compensation they can be paid.
Up to now, some 2,520 agencies and 388 individuals have been included on the list of receivers.
Yet problems remain.
For example, receivers are paid unreasonably poorly in cases of limited assets; furthermore, the random, indiscriminate appointment of receivers sometimes leaves cases over- or understaffed.
Consequently, the job of receiver, though it carries strict liabilities, is highly risky in terms of reward.
If no viable solution is found, no agency or individual will be willing to serve as the receiver in ordinary bankruptcy cases.
Another important innovation is the adoption of restructuring procedures based on other countries’ experiences.
The possibility of restructuring balances the interests of stakeholders and uses legal protections to help potentially risky enterprises prevent or avoid bankruptcy if a bailout is worthwhile or possible.
But stricter and more reasonable standards should be established for courts’ approval of restructuring plans.
For example, if the required majority of shareholders adopts such a plan, the court should protect the rights of the minority of creditors who may have opposed it.
And if the liquidation rate for creditors’ common claims is defined as no lower than that at the time the draft restructuring plan was submitted for approval, compensation must be considered in the event that payment is delayed.
Moreover, the Bankruptcy Law, the Company Law, and the Securities Law should be well coordinated and mutually reinforcing.
How can an enterprise being restructured, say, find a way to issue securities for financing if it cannot meet conventional standards such as profitability and net asset value, as required by the Company Law and the Securities Law?
The law must contain specific provisions regarding such matters in order to ensure successful listing of restructuring firms.
To prevent fraud, an acute problem in the past, the new law established a “right of rescission,” whereby the receiver can ask courts to rescind any action by a debtor that involves fraud, evasion, or unfair liquidation in the prescribed period before a bankruptcy petition is accepted and assets recovered.
The system now holds the key to fairness liquidation.
Moreover, the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China now includes bankruptcy fraud.
The successful implementation of China’s revised Bankruptcy Law hinges on its effective enforcement and abandonment of the mindset and practices shaped under the old version, especially in the era of policy-based bankruptcy.
Despite the difficulties that remain, China’s bankruptcy legislation is increasingly adapted to the market economy; the trend is irreversible.
Ban the Bomb Tests
WASHINGTON, DC – The Nuclear Security Summit process, which concluded earlier this month in Washington, DC, shows what can be achieved when political leaders come together to concentrate on a global problem.
The six-year initiative, focused on preventing nuclear terrorism, produced important outcomes on eliminating, minimizing, and securing dangerous nuclear and radiological materials.
Unfortunately, however, the nuclear threat is still far from being neutralized.
The dangers posed by terrorist groups are growing, as are the risks from competition and conflict between nuclear-armed states.
Strong leadership and global cooperation must also be deployed to address other urgent nuclear dangers, particularly the threat of further testing and proliferation of weapons.
There are few bright signs on the horizon.
On the contrary, almost every nuclear-armed state is either expanding or upgrading its nuclear arsenal.
There are no active negotiations to regulate, cap, or further reduce nuclear stockpiles.
Russia and the United States have each deployed more than 1,800 strategic warheads on several hundred submarines, bombers, and missiles – far more than is necessary to deter a nuclear attack.
Many of these weapons can be launched within minutes, increasing the risk of miscalculation.
Meanwhile, North Korea could soon be able to arm ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads, a development that would pose a significant threat to all of Asia.
Given the grave dangers, it is in every country’s interest to halt further nuclear competition and eliminate the risks associated with the world’s remaining stockpiles of some 15,000 nuclear weapons.
As US President Barack Obama and Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev noted in separate statements during the Nuclear Security Summit, a key element of an effective global risk-reduction strategy must be to bring the 1996 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) into force.
If existing nuclear powers cannot conduct tests, they will not be able to try out new, more sophisticated warhead designs.
Similarly, without test explosions, newer nuclear-armed states will have a far more difficult time developing and fielding smaller, more easily deliverable warheads.
The CTBT has near-universal support.
With 183 state signatories and a de facto test ban in place, the treaty is now a key component of the international nuclear nonproliferation system.
It has established a taboo against testing (violated since 1998 only by North Korea) and slowed the global arms race.
And yet, nearly 20 years after its adoption by the United Nations General Assembly, the CTBT is not valid international law – largely because the US has not ratified it.
The US Senate’s rushed and highly partisan 1999 vote against ratification – and its failure to reconsider the treaty since then – has given the seven other states that must ratify the CTBT a reason for delay.
As a result, the door to further nuclear testing remains open.
Last fall, US Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz and US Secretary of State John Kerry suggested that the Senate revisit the issue.
Unfortunately, President Barack Obama does not have enough time left in office to launch the time-consuming education and outreach campaign needed before bringing the CTBT to the Senate for another vote.
But his administration could intensify the necessary preparatory work – for presenting new information, answering detailed questions, and dispelling old myths and misconceptions – before he leaves office.
Even if the next US president and Senate do reconsider ratification of the CTBT, a vote may not happen for several years.
In the meantime, it is essential that world leaders seek ways to encourage ratification by other CTBT holdout states and to reinforce the de facto global moratorium on testing.
The G-7 foreign ministers’ declaration on April 11 in Hiroshima – “No state should conduct a nuclear test explosion and all states should sign and ratify the CTBT without delay” – is a good start.
No one knows that better than Japan and Kazakhstan, which have suffered from the terrible effects of nuclear detonations.
As their respective foreign ministers, Fumio Kishida and Erlan Idrissov, warned in September, business as usual will not suffice.
Kishida and Idrissov have invited their counterparts to a ministerial-level meeting in Vienna on June 13 to explore options for bringing the CTBT into force.
They will encourage key holdout states to reaffirm their support for the global testing taboo and to pledge that they will consider ratification “at the earliest possible time.”
As we approach the 20th anniversary of the CTBT, members of the UN Security Council and the General Assembly can take further steps to ensure that nuclear testing remains off-limits.
For example, they could pursue the adoption of a new Security Council resolution and a parallel General Assembly measure calling on all states to refrain from testing and urging quick action on ratification.
Such an initiative would reinforce the global norm against testing and stimulate movement by holdout states.
Just as leaders have cooperated at the Nuclear Security Summit to prevent nuclear terrorism, we need renewed cooperation and leadership to end nuclear testing once and for all.
Barack Obama and American Power
CAMBRIDGE – One of the first challenges that President Barack Obama will face is the effects of the ongoing financial crisis, which has called into question the future of American power.
An article in The Far Eastern Economic Review proclaims that “Wall Street’s crack-up presages a global tectonic shift: the beginning of the decline of American power.”
Russian President Dmitri Medvedev sees the crisis as a sign that America’s global leadership is coming to an end, and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez has declared that Beijing is now much more relevant than New York.
Yet the dollar, a symbol of American financial power, has surged rather than declined.
As Kenneth Rogoff, a Harvard professor and former chief economist of the IMF notes, “It is ironic, given that we just messed up big-time, that the response of foreigners is to pour more money into us.
They’re not sure where else to go.
They seem to have more confidence in our ability to solve our problems than we do.”
It used to be said that when America sneezed, the rest of the world caught a cold.
More recently, many claimed that with the rise of China and the petro-states, an American slowdown could be decoupled from the rest of the world.
But when the United States caught the financial flu, others followed.
Many foreign leaders quickly switched from schadenfreude to fear – and to the security of US treasury bills.
Crises often refute conventional wisdom, and this one reveals that the underlying strength of the American economy remains impressive.
The poor performance of Wall Street and America regulators has cost America a good deal in terms of the soft power of its economic model’s attractiveness, but the blow need not be fatal if, in contrast to Japan in the 1990’s, the US manages to absorb the losses and limit the damage.
The World Economic Forum still rates the American economy as the world’s most competitive, owing to its labor-market flexibility, higher education, political stability, and openness to innovation.
The larger question concerns the long-term future of American power.
A new forecast for 2025 being prepared by the US National Intelligence Council projects that American dominance will be “much diminished,” and that the one key area of continued American superiority – military power – will be less significant in the competitive world of the future.
This is not so much a question of American decline as “the rise of the rest.”
Power always depends on context, and in today’s world, it is distributed in a pattern that resembles a complex three-dimensional chess game.
On the top chessboard, military power is largely unipolar and likely to remain so for a while.
But on the middle chessboard, economic power is already multi-polar, with the US, Europe, Japan and China as the major players, and others gaining in importance.
The bottom chessboard is the realm of transnational relations that cross borders outside of government control.
It includes actors as diverse as bankers electronically transferring sums larger than most national budgets, as well as terrorists transferring weapons or hackers disrupting Internet operations.
It also includes new challenges like pandemics and climate change.
On this bottom board, power is widely dispersed, and it makes no sense to speak of unipolarity, multipolarity, or hegemony.
Even in the aftermath of the financial crisis, the giddy pace of technological change is likely to continue to drive globalization, but the political effects will be different for the world of nation-states and the world of non-state actors.
In inter-state politics, the most important factor will be the continuing “return of Asia.”
In 1750, Asia had three-fifths of the world population and three-fifths of the world’s economic output.
By 1900, after the industrial revolution in Europe and America, Asia accounted for just one-fifth of world output.
By 2040, Asia will be well on its way back to its historical share.
The rise of China and India may create instability, but it is a problem with precedents, and we can learn from history about how policies can affect the outcome.
A century ago, Britain managed the rise of American power without conflict, but the world’s failure to manage the rise of German power led to two devastating world wars.
The rise of non-state actors also must be managed.
In 2001, a non-state group killed more Americans than the government of Japan killed at Pearl Harbor.
A pandemic spread by birds or travelers on jet aircraft could kill more people than perished in World Wars I or II.
The problems of the diffusion of power (away from states) may turn out to be more difficult than shifts in power between states.
The challenge for Barack Obama is that more and more issues and problems are outside the control of even the most powerful state.
Although the US does well on the traditional measures of power, those measures increasingly fail to capture much of what defines world politics, which, owing to the information revolution and globalization, is changing in a way that prevents Americans from achieving all their international goals by acting alone.
For example, international financial stability is vital to American prosperity, but the US needs the cooperation of others to ensure it.
Global climate change, too, will affect the quality of life, but the US cannot manage the problem alone.
And, in a world where borders are becoming increasingly porous to everything from drugs to infectious diseases to terrorism, America must mobilize international coalitions to address shared threats and challenges.
As the world’s largest economy, American leadership will remain crucial.
The problem of American power in the wake of the financial crisis is not one of decline, but of a realization that even the most powerful country cannot achieve its aims without the help of others.
Fortunately, Barack Obama understands that.
Barack Obama, Israel’s True Friend
HAIFA – How do you tell a true friend?
By the fact that he believes and has confidence in you, cares about your true needs, and honestly tells you your mistakes, which he tries to help you correct.
That is the kind of friend I want at my side, not one who automatically approves of whatever I do, declares his love for me, and accepts me as I am.
Ever since its great military victory in the Six-Day War of 1967, when it repelled the combined armies of Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, which had openly proclaimed their desire to destroy the Jewish state, Israel has been in the throes of an ideological and military confusion resulting from the conquests it made during that conflict.
Following the Six-Day War, Israel did not consider the conquered lands as something to be traded for peace, and thus induce the Arab world and the Palestinians to recognize its legitimacy and ensure the demilitarization of Palestinian territories after their restitution.
Instead, Israel – either because of its distrust of its enemies and of their commitment to respect any future peace agreement, or because of a desire to annex some of the territories – began to pursue a policy of settlements.
But, in doing so, it created a reality that is difficult to reverse.
Israel’s non-military settlements are, and have always been, irrelevant to the country’s security.
On the contrary, because the settlements are located in the heart of the Palestinian population, they are convenient targets for terrorist attacks and require special defensive measures, including the deployment of large military forces engaged in patrolling and surveillance.
Even on the Golan Heights, where there is no Syrian presence, the settlements, located only a few kilometers from enormous Syrian troop concentrations, create a heavy burden, because, in the event of war, the Israeli army would be forced to evacuate them quickly, as was the case during the Yom Kippur war of October 1973.
The settlements intensify Palestinian hatred toward Israel.
In addition to occupying Palestinians’ land, using their water, and imposing limits on their freedom of movement, the settlements symbolize Israel’s intention to remain, and thus its reluctance to concede independence to the Palestinian people, even if they were to recognize Israel’s legitimacy and show themselves disposed to peaceful coexistence.
Israel has invested great financial resources in the settlements, often ignoring important needs in Israel proper.
The settlers, predominantly supporters of religious-nationalist movements and parties, often flaunt an attitude of superiority in their relations with Israeli authorities, pretending to have a special status with respect not only to Palestinians, but also to other Israeli citizens.
Indeed, a substantial number of them don’t even recognize the Israeli state’s legal authority.
The greatest problem with the settlements is that if they continue to expand, the two-state solution will be compromised and, sooner or later, lead to a unitary state – one populated by two ethnic groups – between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea.
Because simple demographic implies that Palestinians would gradually come to constitute a majority, a unitary state is a recipe for the end of Israel.
The majority of Israelis understand this.
But, like an incorrigible drug addict, they are unable to say, “Enough. We have made a mistake, and we have to remedy it before it’s too late.”
To be sure, when a peace treaty was signed with Egypt, Jewish settlers were forcibly evacuated from the Sinai.
Similarly, when Jewish communities in the Gaza Strip became unsupportable, the leader of the right, Ariel Sharon, forced out the 9,000 settlers who lived there among 1.5 million Palestinians – a dramatic event that has left deep scars on both sides.
But there are 250,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank.
Any attempt to evacuate them could escalate into a civil war.
The world, including the United States, disapproves of the Israeli settlements.
But, despite past US administrations’ opportunity to make their influence felt, they preferred to permit Israel, an allied, friendly state, to do what it wanted.
So a moment of truth has arrived.
Barack Obama, a wise and courageous leader, is – I have no doubt about it – not merely interested in improving America’s image in the eyes of the Muslim world.
He also seeks Israel’s welfare and security, and says to us, “Enough.
Stop harming yourselves and your own future.
Even if you don’t believe in Palestinians’ real desire for peace, their capacity to hold terrorist organizations at bay, or their renunciation of the alleged right of return, you can always protect your security with a military presence in Palestinian territories rather than prejudicing the future peace and the two-state solution by expanding useless settlements.”
With such a clear and direct appeal to the Israeli government, America’s president not only expresses what a majority of Israelis know.
He also proves his profound friendship for the Jewish state.
Barack Obama’s American Revolution
For eight years, George W. Bush has managed to incarnate and reinforce all the prejudices and negative stereotypes the world has of the US.
He has antagonized the world more than any other American president before him, seriously damaging America’s “soft” power by inefficient and excessive use of its “hard” power.
Reconciling the United States with itself and the world should thus be the twin priorities for America’s next president.
If there is one candidate who can accomplish this, who can contribute, in a split second, to restoring America’s international reputation, it is Barack Obama.
Exceptional periods sometimes create exceptional leaders.
Without the French Revolution, Napoleon Bonaparte would have remained a gifted and frustrated junior military officer.
Likewise, the current period in America and its relations with the world have been truly exceptional, requiring a leader who can fundamentally challenge a global majority’s view that America has become arrogant, impotent, and selfish.
Of course, diehard anti-Americans will never be persuaded, but they remain a minority, with the possible exception of the Muslim world.
The silent majority is ready to be convinced that there is life after Bush.
Why is Obama so different from the other presidential candidates, and why could he make such a large difference internationally?
After all, in foreign policy matters, the next president’s room for maneuver will be very small.
He (or she) will have to stay in Iraq, engage in the Israel-Palestine conflict on the side of Israel, confront a tougher Russia, deal with an ever more ambitious China, and face the challenge of global warming.
If Obama can make a difference, it is not because of his policy choices, but because of what he is.
The very moment he appears on the world’s television screens, victorious and smiling, America’s image and soft power would experience something like a Copernican revolution.
Think of the impression his election would make not only in Africa, but in Asia, the Middle East, and even Europe.
With its rise to global supremacy, America had become the incarnation of the West, and the West was seen as “white.”
Power in America shifted first from the East Coast to the West Coast, and then to the South.
But if a shift across America’s racial divide is not truly revolutionary, then what is?
Of course, to reduce Obama to the color of his skin is a grave oversimplification, even if he has been keen to emphasize his “black roots.”
In fact, African-Americans do not fully support him.
With his white mother and his African father, he does not fit any African-American precedent.
But that is another reason why Obama is exceptional: the complexity of his identity makes him truly universal, a global candidate for a global age.
By virtue of his unique personal history, he can bridge Africa, America, and even Asia – where he studied as a young boy in a Muslim school – thereby reviving the universal image and message of America.
But, above all, what makes Obama unique, given what the US has been through during the Bush years, is the nature of the message he embodies, which is best summed up in the title of his book The Audacity of Hope .
If America can move from a culture of fear to one of hope – and again incarnate hope for the world – it will require a leader who embodies the American dream: modern and armed with a humanistic religious message, in contrast to the anxious irrationalism of the Christian conservative movement that fueled Bush’s political base.
Regardless of whether Obama can deliver on his promises, America will not regain the stature it had between 1941 and 2000.
With or without Obama, the “American century” will not be repeated.
But Obama can learn from the early mistakes made by Jimmy Carter in the mid-1970’s.
Neo-isolationism is not an option, but restraint – based on confidence and wisdom – is.
The world needs a more modest and confident America.
For a European who has been deeply troubled and saddened by America’s evolution in the last decade, Obama, of all the declared presidential candidates, seems to come closest to incarnating such an America.
Jimmy Carter Obama
PARIS – “How many divisions does the Pope have?”
Joseph Stalin famously quipped when told to be mindful of the Vatican.
In an updated lesson in realpolitik, Russian President Vladimir Putin recently was happy to count Pope Francis as an ally in opposing American military intervention in Syria.
Presenting himself as the last pillar of respect for international law, Putin offered ethics lessons to the United States – and specifically to President Barack Obama.
With the US-Russian agreement, signed in Geneva on September 14, to place Syria’s chemical weapons under international control, Russia has returned to the global scene – and not only because of its nuisance value.
Could Putin one day receive, like Obama before him, a Nobel Peace Prize?
Has not Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, who proposed the deal, already entered the pantheon of great Russian diplomats, as the successor of Karl Nesselrode, the Russian envoy to the 1814-1815 Congress of Vienna and to the Congress of Paris in 1856?
Of course, Russian diplomacy has performed extremely well recently, but it does not stand on its own merits alone.
Russia’s diplomats would have gained little without America’s foreign-policy malaise – a victim of Obama’s vacillation and of Americans’ hostility to any new military adventure, however limited its scope – and Europe’s deep internal divisions.
Yes, Russia is emerging from its humiliation following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Heir to an imperial tradition that has shaped its national identity, Russia is resuming in the Middle East a role and status more in tune with the one it had from the Czarist era to Soviet times.
But Russia is no match for the US militarily and no match for China economically, and its soft power is virtually non-existent.
If Russia can provoke America – whether by granting political asylum to the “traitor” Edward Snowden, for example, or by resisting Western diplomacy in the Middle East – it is not because it has become a great power once again, but simply because America is no longer the great power that it once was.
The Syrian crisis has made that plain.
Recent US diplomacy has seemed amateurish and naive.
Obama’s handling of the Syrian crisis increasingly evokes Jimmy Carter’s handling of the Iranian hostage crisis 33 years ago, particularly the failed operation in 1980 to rescue the Americans abducted following the takeover of the US embassy in November 1979.
Then, too, hesitation seemed to prevail over determination, contributing to the failure of the mission.
Carter was a somewhat bland engineer, whereas Obama is a charismatic lawyer.
Yet they seem to share a fundamental indecisiveness in their approach to world affairs.
Carter had difficulty choosing between the muscular line of his national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and the more moderate approach of his secretary of state, Cyrus Vance.
By contrast, there are no fundamental disagreements among Obama’s closest foreign-policy advisers – Susan Rice, the national security adviser, Samantha Power, who succeeded Rice as US Ambassador to the United Nations, and Secretary of State John Kerry.
Instead, it is Obama himself who seems to be constantly hesitating.
The divisions are not among his advisers, but within his own mind.
As a good lawyer, Obama weighs the pros and cons, aware that it is impossible to do nothing in the Syrian crisis but remaining viscerally disinclined to leap into any foreign entanglement that would distract attention from his agenda of domestic reform.
More important, he seems to lack a coherent long-term strategic vision of America’s role in the world.
Neither the currently fashionable “Asian pivot” nor the “Russian reset” four years ago constitute the beginning of a grand plan.
In such a context, the return of global realpolitik can only benefit Russia and harm the US, despite America’s many advantages in terms of hard and soft power.
The agreement on Syria’s chemical weapons struck by Russia and the US could one day be remembered as a spectacular breakthrough in the field of arms control.
But it is more likely to be perceived as a grand deception – remembered not for helping Syria’s people, but mainly as a sign of America’s growing international weakness.
In that case, the agreement will not only damage America’s reputation, but will also undermine global stability.
Weakness is weakness, whether one is in Moscow, Beijing, Tehran, or Pyongyang.
Barack Obama’s Missing Freedom Agenda
On his second full day in office, President Barack Obama made a major gesture toward restoring the Constitution and the rule of law by signing two executive orders: one closed the prison at Guantánamo Bay, and the other restored America to the company of civilized nations by closing so-called “black sites” that facilitated state-sanctioned torture.
Nice start, and the credit goes both to Obama and to the millions of Americans who stood up and took risks to fight against gathering tyranny.
But it is not enough.
There is a speech that we still need to hear, detailing five tasks that, in order to repair the damage to liberty caused by the previous administration, he must pursue as quickly as he handled the first two executive orders.
Its substance should be something like the following:
“My fellow Americans, the Founders had the wisdom to guarantee our freedoms in many ways.
They could not guarantee our souls.
That is up to us and how we act.
“In every major religion, a version of the following question is asked: what does it profit us to gain wealth and power if we lose our moral values?
In the past eight years, we have colluded with acts that jeopardized the very soul of our nation.
The greatest crime we committed or tolerated was the savaging of our cherished Constitution.
“Without our Constitution, America is just another world power made great by wealth and weapons instead of by values and convictions; so we are at risk of collapse when our wealth and weapons fail us.
It is our Constitution that is our true wealth and the true guarantee of our nation’s endurance.
“After closing Guantánamo Bay and forbidding torture, we must repeal the Patriot Act, thereby restoring the Constitution’s restraints against warrantless wiretapping and surveillance.
“Second, though we have closed the prisons, we must seek the forgiveness of our fellow nations for the horrors that we committed or with which we colluded by engaging in state-sanctioned torture and “extraordinary rendition” of detainees to countries that torture.
I am appointing a commission to establish a truth and reconciliation process to put the accounting of these horrors before our own consciences and before the world.
“Third, we must have a special prosecutor to prosecute the culpable.
Many in the military or the intelligence services now fear criminal liability for actions they took at the behest of those at the top of the chain of command.
But the proper course of action is that taken in Nuremberg, The Hague, Sierra Leone, and after the Bosnian conflict: prosecute those who designed, approved, and implemented the policy of torture and rendition, however high the chain of commission goes – including the lawyers who justified legal perversions that led to torture and murder – rather than targeting those farther down the chain of command.
 “Fourth, let us once again outlaw the presence of the military on our streets, as the Founders intended.
On October 7, 2008, more than 3,000 American troops were deployed from Iraq to the United States, in violation of Posse Comitatus, which has protected us from military policing for a century, and in violation of the Insurrection Act, which protected us for the century before that.
Today, there are 20,000 soldiers – not accountable to the people, but only to the executive – on our streets.
“The danger of that situation is why the Founders adopted the Second Amendment, which is meant to restrict domestic policing to militia – the National Guard and civilian police – that are answerable to the people.
America is neither a battlefield nor a police state, so we should send our soldiers to the actual front or else back home to their families.
“Finally, we must ensure that this darkness never descends again.
Half of American children grow up with no civic education.
Half of states no longer teach civics – the study of our Republic and how it works – in middle school.
So half of incoming American college students don’t know what our democracy is, let alone how to defend it when it is threatened.
I call on states throughout the land to re-institute the study of US civics so that we will produce citizens who understand our legacy and can defend liberty and the Constitution when it is threatened.
“Join me in accomplishing these next five tasks, and we can look at ourselves in the mirror again, recognizing ourselves as true Americans.”
Qaddafi’s Long Shadow
ANTALYA – The recent coup attempt in Libya, led by General Khalifa Hiftar, has finally pierced the illusion that the country’s dysfunctional central government, whose power is limited to the capital, Tripoli, can rule effectively.
But determining how to bring peace and stability to Libya’s deeply fragmented society will require more than an assessment of this government’s mistakes; it will demand careful consideration of former leader Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s failures – and his successes.
Hiftar believes that the key to solving Libya’s myriad crises lies in establishing a strong national army capable of subduing the Islamists who are destabilizing the country.
Others continue to advocate for national reconciliation.
But neither solution addresses what is really driving events in Libya: the legacy of Qaddafism.
Given that Qaddafi ruled Libya for more than four decades, his is a legacy that cannot simply be ignored.
That means not only recognizing the vital link between his policies and today’s problems, but also ensuring that what should be preserved is not sacrificed in the rush to efface his memory.
Qaddafi used strong security services and paramilitary revolutionary committees to safeguard his rule, leaving state institutions dysfunctional and fragmented.
Indeed, Qaddafi’s belief that the bureaucracy impeded the transmission of his message to the masses spurred him to dismantle ministries periodically and place privileged personal relationships above institutional hierarchies.
Lacking unified leadership, Libyans reverted to tribal and regional allegiances, at the expense of a shared national identity.
This atomization of the state and society continues to impede Libya’s ability to establish effective and credible government.
With the right approach, however, there is hope.
The problem is that Libya’s leaders have so far done more to perpetuate fragmentation and dysfunction than to ameliorate it.
In its two years in power, the parliament, known as the General National Congress (GNC), has empowered non-state actors, with ministries bypassing the army to task militias with security operations.
Hiftar recognizes the problem with this approach – indeed, it spurred him to initiate the coup; but his proposed solution is equally flawed.
After all, Libya’s security forces have already proved to be more likely to facilitate than fight cronyism.
Moreover, instead of eliminating Qaddafi’s highly politicized judicial system – for example, separate courts, administered by the revolutionary committees, could try any Libyan without due process – his successors have embraced it.
In 2012, a United Nations report revealed that “the vast majority” of an estimated 8,000 conflict-related detainees were being held outside of the state’s purview.
Militias have taken advantage of this system to strong-arm prosecutors into issuing arrest warrants.
And militias based in the city of Zintan continue to refuse to hand over Qaddafi’s son, Saif al-Islam, to the central authorities.
Finally, the corruption that was endemic in Qaddafi’s regime endures, with ministry officials accepting bribes, for example, in exchange for contracts.
For their part, the militias that overthrew Qaddafi have released prisoners in exchange for ransom payments.
If Libya is to escape its current predicament, its leaders must transform the governance structures that Qaddafi built to create a fair and credible system based on the rule of law.
That requires, first and foremost, efforts to strengthen and modernize institutions, guided by Western examples.
At the same time, Libya’s leaders must recognize and build upon the few positive aspects of Qaddafism.
For starters, Qaddafi managed to unify a country that, since the Greek invasion in the seventh century BC, had been divided between a coastal strip linked to the larger Mediterranean basin and an isolated hinterland that even Benito Mussolini’s brutal regime could not secure.
Qaddafi thus took the first step – intentional or not – toward creating a modern nation-state.
The challenge now is to overcome the divisions that remain within the population – no easy task in a vast country with a sparsely inhabited interior populated mostly by ethnic minorities and reclusive tribes.
The most important positive component of Qaddafi’s legacy, however, was the partial emancipation of women.
As a modernizer seeking to mobilize his entire population, Qaddafi promoted women’s social and economic inclusion by expanding education for girls, granting women the right to divorce, and appointing female judges and ministers.
Though Qaddafi’s female guards were mocked as the trappings of his eccentricity, they actually represented his desire to liberate women.
Here, too, Qaddafi’s successors have failed.
Back in 2012, for example, the head of the interim government, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, declared his intention to lift restrictions against polygamy.
Later, he ordered Sarah Elmesallati, the host of the ceremony at which power was transferred to the GNC, to leave the stage halfway through her presentation because she was not wearing a headscarf.
Ordinary Libyans have also advocated keeping women on a short leash.
A college-age Libyan woman’s father recently denied her the opportunity to accept a scholarship from the US State Department to attend a training workshop in Washington, DC, because he could not accompany her overseas.
Libya’s leaders – and their Western benefactors – have no choice but to consider and address the effects of Qaddafi’s legacy on public attitudes and official behavior.
But they must also accept that only modernization of Libya’s state and society – the agenda that Qaddafi pursued, albeit in a perverted form – will ensure the country’s survival.
Barbarians or Geniuses at the Gate?
MUNICH – Europe is currently experiencing a huge wave of migration between its east and west.
This movement resembles the Great Migrations (Völkerwanderung) that marked Europe between the fourth to sixth centuries.
Within the first year of Romania’s accession to the EU on January 1, 2007, for example, roughly a million Romanians migrated to Italy and Spain.
More than 800,000 East Europeans have become workers in the United Kingdom over the past four years, most coming from Poland.
Indeed, in the last two years alone, 1.5 million Poles emigrated, and overall probably more than two million have done so since Poland’s EU accession in 2004.
On a smaller scale, the migration of Ukrainians to the Czech Republic, Bulgarians to Turkey, and British citizens to Spain is also noteworthy.
Because Germany still restricts the immigration of dependent workers from eastern EU countries, most of its immigrants come as self-employed or economically inactive people.
In Munich, the number of self-employed tilers increased in 2004 and 2005, the first two years after the first eastern enlargement wave, from 119 to 970.
But despite restrictions, by 2005 Germany had absorbed 37% of all migrants from Eastern Europe that came before and after eastern EU enlargement, whereas Italy had absorbed 22%, Greece 11%, Switzerland 8%, and the UK only 3%.
In the same year, 13% of the population living in Germany was foreign born, more than in Britain (10%), France (7%), Spain (5%), or Italy (3%).
The immigration waves of the last two years to Britain, Spain, and Italy will have significantly changed these figures, but the information needed to update the statistics is not yet available.
Nowadays, people move faster than statistical offices can count them.      
Before the EU’s eastern enlargement, many studies predicted the likely migration waves.
The forecasts of the proportion of East Europeans who were expected to move west within a 15 years ranged from 2.5% to 6%.
Given that about 5% of the Polish population has now emigrated within a period of only four years, despite immigration restrictions by important target countries, these estimates were much too cautious.
Before enlargement, it was politically incorrect to discuss possible waves of migration to the West, as EU politicians saw this as an obstacle to the enlargement process.
Now that enlargement has taken place, it is easier to discuss migration objectively.
This immigration is not an invasioni barbariche, as Italians refer to the Völkerwanderung, although the orders of magnitude are comparable.
As migrants move between markets with well-defined property rights, immigration in principle is beneficial for both the immigrants and the target country.
The immigrant receives a higher wage than at home, and the target country benefits from cheap labor, which creates more value than it costs.
But in practice, immigration is often not as beneficial as it could be, because the target country has a rigid wage structure that prevents the additional jobs needed to employ the immigrants from being created.
If, for example, a target country provides minimum wage guarantees and replacement incomes for the domestic unemployed, immigrants simply force domestic residents into the care of the welfare state.
This is not a problem of immigration as such, but of poorly designed domestic social and labor market institutions.
To be on the safe side, host countries often try to limit immigration to skilled workers, because they join segments of the labor market in which sufficient downward wage flexibility provides immigrants with additional jobs.
But countries have so far had mixed success in attracting skilled immigrants.
The most successful countries in this regard have been the Anglo-Saxon countries (Canada, Ireland, Australia, the United States, and the UK, in that order), as well as Denmark and Norway.
More than one-third of immigrants to these countries have tertiary education, with Canada and Ireland at 45%.
In the more unsuccessful countries – Italy, Austria, Germany, France, Portugal, and the Netherlands – the proportion of immigrants with a tertiary education is below a quarter.
In Italy, the share is just 11% – the lowest in the available statistics.
The brain drain to the Anglo-Saxon countries, the US in particular, is astounding.
The graduating classes of top American universities are packed with foreign students, and 27% of physicians practicing in the US today come from abroad.
America’s postwar growth and dynamism largely resulted from skilled immigrants.
Before and after World War II, many skilled people came from Europe, Germany in particular; in recent decades, Asian immigrants dominate, with India, Pakistan, and the Philippines occupying the top ranks.
Today’s brain drain is not only from emerging and developing countries to richer countries, but also from European countries to the US.
In most research disciplines, European-born “superstars” work and teach in the US rather than in Europe, and, according to a study by Gilles Saint-Paul, it is the superstars in particular who generate growth and prosperity for a country.
Of course, people with a decent tertiary education are also important for a country’s economy, and here the loss of some European countries is substantial.
While only 3% of Spanish and 4% of French people with tertiary education live abroad, 7% of Italians and 9% of Germans do.
Surprisingly, Ireland and the UK lead in this category, with 34% and 17%, respectively.
This may reflect the high interchange in both directions between the Anglo-Saxon countries, or replacement migration in which skilled people arrive from elsewhere as the domestic skilled migrate to other Anglo-Saxon countries.
The European landscape will change as rapidly in the course of this century as it did at the time of the Völkerwanderung.
History will have many tales to tell about what this really meant for the Continent.
At the moment, though, the casual observer is still rather clueless.
Barrels, Bushels, and Bonds
CAMBRIDGE – The prices of hydrocarbons, minerals, and agricultural commodities have been on a veritable roller coaster.
While commodity prices are always more variable than those for manufactured goods and services, commodity markets over the last five years have seen extraordinary, almost unprecedented, volatility.
Countries that specialize in the export of oil, copper, iron ore, wheat, coffee, or other commodities have been booming, but they are highly vulnerable.
Dollar commodity prices could plunge at any time, as a result of a new recession, an increase in real interest rates in the United States, fluctuations in climate, or random sector-specific factors.
Countries that have outstanding debt in dollars or other foreign currencies are especially vulnerable.
If their export revenues were to plunge relative to their debt-service obligations, the result could be crises reminiscent of Latin America’s in 1982 or the Asian and Russian currency crises of 1997-1998.
Many developing countries have made progress since the 1990’s in shifting from dollar-denominated debt toward foreign direct investment and other types of capital inflows, or in paying down their liabilities altogether.
But some commodity exporters still seek ways to borrow that won’t expose them to excessive risk.
Commodity bonds may offer a neat way to circumvent these risks.
Exporters of any particular commodity should issue debt that is denominated in terms of the price of that commodity, rather than in dollars or any other currency.
Jamaica, for example, would issue aluminum bonds; Nigeria would issue oil bonds; Sierra Leone would issue iron-ore bonds; and Mongolia would issue copper bonds.
Investors would be able to buy Guatemala’s coffee bonds, Côte d’Ivoire’s cocoa bonds, Liberia’s rubber bonds, Mali’s cotton bonds, and Ghana’s gold bonds.
The advantage of such bonds is that in the event of a decline in the world price of the underlying commodity, the debt-to-export ratio need not rise.
The cost of debt service adjusts automatically, without the severe disruption that results from loss of confidence, crisis, debt restructuring, and so forth.
The idea is not new.
So, why has it not been tried before?
When one asks finance ministers in commodity-exporting debtor countries, they frequently reply that they fear insufficient demand for commodity bonds.
That is a surprising proposition, given that commodity bonds have an obvious latent market, rooted in real economic fundamentals.
After all, steel companies have an inherent need to hedge against fluctuations in the price of iron ore, just as airlines and utilities have an inherent need to hedge against fluctuations in the price of oil.
Each of these commodities is an important input for major corporations.
Surely there is at least as much natural demand for commodity bonds as there is for credit-default swaps and some of the bizarrely complicated derivatives that are currently traded!
It takes liquidity to make a market successful, and it can be difficult to get a new one started until it achieves a certain critical mass.
The problem may be that there are not many investors who want to take a long position on oil and Nigerian credit risk simultaneously.
A multilateral agency such as the World Bank could play a critical role in launching a market in commodity bonds.
The fit would be particularly good in those countries where the Bank is already lending money.
Here is how it would work.
Instead of denominating a loan to Nigeria in terms of dollars, the Bank would denominate it in terms of the price of oil and lay off its exposure to the world oil price by issuing that same quantity of bonds denominated in oil.
If the Bank lends to multiple oil-exporting countries, the market for oil bonds that it creates would be that much larger and more liquid.
This pooling function would be particularly important in cases where there are different grades or varieties of the product (as with oil or coffee), and where prices can diverge enough to make an important difference to the exporters.
An alternative for some commodity exporters is to hedge their risk by selling on the futures market.
But an important disadvantage of derivatives is their short maturity.
A West African country with newly discovered oil reserves needs to finance exploration, drilling, and pipeline construction, which means that it needs to hedge at a time horizon of 10-20 years, not 90 days.
Another disadvantage of derivatives is that they require a high degree of sophistication –both technical and political.
In the event of an increase in a commodity’s price, a finance minister who has done a perfect job of hedging export-price risk on the futures market will suddenly find himself accused of having gambled away the national patrimony.
This principal-agent problem is much diminished in the case of commodity bonds.
If the international financial wizards can get together and act on this idea now, commodity exporters might be able to avoid calamity the next time the world price of their product takes a plunge.
The World Bank should take up the cause.
Barroso Overboard?
BRUSSELS – It is time for José Manuel Barroso to start selling himself.
His chances of being re-appointed as President of the European Commission depend on the case he makes.
Until the global financial crisis broke, Barroso looked fairly certain to get a second five-year term.
Now, it is becoming increasingly hard to find diplomats or policymakers who support him.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy is said to have been disappointed by Barroso’s performance during last autumn's financial meltdown, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel also seems to have fallen silent on the matter of his future.
No one doubts that Barroso is in an awkward position.
The European Commission has few powers of its own with which to confront the recession as it spreads throughout the European Union; most powers belong to the European Central Bank.
But the Commission does have a voice with which to rally people, and it is for their silence that Barroso and his fellow commissioners are being rebuked.
The perceived lack of leadership from the Commission at this time of deepening economic gloom is just the tip of the iceberg.
The events of recent months have crystallized more deep-seated concerns.
When Barroso, the former Portuguese prime minister, was awarded the EU post by his fellow heads of government, he appeared to be a dynamic new broom who would sweep away the cobwebs left by his predecessor, Italy’s Romano Prodi.
But, with the passage of time, the Barroso-led Commission has also come under fire for being unadventurous and lacklustre.
Even before the clouds of recession began to gather, Euroskepticism was on the rise, with the Commission blamed, rightly or wrongly, for the EU’s failure “to reach out to the citizen.”
The job of Commission President is arguably among the most difficult in the world.
The institution has been in near-imperceptible decline for almost 20 years, thanks to the rise of the European Parliament and the way EU member governments have whittled away its authority while consolidating their own powers as the EU’s true legislators.
Yet the head of the Commission is called upon to be the dynamic public face of Europe.
The Commission’s own internal culture of cautiousness and red tape is a constraint that nobody in Brussels much likes to talk about.
It is not a structure that is conducive to political coups de theâtre , and most of the Commission’s work is the relentless grind of EU regulation and re-regulation.
But the bottom line is that at a time when everyone is asking, “What is Europe doing?”, the Commission’s responses have seemed inadequate.
For reasons that are now obscure, there is an unwritten rule that Commission presidents must be drawn from the ranks of past or current prime ministers.
This has in large part accounted for Barroso’s high hopes of getting a second term.
There was, it appeared, no other credible candidate to challenge him.
For his part, Barroso is widely seen as having avoided controversy throughout 2008 in order not to risk offending any governments that might have been inclined to block his reappointment.
That seeming passivity is now his greatest problem.
France’s presidency of the EU during the second half of 2008 showed that dynamic leadership is a quality widely appreciated by the European public.
With his sense of showmanship, Sarkozy almost effortlessly eclipsed Barroso when handling the Russia-Georgia crisis in August, followed by the EU’s responses to the autumn crisis of cascading bank collapses.
The Commission was left on the sidelines.
What is to be done?
France’s successful presidency has intensified doubts about the effectiveness of the Commission and its president, so much so that even in Paris concerns are being voiced that the Brussels executive must somehow be strengthened if it is not to become a mere secretariat.
EU governments have wanted a pliable Commission, but now the cost could be the death of the “community method” that protects the EU against national frictions.
Barroso needs to respond to all these doubts.
If he is to reassure EU national leaders that they should re-appoint him, then he needs to signal that his second term can hold out fresh promise.
He is good at giving upbeat speeches, but this will not be enough.
Some sort of plan is needed.
When he arrived in Brussels in 2004, Barroso was repeatedly asked whether he had a “big idea” for Europe’s future.
Back then, he did not need one to be appointed.
This time, he must produce one if he is to save his skin.
Restructuring Debt Restructuring
BERKELEY – Sometimes the worst intentions yield the best results.
So it is, unexpectedly, with Argentine debt.
The story begins with Argentina’s financial crisis in 2001-2002.
There is no question that the crisis left the country unable to service its debts.
But Argentina made no friends by waiting four years to negotiate with its creditors and then offering settlement terms that were stingy by the standards of previous debt restructurings.
Still, the terms were acceptable to the vast majority of the country’s creditors, who exchanged their old claims for new ones worth 30 cents on the dollar.
All, that is, except for a few holdouts who bought up the remaining bonds on the cheap and went to court, specifically to the US District Court of the Southern District of New York, asking to be paid in full.
This quixotic strategy met with unexpected success when Federal Judge Thomas Griesa ruled in the holdouts’ favor.
Griesa idiosyncratically reinterpreted the pari passu, or equal treatment, clause in the debt contracts to mean that “vulture” funds refusing to participate in the earlier debt exchange should receive not 30 but 100 cents on the dollar.
Griesa’s ruling threatened to hold the Bank of New York Mellon, the Argentine government’s agent, in contempt if it paid other bondholders without also paying the vultures.
Effectively barred from servicing its debt on the renegotiated terms, Argentina had little choice but to default again.
This was not an episode from which anyone emerged smelling like a rose.
Argentina’s hardball tactics and erratic policies did not endear it to investors.
The vultures showed no scruples in profiting at the expense of Argentine taxpayers.
They are now deploying the same strategy against the Democratic Republic of the Congo, one of the world’s poorest countries.
Griesa, for his part, showed no compunction about upending a financial order in which market-based exchanges of old bonds for new ones are used to restructure the debts of countries unable to pay.
By making it impossible for sovereigns to restructure, he effectively rendered them unable to borrow in the United States.
Ignoring previous precedent and all economic common sense, he threw international financial markets into turmoil.