If there are no proper roads linking fields to markets, farmers cannot easily sell their surplus produce, which may then spoil before it can be eaten.
Improving road and rail capacity enables farmers to reach buyers – and fertilizer and other agricultural inputs to reach farmers.
Supplying reliable electricity permits grains to be dried and vegetables to be kept cool.
Economists from the International Food Policy Research Institute estimate that the overall cost of approximately halving post-harvest losses in the developing world would be $239 billion over the next 15 years – and would generate benefits worth more than $3 trillion, or $13 of social benefits for every dollar spent.
This would make food more affordable for the poor.
By 2050, better infrastructure could mean that 57 million people – more than the current population of South Africa – would no longer be at risk of hunger, and that about four million children would no longer suffer from malnutrition.
Most of these gains would be in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, the world’s most deprived regions.
But there is an even better investment.
We can achieve three times the economic benefits, and even larger reductions in the number of people at risk of hunger, if we focus on improving food production rather than just on preventing food losses.
Today, only $5 billion is spent annually on research to improve the seven major global food crops, and just one-tenth of that is targeted to help small farmers in Africa and Asia.
Investing an extra $88 billion in agricultural research and development over the next 15 years would increase yields by an additional 0.4% each year.
That might not sound like very much, but the reduction in prices and improvements in food security would help almost everyone.
It would be worth nearly $3 trillion in social good – yielding an enormous $34 of benefits for every dollar spent.
Hunger is a complex problem, exacerbated by financial pressures, volatile commodity prices, natural disasters, and civil wars.
But we could take an enormous step toward winning the global campaign against malnutrition, simply by investing in improved infrastructure and in agricultural research and development.
Water for All
This month, water once again takes center stage at the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico City.
It is an opportune moment: while much of the world’s attention has been fixed on issues of energy supply and security, hundreds of millions of people in the developing world continue to see the supply and security of fresh water as equally, if not more, important.
Surveys undertaken by the World Bank in developing countries show that, when poor people are asked to name the three most important concerns they face, “good health” is always mentioned.
And a key determinant of whether they will have good health or not is access to clean water.
More than a billion people around the world today do not.
As a result, they are increasingly vulnerable to poor health.
The World Bank estimates that by 2035, as many as three billion people, almost all of them in developing countries, could live under conditions of severe water stress, especially if they happen to live in Africa, the Middle East, or South Asia.
This will cause obvious hardship, but it will also hold back the economic growth needed for millions of people to escape poverty.
In Latin America, about 15% of the population – roughly 76 million people – do not have access to safe water, and 116 million people do not have access to sanitation services.
The figures are worse in Africa and parts of Asia.
This is a situation that few people in rich countries face.
Generally, these countries’ citizens enjoy services that provide for all water needs, from drinking to irrigation to sanitation.
In addition, other water-related issues, such as the risks posed by flooding, have been reduced to manageable levels.
Rich industrial countries have invested early and heavily in water infrastructure, institutions, and management capacities.
The result, beyond the health benefits for all, has been a proven record of economic growth; one only has to look at investment in hydropower to see the positive impact of water management projects on many economies.
Granted, rich countries have a certain advantage: they benefit from generally moderate climates, with regular rainfall and relatively low risks of drought and flooding.
Even so, they are not immune to water-related disasters, as Hurricane Katrina’s destruction of New Orleans taught us.
But the impact of such events on poor countries is much greater.
Extreme rainfall variations, floods, and droughts can have huge social and economic effects and result in the large-scale loss of life.
The Gulf coast of Mexico and Central American countries has repeatedly experienced such tragedies, with poor communities the most vulnerable and the least able to cope.
Ethiopia and Yemen are equally stark examples.
Ethiopia’s development potential is closely tied to seasonal rains, so high rainfall variation, together with lack of infrastructure, has undermined growth and perpetuated poverty.
A single drought can cut growth potential by 10% over an extended period.
Yemen, for its part, has no perennial surface water; its citizens depend entirely on rainfall, groundwater, and flash flooding.
To move forward, developing countries need new water infrastructure and better management.
Any approach must be tailored to the circumstances of each country and the needs of its people, but there is no fundamental constraint to designing water development investments that ensure that local communities and the environment gain tangible and early benefits.
In some countries, new water infrastructure may mean canals, pumping stations, and levees.
Still others might need deeper reservoirs, more modern filtration plants, or improved water transport schemes.
These can all potentially be designed to improve and expand water supplies for power generation, irrigation, and household and industrial use, while providing security against droughts and protection from floods.
The key to successful increased investment in water infrastructure is an equally increased investment in water institutions.
Badly managed infrastructure will do little to improve peoples’ health or support economic growth, so water development and water management must go hand in hand.
Water infrastructure can and must be developed in parallel with sound institutions, good governance, great attention to the environment, and an equitable sharing of costs and benefits.
A water investment policy that reduces the vulnerability of the poor and offers basic water security for all will require customized planning and an effective partnership of donor countries, developing country governments, the private sector, and local communities.
Delegates to the World Water Forum will have ample opportunity to forge and/or strengthen these partnerships.
If they succeed, the rewards for the world’s poor will be immense.
Perang dan Perdamaian dan Air
WASHINGTON, DC – India tengah mengalami krisis air terburuk dan peristiwa ini mengakibatkan 330 juta orang – seperempat populasi penduduknya – menderita kekeringan yang sangat parah.
Ethiopia juga kini tertimpa kekeringan terburuk yang menyebabkan gagal panen sehingga hampir sepersepuluh warganya menderita karena keterbatasan pangan.
Di tengah kondisi seperti ini risiko timbulnya perselisihan sumber daya akan meningkat.
Dahulu kekeringan yang sedemikian parahnya telah berujung pada konflik dan bahkan perang antar warga dan negara.
Salah satu pertikaian pertama dalam sejarah meletus sekitar 4.500 tahun lalu ketika kota Lagash – terletak diantara sungai Eufrat dan Tigris di Irak – mengalihkan sumber air dari kota tetangganya, Umma.
Persaingan demi memperoleh air juga memicu peristiwa kekerasan di peradaban Cina kuno dan menyebabkan ketidakstabilan politik di Mesir pada zaman Firaun.
Kini, perang antar negara untuk mendapatkan sumber air relatif jarang, berkat penguatan kerja sama lintas batas dan dialog.
Namun di dalam negeri, persaingan akibat kekurangan air semakin menjadi sumber penyebab ketidakstabilan dan konflik yang umum terjadi, apalagi karena perubahan iklim memperburuk skala dan frekuensi terjadinya cuaca ekstrim.
Sebagaimana kami tuliskan secara mendetail dalam laporan terbaru yang berjudul “High and Dry: Climate Change, Water and the Economy,” ketersediaan air yang menipis dan tidak menentu berdampak pada melemahnya pertumbuhan ekonomi, mendorong perpindahan penduduk, dan memicu konflik sipil yang pada akhirnya semakin membahayakan migrasi.
Siklus ini sudah ditemukan di sejumlah kawasan selama beberapa dekade.
Di Afrika Sub-Sahara misalnya periode ketika curah hujan rendah terjadi selama 20 tahun terakhir hampir selalu diikuti dengan kenaikan jumlah kekerasan, perang saudara, dan perubahan rezim.
Dan di banyak tempat di wilayah pedesaan di Afrika dan India, penurunan curah hujan menjadi “faktor pendorong” perpindahan penduduk secara internal atau lintas batas negara menuju lokasi yang memiliki sumber air melimpah, terutama ke perkotaan, sehingga menghasilkan tekanan sosial baru seiring bertambahnya jumlah penduduk yang terlantar.
Di dalam laporan tersebut kami memperkirakan bahwa kekurangan air dapat menjadi multiplier conflict-risk, angka pengganda yang memicu serangkaian konflik, kekerasan, dan pengungsian (displacement) akibat persaingan sumber daya, terutama di kawasan-kawasan yang sudah mengalami kelangkaan air (water stress) seperti Timur Tengah dan kawasan Sahel di Afrika dimana pertanian masih menjadi sumber utama mata pencaharian.
Untungnya masih ada cara untuk menghindari siklus kemiskinan, kelangkaan, dan konflik.
Jika semua negara sekarang bertindak dan menerapkan kebijakan dan praktik pengelolaan air yang efektif, ditopang dengan insentif yang dirancang dengan baik, tidak hanya mereka bisa memutarbalikkan keadaan tapi juga meningkatkan laju pertumbuhan ekonomi sebanyak 6 poin persentase per tahun.
Salah satu negara langka air telah mengambil tindakan untuk meningkatkan ketahanan terhadap perubahan iklim adalah Maroko.
Ketika mengalami curah hujan rendah selama beberapa tahun, lembaga yang berwenang mengurus DAS di Maroko menurunkan prioritas bagi irigasi sawah yang merupakan pengguna air terbesar di negara tersebut.
Namun tentu saja pertanian tetap penting untuk menghidupi warganya.
Jadi pemerintah berinvestasi pada modernisasi infrastruktur irigasi untuk menyediakan layanan air yang lebih efisien bagi petani agar mereka bisa menyesuaikan diri terhadap naik-turun ketersediaan air.
Pemerintah Maroko juga berupaya memperbaiki tata kelola air tanah guna menghindari ekstraksi yang berlebihan.
Para petani yang menggunakan pertanian tadah hujan menerima bantuan yang membantu mereka menggunakan air hujan secara lebih efisien – contohnya melalui pengenalan praktik-praktik yang tahan perubahan iklim seperti pembibitan langsung – dan memperoleh hasil panen yang lebih banyak dibandingkan melalui praktik tradisional yang dilakukan selama musim kering.
Pesan yang bisa diambil dari kisah di Maroko – dan dari laporan kami – adalah melalui kebijakan dan intervensi air yang cerdas, negara bisa menjamin masa depan yang tahan dari perubahan iklim dan ketersediaan air yang memadai.
Disini yang menjadi landasan bagi strategi-strategi pengelolaan air yang efektif adalah meningkatnya perencanaan mengenai alokasi sumber air, penerapan insentif untuk meningkatkan efisiensi, investasi pada infrastruktur untuk meningkatkan keamanan air, dan penyempurnaan perencanaan tata kota, manajemen risiko, dan partisipasi warga negara.
Pembentukan badan baru yaitu International High-level Panel on Water yang beranggotakan sepuluh kepala negara akan menyerukan agenda ini untuk mengembangkan pengelolaan air secara global yang lebih baik.
Tentunya tidak semua negara akan menerapkan langkah yang sama dalam menjaga ketersediaan air di masa depan.
Namun, ketika negara merumuskan strateginya, mereka bisa saling bertukar gagasan dan pengetahuan atas hal-hal yang bisa membuahkan hasil dan yang tidak.
Melalui tindakan yang kuat dan bijak, negara-negara di seluruh dunia bisa mengatasi keterbatasan alam dan ketidakpastian yang menimpa sumber-sumber air dan akhirnya bisa mempersiapkan perekonomian negara serta warganya dalam menghadapi prospek yang ada di hadapan mereka.
Hard Wisdom for Scarce Water
CAMBRIDGE – In California, residential consumers are being fined for wasting water.
The goal is to combat a severe drought by reducing residential consumption by 20%.
The trouble is that residential water use accounts for less than 15% of total consumption.
The rest is used mainly for agriculture.
Even if the desired cuts are achieved, they will account for less than 3% of total demand – a drop in an otherwise empty bucket.
Meanwhile, in China, some 30,000 workers are trying to change the weather, attempting to seed clouds from airplanes or using anti-aircraft guns to shoot shells into the air, hoping to coax some rain from the sky.
There is no statistical proof that this type of weather manipulation works, but cloud seeders are also busy in the United States, mainly in the west.
These pointless policies are what I have come to call “political placebos”: attempts by governments to demonstrate to their citizens that they are doing something – anything! – to alleviate water shortages.
Placebos may have their place in medicine, but when they distract from efforts to address the underlying malady, they can do more harm than good.
Measures like those in California are like instructing police officers to blare their sirens wherever they drive to create the impression that crime is being fought.
As climate change leads to deeper and more frequent droughts, the resulting water shortages will require new, sometimes difficult, solutions that go beyond futile attempts to placate the public.
The challenges are daunting.
In many places, underground water is considered the property of the owner of the land where the water is extracted, even when a well’s user is tapping an aquifer that spreads across thousands of square miles.
As a result, there is little incentive to conserve.
Meanwhile, widespread pumping lowers the level of the entire aquifer, potentially allowing salt water to encroach.
And, because this arrangement is tied to property rights, only the bravest of politicians dare to address it.
In some parts of California and Texas, a portion of the water supply is provided to consumers for almost nothing – delivered by a network of dams, reservoirs, and aqueducts that were built decades ago.
The Hoover Dam, for example, which created Lake Mead, the largest reservoir in the US, was built in 1936 during the Great Depression as part of the New Deal.
Even if the federal government had intended to get a return on its investment by selling the water from Lake Mead, the dam’s construction costs have long since been amortized.
Unlike other commodities, the price of water is very often a political decision, subject to the influence of interest groups that lobby for subsidies.
For example, most of the water used in agriculture in Texas and California is sold at a price below its cost.
As a result, it is frequently wasted.
The cost for an acre-foot of water in Dallas or Austin is at least $150.
Texas rice farmers, however, pay just $10, and every year they consume the equivalent of a five-foot flood.
Such a large quantity of water is not even necessary for rice farming; most of it is used to drown weeds.
The US federal government needs to intervene in the water industry.
As long as these distortions persist, new technologies will struggle to compete.
Rationalizing the water sector would allow new investors to enter the market.
Farmers in Texas and California need to stop growing rice, which should be imported from water-rich countries like Vietnam.
Instead, US farmers should be encouraged to shift to other crops, such as sesame, with the government sharing the cost of replacement machinery needed to cultivate and harvest them.
The adoption of technologies like drip irrigation would make current water use seem primitive and outdated.
The water sector should follow the example of the electric-power industry, where changes to federal regulations in the second half of the twentieth century allowed independent power producers to use existing transmission lines.
The deep price cuts and improved service ushered in by these regulatory changes prompted other countries to adopt the American model.
It is time to turn off the tap on subsidized water and find a real cure for persistent water shortages.
Air sebagai Kekuatan untuk Menciptakan Perdamaian
MUMBAI – Pergantian kepemimpinan Perserikatan Bangsa-Bangsa yang bermarkas di New York, dimana Antonio Guterres akan mengambil alih tampuk kepemimpinan dari Ban Ki-moon sebagai sekretaris jenderal, terjadi di saat gagasan mengenai perdamaian dan konflik mengalami perubahan yang tidak begitu kentara.
Perubahan ini khususnya terjadi pada peranan sumber daya – terutama air – yang mulai mendapatkan pengakuan.  
Perubahan semacam ini telah lama dinantikan.
Baik Ban Ki-moon dan pendahulunya, Kofi Annan, sejak hampir dua dekade yang lalu telah menyatakan bahwa perlindungan dan pembagian sumber daya alam, terutama air, sangatlah penting bagi perdamaian dan keamanan.
Tapi permasalahan ini baru mendapatkan banyak pengakuan pada bulan November tahun lalu, saat Senegal – yang menjabat sebagai Presiden Dewan Keamanan PBB pada bulan tersebut – mengadakan debat resmi yang pertama kali di PBB mengenai air, perdamaian, dan kemanan.  
Debat ini terbuka untuk seluruh negara anggota PBB, dan debat ini berhasil menyatukan pendapat dari 69 perwakilan negara anggota yang meminta agar air diubah dari hal yang mungkin menyebabkan konflik menjadi instrumen untuk mencapai perdamaian dan kerjasama.
Beberapa minggu setelahnya, Gutteres menunjuk Amina Mohammed, mantan menteri lingkungan hidup Nigeria sebagai Wakil Sekretaris Jenderal PBB.
Semakin tingginya kesadaran akan kegunaan strategis air mencerminkan perkembangan global.
Dalam tiga tahun terakhir, Negara Islam (ISIS) merebut bendungan Tabqa, Tishrin, Mosul, dan Fallujah di Sungai Tigris dan Eufrat.
ISIS kemudian kehilangan kendali atas ketiga bendungan tersebut, namun hal ini terjadi setelah mereka mengakibatkan banjir atau menciptakan kelaparan bagi masyarakat yang tinggal di hilir bendungan agar mereka menyerah kepada ISIS.   
Banyak analis yang berharap agar ISIS akhirnya dapat diusir dari Irak dan Suriah dalam beberapa bulan ke depan.
Namun bukan berarti bahwa kelompok ini akan bubar; justru sebaliknya, mereka mungkin akan pindah ke daerah perbatasan antara Libya dan Republik Chad, sehingga bisa membahayakan kota-kota dan instalasi air di Afrika Barat.    
Taktik ini tidak hanya digunakan oleh ISIS.
Kelompok ekstrimis di Asia Selatan juga pernah mengancam akan menyerang infrastruktur air.
Dan tentunya oknum pemerintah juga bisa menggunakan air untuk mendapatkan keuntungan strategis.
Bukan suatu hal yang berlebihan jika dikatakan bahwa pentingnya peran air pada abad ke-21 sama dengan pentingnya peran minyak pada abad ke-20.
Namun, masih terdapat ahli strategi yang terus meremehkan hal ini.
Kenyataannya minyak mempunyai alternatif lain seperti gas alam, angin, tenaga matahari, dan energi nuklir.
Sebaliknya, seperti yang pernah diutarakan oleh mantan Presiden Slovenia Danilo Türk, untuk keperluan industri dan pertanian serta air minum dan sanitasi, satu-satunya alternatif dari air adalah air.    ��  
Prinsip yang sama juga bisa diaplikasikan dalam perdagangan.
Misalnya saja di Sungai Rio Chagres.
Walaupun sungai ini tidak terlalu terkenal, namun sungai ini mempunyai peranan penting karena 50% dari perdagangan antara Asia dan Amerika melalui rute ini.
Tidak ada resiko air sungai ini akan menjadi kering selama ratusan tahun ke depan, namun jika terjadi konflik, sungai ini bisa dikuasai oleh pemberontak.
Dan jika terjadi, hal ini bisa menimbulkan dampak besar pada perekonomian global.    
Terdapat konsensus akan pentingnya perlindungan terhadap sumber daya dan instalasi air di area konflik.
Yang belum jelas adalah bagaimana cara mempraktekkan konsensus tersebut.
Tidak seperti obat atau makanan, air tidak bisa diberikan dengan cara dijatuhkan dari pesawat di wilayah konflik.
Dan saat ini pasukan perdamaian PBB sudah sangat kewalahan.
Komite Palang Merah Internasional melakukan negosiasi agar teknisi bisa masuk ke wilayah konflik untuk melakukan pemeriksaan dan perbaikan infrastruktur dan sistem penyimpanan air di Irak, Suriah dan Ukraina; namun untuk melakukan setiap perjalanan, hal ini perlu dirundingkan dengan pemerintah dan komandan pemberontak – sehingga hal ini menjadi sebuah proses yang panjang dan melelahkan.
Pendekatan yang lebih baik adalah dengan meminta negara adikuasa menggunakan pengaruh mereka untuk merundingkan gencatan senjata jangka pendek di wilayah yang mengalami konflik yang berkepanjangan, khususnya untuk melakukan perbaikan dan pemulihan sistem air.     
Namun untuk membuka jalan bagi pendekatan tersebut, Dewan Keamanan PBB harus menyatakan bahwa air adalah “sumber daya strategis bagi umat manusia” dan menyetujui resolusi untuk melindungi sumber daya dan instalasi air, hal ini mirip dengan resolusi 2286 yang disetujui pada bulan Mei tahun lalu yang bertujuan untuk melindungi fasilitas medis di wilayah konflik.          
Dalam jangka panjang, negara-negara yang berbagi garis pantai yang sama harus menyetujui pengaturan keamanan regional untuk melestarikan dan melindungi sumber daya mereka.
Dengan manajemen kolaboratif yang mendukung perlindungan kolektif, air, yang sering menjadi sumber kompetisi dan konflik, bisa menjadi fasilitator perdamaian dan kerjasama.
Denis Sassou-Nguesso, Presiden Republik Kongo, berada di garis depan pergerakan ini, dengan memimpin kelompok yang terdiri dari delapan negara yang berusaha membuat “Dana Biru” untuk Cekungan Kongo.
Jika berhasil, Dana ini akan membantu mengurangi dampak perubahan iklim, menciptakan lapangan kerja berbasis sungai, dan meningkatkan keamanan kolektif di wilayah yang tidak stabil.
Pertemuan Aksi Afrika di Marrakesh yang diselenggarakan dua bulan lalu menyatakan bahwa Dana ini adalah salah satu dari empat ide utama dalam melakukan transformasi di benua Afrika.      
Bulan Maret tahun lalu, pada Hari Air Sedunia, Pangeran Hasan bin Talal dari Yordania dan Saya menyerukan dukungan atas dibentuknya Dana Marshall untuk negara-negara yang berada di cekungan sungai.
Dana Biru untuk Cekungan Kongo adalah satu langkah menuju arah tersebut.
Yang kita perlukan sekarang adalah pembentukan dana serupa untuk melindungi seluruh 263 cekungan sungai dan danau yang menghubungkan banyak negara.
Ini adalah sebuah tantangan yang besar; namun jika kita mengingat bahwa air dapat menciptakan konflik dan juga perdamaian, ini adalah tantangan yang harus kita hadapi.                                                            
Water Wars.
What is more vital for the future of humanity – and life in general – than water?
Water abounds in nature, and most of humanity will have lived more than ten millenniums without ever wondering about it.
We draw it, use it, throw it away, most often back into rivers or oceans.
But we could very soon end up not having enough of the fresh water that accounts for just 3% of all the water available on our planet.
When one considers the fights we are capable of having over oil, one shudders to imagine where a lack of water could lead.
While Latin America seems well endowed, the situation is very different elsewhere.
Europe is nearing its limits, and water scarcity is already a pressing issue in Africa, Central Asia, and China.
Over the last 20 or 30 years we have begun to comprehend what is at stake, owing to initiatives like the World Water Forum, which held its fourth annual meeting in March.
Unfortunately, the Forum is not yet an official body and has no decision-making power.
But providing an arena for thought and debate has brought at least one huge benefit: greater awareness about water issues among the public and policymakers.
Water management is an inherently difficult challenge, and experience counts for a lot.
Practice shows that local levels of government provide the most efficient water management, even if regulations must necessarily be national in scope.
But this is a division of labor that few national governments are ready to accept.
Nor do most states seem prepared to start a real dialogue over water policy with civil society groups.
At one extreme of exclusion, for example, consider that decisions about water management are largely taken by men, though in most of the world it is women who use the water.
Moreover, interference is constant, and inevitable, between the public and the private sectors. A subtle mix of official regulation and private contracting is required.
But not all jurisdictions respond in the same way.
The multiplicity of interlocutors inevitably creates a multiplicity of water systems with vastly unequal levels of efficiency.
Initiatives like the World Water Forums thus inevitably highlight debates about what constitutes good water management, as well as elaborating useful concepts.
One casualty of such debates has been the myth that water is free.
Water has a cost, and someone, either end-users or taxpayers, has to pay it.
It is possible, of course, to envision sharing the costs, but it is no longer possible not to charge for water.
The most recent World Water Forum debated two issues that will confront policymakers in the years ahead.
The first concerns the so-called “right to water.”
The urgency of the needs, with a billion people lacking access to drinking water and two billion without proper sewer systems, together with the vast number of diseases that result, underscore the need to recognize such a fundamental human right.
A consensus was reached at the Forum that such a right makes sense only if it is formulated in such a way that particular policymaking entities, be they water companies or local governments, face an affirmative duty to respect this right.
Only the state can be made responsible here.
But the acknowledged responsibility of states in implementing the right to water cannot turn them into the sole paying authority.
The state must be charged with ensuring an effective water system that meets the basic needs of all, but the balance of this system remains to be defined.
These uncertainties, indeed, led the Forum to avoid acknowledging a formal right to water in its final resolution.
The second issue concerned the role of local authorities.
Despite the political and administrative centralization of most of the countries represented at the Forum, there was widespread agreement that the most efficient water systems are managed as close as possible to the resource and its users.
Agreement on this provided a real breakthrough for the future of water policy.
Naturally, conflicts among governments or local authorities and private enterprises resurfaced.
Inevitably, the cruel lack of means was pointed out time and again.
And, unsurprisingly, the lack of solidarity among water haves and have-nots was openly on display at the Forum.
As we grapple with our joint water future, we will face a time of trial and error in finding workable solutions.
But humanity already seems to be making more progress on matters related to drinking water than other global threats, such as climate change.
We should all drink to that.
Breakthrough Vaccines
NEW YORK – Vaccines are one of the great success stories in the history of individual and public health.
They have helped rid the planet of the scourge of smallpox, are poised to eliminate polio, and each year prevent millions of deaths, reducing the suffering and costs caused by infectious diseases.
But there are still many diseases for which vaccines do not yet exist.
Moreover, strategies that have previously led to the successful development of vaccines are unlikely to work against more complex bacteria or viruses, such as HIV, which have evolved multiple mechanisms to evade the immune system.
The history of vaccinology is one in which biomedical and technological advances usher in the “next generation” of vaccines.
In the 1950’s, a breakthrough that enabled viruses to grow in tissue cultures led to the development of both live attenuated vaccines and inactivated vaccines for measles, polio, and other diseases.
In the 1980’s, recombinant DNA technology led to the development of vaccines against hepatitis B and human papillomavirus.
Around the turn of the century, the first sequencing of the human genome led to “reverse vaccinology.”
This approach, whereby computational analysis of a pathogen’s genome enables identification and screening of a great many more potential vaccine targets than was previously possible, was used in the successful development of a vaccine against meningitis B.
The past decade has already yielded major advances in structure-assisted vaccine discovery, synthetic biology, systems biology, and immune monitoring.
However, successfully translating these advances into the development of next-generation vaccines continues to be impeded by gaps in our understanding of the human immune response that protects against specific bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
That is why I, along with eight fellow scientists, have proposed the establishment of a new human-immunology-based clinical-research initiative, the Human Vaccines Project.
In February 2014, leading scientists and public-health specialists will gather in La Jolla, California, to craft a scientific plan to identify, prioritize, and, most important, solve the major problems currently hindering development of vaccines against diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria.
Such a project would represent a paradigm shift in vaccine development.
The current process is long (often spanning decades from concept to licensure), has a low probability of success (because of the limitations of animal models in predicting immune response and efficacy in humans), and is costly (often requiring hundreds of millions of dollars to develop a single vaccine).
Consider this: In just the past few years, many candidate vaccines against HIV, dengue, herpes, tuberculosis, and staphylococcus aureus have failed, at a cost of more than $1 billion.
Investing that amount over the next decade in a coordinated effort to address the major questions facing vaccine development would rapidly accelerate our search for effective solutions, implying a transformative impact on individual and public health.
HIV presents perhaps the greatest challenge, because the virus leverages its extensive genetic variability to hide from the immune system.
Using recent advances, however, scientists have now identified highly conserved regions of this variable virus, determined their molecular structure, and begun designing next-generation vaccine candidates to elicit antibodies that target these regions to prevent HIV infection.
But HIV vaccine development, like that for several other diseases, is still impeded by the limitations of what animal models can tell us about how to elicit the necessary immune responses in humans.
Two recent advances could accelerate vaccine development and reduce its costs dramatically.
In synthetic biology, the rapid engineering of nucleic acid-based vaccines means more candidates move more quickly from concept to trial.
In systems biology, high-throughput technologies have increased the number of genetic and immunologic parameters assessed in trials.
This approach has helped predict the efficacy of potential new-generation vaccines against yellow fever and influenza within days of immunization, compared with the usual timeframe of months or years.
Vaccines already prevent the deaths of 2-3 million people every year, preempt human suffering, lighten the burden placed on health-care systems, and enable more rapid economic and social development.
Models show that adding even a partly effective AIDS vaccine to the current range of prevention and treatment procedures could dramatically lower the rate of HIV infection.
As the Nobel Peace Prize laureate Desmond Tutu, one of the world’s great campaigners against HIV/AIDS, wrote recently: “We must make the most of scientific advances over the last half-century, which have made vaccines for other preventable diseases the most powerful and cost-effective health-care investment that currently exists.”
That is the idea behind the Human Vaccines Project – a concept that would have been unimaginable even a decade ago.
Today, technological advances in vaccine discovery and immune monitoring allow us realistically to explore this potentially game-changing approach to disease prevention.
February’s gathering in California may take us a giant step closer to a world without deadly and debilitating infectious diseases.
The G-20 to the Rescue?
BRISBANE – The G-20’s upcoming meeting in Brisbane, Australia, comes at a time when a precarious global economy requires big decisions to be made.
But it is far from clear who will provide the decisive voice needed to set a bold agenda – and then shepherd its implementation.
Economic data reveal that the global economy is shakier than at any time in the past two years.
Capitalism is struggling to generate adequate demand.
Wealth and income have become increasingly concentrated, while middle-class incomes in the developed world have stagnated.
Tax avoidance by multinational companies is draining developing-country incomes, limiting their ability to invest in education and infrastructure.
And much more action is needed to address the largest and most urgent structural weakness of all – climate change.
Many leading economists and policymakers are forecasting continued economic gloom.
Stephen Roach has suggested that in the post-crisis global economy “relapse is the rule”; economist Brad DeLong, speaking of the “consequences of our lesser depression,” argues that the pretense of a eurozone recovery has collapsed; and European Central Bank President Mario Draghi has acknowledged the need not only for structural reform, but also fiscal expansion to boost aggregate demand.
At the heart of their concerns is the lack of sustained demand needed to drive growth.
While structural reforms – particularly on the supply side – are required in developed and developing countries, they are not sufficient to address what former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers has called “secular stagnation” – that is, the difficulty of sustaining sufficient demand to permit normal levels of output.
The G-20’s central task, therefore, must be to establish a framework for strong and sustainable growth.
Member states need to introduce reforms aimed at achieving a 2% annual growth target, as agreed earlier this year by finance ministers.
One structural reform that could drive global growth is substantial infrastructure investment in developing and developed countries alike.
Unfortunately, no G-20 leader has seriously articulated this need, let alone lobbied for a solution.
Apart from a World Bank presentation for a possible pilot infrastructure program, there is little to suggest how the 2% target could be met over the medium term.
G-20 governments, especially those with strong balance sheets, should be calling for large-scale public and private infrastructure investment to expand the productive capacity of member economies.
In the area of tax avoidance, discussion needs to broaden beyond developed economies; as the International Monetary Fund recently pointed out, developing economies’ budgets are disproportionately affected by multinational companies’ savvy accounting strategies.
Unfortunately, judging by the initiatives already on the Brisbane agenda, the summit looks set to take a business-as-usual approach.
If the G-20 fails to put policy meat on its rhetorical bones, it will risk looking weak and irrelevant.
Its very credibility is on the line.
Indeed, some in the developed world would prefer a smaller, more exclusive body – a G-14 or even a new G-7.
Such a move would hurt the developing world, especially the Asia-Pacific region, including Australia.
One reason why some want a tighter group is that the G-20 struggles to achieve consensus.
But this misses the&nbsp;point: It is harder to reach agreement precisely because all of the key leaders (representing around two-thirds of the world’s population and 80% of global GDP), whose support is needed for any truly global decision, are in the room.
The Brisbane Summit therefore needs to rediscover the activism that it displayed in 2008 and 2009, during the height of the financial crisis.
It must be led by the United States and other advanced economies, and backed up by major emerging economies.
Australia, as host, also has a role to play.
The country is respected by developed and developing countries alike, often bridging the interests of both, and is widely viewed as an honest broker.
Unfortunately, the current government has had little to say about the big structural problems that underlie the world’s economic malaise.
The modest initiatives on the table reflect the government’s anti-public-sector rhetoric.
Worse, as developed and developing countries are starting to take climate change seriously, Australia is moving in the opposite direction.
The Brisbane summit will be a crucial test for Australia, the G-20, and the possibility of truly global policy coordination.
Weak America = Weakened Europe
America’s power has been so overwhelming for so long that many think it has survived George W. Bush’s presidency unscathed.
That this is untrue is demonstrated by those, from Russia’s Vladimir Putin and Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez to Iran’s Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, who are exploiting America’s loss of standing and influence.
This is no cause for schadenfreude .
On the contrary, it is high time for friends of the United States, particularly in Europe, to realize that America’s weakness undermines their international influence as well.
The evidence of America’s weakness is clear enough.
At the height of America’s power, Russia had resigned itself to the apparently unstoppable encroachment of NATO on the Soviet Union’s former sphere of influence.
President Putin tolerated a US presence in Central Asia to assist in the campaign against the Taliban in Afghanistan and raised no serious objections when the US trashed the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty prohibiting strategic missile defenses.
America, eager to bring both Ukraine and Georgia into NATO, felt scant need to consider Russian concerns, convinced that the Kremlin would have no choice but to bow to the inevitable.
That was yesterday.
Today, Putin seeks to regain the influence Russia lost in previous years.
He is skillfully playing the anti-America card across Europe while putting pressure on the Baltic states, a clear warning not to extend Nato any further.
In Ukraine, political forces resisting closer strategic links to the West have gained ground.
And the Kremlin is aggressively portraying the planned establishment of a modest US missile defense installation in Poland and the Czech Republic as a threat to Russia’s vital security interests.
Or consider Iran, another power exploiting American weakness.
Only a few years ago, Iran’s government seemed sufficiently in awe of the US to inch toward an agreement on its nuclear program that would have interrupted, and perhaps even halted, its enrichment activities.
There was talk of possible bilateral contacts with the US, which, if successful, would have ended almost three decades of hostile relations.
Today, Iran’s enrichment program is going ahead despite the United Nations Security Council’s warnings of new sanctions, while Iranian officials publicly ridicule threats of US military action.
These examples reflect the same message: America is losing clout around the world.
The Bush administration is internationally exposed in both the arrogance of its concepts and the limits of its power. It lacks support at home and respect abroad.
Never since the US became the world’s predominant power during World War II has there been a similar decline in its international influence.
Even during the Vietnam War and following its humiliating withdrawal from Southeast Asia, there was never any serious doubt about America’s authority and ability to deal with what was then the central strategic challenge, the Cold War.
In today’s interdependent world, however, it is no longer the number of nuclear warheads that bestows influence, but a country’s ability to get others to go along with policies that it regards as serving its major interests.
Bush’s America has forfeited that influence– in the Middle East, in Asia and Africa, and in much of Europe.
Many in the US like to think that this is a temporary state of affairs that will vanish with the election of a new president and Congress in 2008.
But they are neither sufficiently aware of the damage done nor realistic enough about the chances of Bush’s potential successors – many of whom initially supported his adventurism – to revive the trust and respect their country once enjoyed.
To achieve that will take more than a new face in the White House. It will require years of hard work to reconcile America’s resources and requirements, and to ensure that its initiatives can once again be seen as designed not to serve narrow US ideologies, but to advance a fair international order.
The result of protracted US weakness is also a weaker Europe.
In the heyday of American dominance, European governments profited doubly: they were part of a powerful West and courted as a potential counterweight to US dominance by third countries.
If they dissented from US positions, this did not seriously impair the West’s strategic efficacy because American power was more than sufficient to compensate.
That arrangement no longer works.
If European governments today distance themselves from America, as their citizens frequently demand, they will both antagonize and further weaken the US.
At the same time, they will undermine their own international influence, allow others to play off Europe against America, destroying as well what chance remains for rebuilding the West with a reformed America.
European leaders, even when they are unhappy over US positions, therefore need to combine forceful support for the transatlantic community of interests with discrete, if firm lobbying in Washington not to strain it to the breaking point.
Whether they can successfully perform this difficult act, remains to be seen.
Fortunately, Angela Merkel, Nicolas Sarkozy, and Gordon Brown understand the challenge, and at least some parts of the Bush government seem aware of the problem.
In the long period of American weakness, European leaders will have to demonstrate statesmanship for the West as a whole. It is a role for which decades of US supremacy have scarcely prepared them.
Europe’s German Ball and Chain
BRUSSELS – A storm-tossed ship near dangerous cliffs needs a strong anchor to avoid finishing on the rocks.
In 2012, when a financial storm engulfed the eurozone, it was Germany that kept the European ship off the shoals of financial disaster.
But now Europe’s anchor has become a brake, hindering forward movement.
Of course, German Chancellor Angela Merkel acted in 2012 only when she could tell her domestic constituency that there was no alternative.
But in the end, Merkel agreed to a permanent bailout fund for the eurozone.
She also backed the formation of a banking union, which remains incomplete but still represents a key step toward a financial system supervised by the European Central Bank.
Thanks to these measures, and ECB President Mario Draghi’s vow, which Germany tacitly approved, to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro, the financial storm abated.
But now the eurozone seems incapable of escaping near-deflation, with little economic growth and prices barely moving upwards.
That was not supposed to happen.
When the crisis struck, the economies of the eurozone periphery were buffeted by the twin shocks of spiking risk premiums and a collapsing housing market.
At the same time, the German economy benefited from the return of capital fleeing the periphery.
Real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates in Germany became substantially negative, triggering a housing boom.
It was assumed that this would generate strong domestic demand in Germany, helping the periphery to export more.
Instead, the German economy has barely grown; indeed, weaker world trade threatens to put it in recession.
The current-account surplus, which was supposed to decline sharply, has actually increased, as savings have remained higher – and investment lower – than expected.
Another problem, at least from the point of view of the rest of the eurozone, is that inflation in Germany remains too low.
With German prices rising at less than 1% annually, the eurozone periphery needs falling prices in order to regain the competitiveness lost during the pre-2008 boom years.
This lack of dynamism at the core of the eurozone has now become its key problem.
With no growth in Germany, the rest of the eurozone might not be able to reduce debt via external surpluses.
And there might be no solution short of a magic button to increase German domestic demand.
Obviously, the German government is in charge of the country’s public finances.
But fiscal policy has been roughly neutral in recent years, and thus cannot be blamed for the German economy’s lack of dynamism.
This year, the public-sector budget might move from a small deficit to what German officials call a “black zero” – a very small surplus.
But this tightening by a fraction of a percentage point of GDP implies no adverse effect on growth.
The root cause of Germany’s sluggish economic performance in recent years is the continuing unwillingness of its households and enterprises to consume and invest.
And it is difficult to see what the government can do about this.
Indeed, investment has fallen despite financing conditions for enterprises that have never been easier, both in terms of ultra-low interest rates and banks’ willingness to lend.
Yet Germany’s corporate sector remains reluctant to borrow and invest in the country, because it sees little reason to expect long-term economic growth, given that the population is set to decline and productivity gains remain anemic.
With investment unlikely to become a motor for the German economy, consumption holds the key to stronger demand growth in Germany.
Its weakness is somewhat surprising: real incomes are up, and the coalition government that came to power last year has introduced a series of generous welfare measures, including a large increase in the minimum wage, a reduction of the retirement age, and a special top-up pension for women with children.
But even these measures, which foreign observers have largely overlooked, have failed to boost consumer demand.
So what more could the German government do to wean the Germans off their abstemious habits?
Public investment is the one area where the government could act.
But the growth fillip from public-sector infrastructure spending can only be modest.
Increasing infrastructure spending by a quarter, which would represent a huge administrative effort, would lift GDP growth by just 0.4 percentage points.
The main danger now is political.
A weak German economy makes the necessary structural adjustments in the eurozone periphery much more difficult.
That, in turn, fuels the perception that responsibility lies with the German government, which is seen as unwilling to take the steps needed to strengthen domestic demand – even as it prohibits the periphery governments from spending more themselves.
As unemployment remains stubbornly high and incomes stagnate in much of the eurozone, the temptation to blame “the Germans” is becoming ever stronger.
The German government, no surprise, does not even acknowledge that there is a problem.
With unemployment remaining near record lows, the lack of demand growth is simply dismissed, and the absence of inflation is taken as a sign of success.
This is a mistake.
Europe’s German anchor has become stuck, and the rising tide of anxiety among Germany’s partners should not leave its government indifferent.
Weak Labor, Strong Securities Markets
A vital distinction between market economies is the degree to which ownership of large firms is separate from a firm's day-to-day management.
What makes a company's owners willingly hand over control to professional managers?
That question is increasingly urgent as wealthy countries-as well as many transition and developing economies-attempt to create the robust securities markets needed to boost investment, productivity, and growth.
Separation of ownership from management and effective securities markets reinforce each other.
The underlying theory is straightforward: if bosses can steal, distant owners will not buy shares.
The formalistic civil-law systems that prevail in continental Europe supposedly provide inadequate protection, so ownership remains concentrated.
By contrast, Anglo Saxon common-law systems empower judges to interpret open-ended fiduciary rules on a case-by-case basis, thereby establishing legal precedents that are binding on managers.
But this is a weak explanation.
Before World War I, Europe's civil-law countries were developing securities markets as fast as the US and the UK.
Indeed, regulatory agencies like the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) arose because common-law fiduciary duties failed to protect distant owners.
Insider trading, for example, was generally legal under the rules governing fiduciary duties in America's states, which back then played a dominant role.
By contrast, the SEC is a rule-generating institution of the type that civil-law countries like France or Germany would have little difficulty creating if they wished to .
Moreover, fiduciary duties only aspire to prevent insiders from stealing. They do not control the main costs that shareholders face when they do not manage the company themselves, such as unprofitable expansion, shirking, retention of free cash flow, and empire building.
Unless there is a conflict of interest between a company's management and its board, owners in common-law countries have no legal recourse when managers' operational or strategic decisions are bad, stupid, or otherwise harmful to shareholders.
Throughout the rich world, institutions that raise the costs to shareholders of turning over control to professional managers play a powerful role in determining outcomes.
But these institutions reflect the political power of social forces, not the differences between civil-law and common-law systems.
In particular, ownership separation in the wealthy continental European nations and the US can be linked with the role of labor inside the firm and within society.
In some nations, labor greatly influences the firm through politics-i.e., opposing mass lay-offs and resisting restructuring plans that change the nature of the workplace.
Consider a simple scenario: a nation bars firms and owners from laying off employees for economic reasons. Faced with a no-fire rule, shareholders have reason to be very cautious: if expansion is not profitable, they cannot reduce labor costs.
France, for example, is notorious for forcing foreign firms like Britain's Marks and Spencer to keep redundant workers on the payroll.
Of course, no nation completely bans lay-offs, but flexibility varies greatly and can be central to profitability.
In a nation like the US, where employees can be fired easily, shareholders have less to fear.
But in a labor-strong society, dominant shareholders-those with the most to lose if expansion goes awry-have reason to keep managers on a short leash.
Italy's Fiat illustrates the problem: even a conservative government seeks to impede downsizing.
A second factor should also make owners want to stay close to the firm if labor is politically strong.
Bargaining over the economic surplus is often open-ended, especially if competition is weak.
Where employees have high bargaining power, the profits pie is constantly up for re-division, both within the firm and at the national level.
If managers are only loosely tied to shareholders, they could more willingly give up a bigger share of the pie to labor.
Similarly, where shareholder interests do not come first, say, in a corporatist system, dominant owners have greater reason to keep financial information private, lest labor use it to press for more favorable terms.
Both considerations support concentrated ownership and work against securities markets.
So, where political and social values strongly favor labor, managers' loyalty to shareholder interests will be weaker.
Managers in such "left" societies are no less technically capable, but their organizational constraints, incentives, and goals are less pro-shareholder.
When forced to cut employment, they are more likely to think that they are destroying lives rather than raising economic efficiency and increasing wealth.
Such societies should have fewer public firms, and narrower or no ownership separation.
So they do.
The OECD has indexed how easy it is to fire an employee in member countries.
Employees enjoy the least protection in the US, and a high degree of protection in Italy, France, and Germany.
The correlation with ownership separation is striking: a sample of the 20 largest firms in each country shows that, whereas 90% of the US companies have no shareholder with more than a 20% stake, none of the Italian, French, or German firms have such highly dispersed ownership.
True, with only 16 countries rich enough to be included in the survey, the correlation isn't perfect.
The United Kingdom is in seventh place in terms of labor-market flexibility, but a higher proportion of its largest companies have widely dispersed ownership than sixth-place Switzerland-and double the share of fifth-place Denmark and fourth-place Australia.
But whatever measures of "political" qualities and ownership separation we use, the index of employment protection appears to be the best predictor of ownership separation in the wealthy West.
More fundamentally, creating the regulatory institutions conducive to ownership separation may be impossible unless a society's political orientation towards labor and capital is more favorable to capital.
The Failed State of Egypt?
CAIRO – The aggrieved supporters of ousted Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi and the jubilant protesters who pushed the military to remove him have divided Egypt into two irreconcilable camps, both reflecting and reinforcing the country’s deeper problems.
Indeed, Egypt is now largely an ungovernable country that subsists on generous foreign handouts.
Morsi never appreciated his tenuous position.
Though elected democratically, he chose to govern undemocratically.
He was bent on purging the judiciary and the public prosecutor’s office, claiming that they were aligned with the protesters opposing his government and their military backers, who had been overthrown in 2011.
Morsi brooked little opposition in pushing through a controversial draft constitution.
In doing so, he neglected to focus on the structural problems that propelled a docile society to pour into the streets two and a half years ago to bring down his predecessor, Hosni Mubarak.
Just as damaging as Morsi’s governing style was the Muslim Brotherhood’s go-it-alone mentality.
Decades of persecution have instilled in its leaders the belief that the world is aligned against them.
Assuming power only stoked their paranoia.
The Brotherhood’s leaders believed that the United States and Egypt’s elite were bent on ensuring their failure.
For this reason, they refused to reach out to their secular opponents to offer them a piece of the political pie.
Even members of the more puritanical Islamist Nour Party were not invited to join the government.
But it was not only Brotherhood politicians – inexperienced in the ways of democracy (and skeptical of them) – who stumbled.
The debate in the US, long Egypt’s primary ally and donor, did not center on strengthening Egypt’s embattled institutions, but focused instead on how to ease the military out of power by withholding aid.
Multilateral lenders like the International Monetary Fund were fixated on fiscal reforms such as reducing costly subsidies rather than shoring up a beleaguered economy.
Today, a democratic transition that the West sought to portray as a model that other Arab nations could emulate lies in tatters.
Egypt’s economy, bruised by the outflow of foreign investment and a dearth of tourists, is on life support.
Rebuilding the country will require much more than the cheering from the sidelines that Western countries have offered so far.
Egypt has always relied on munificent benefactors to sustain its patchy state and economy.
After the military coup in 1952, the Soviets provided much of the needed aid.
Their “technical” experts turned the country’s second city, Alexandria, into a Russian country club.
After Egypt pivoted to the West in the wake of the 1973 war against Israel, America became its main patron.
But America’s ritual annual gift of roughly $1.5 billion could only dull the pain of Egypt’s problems, not resolve them.
The country can no longer provide enough government stipends in the form of bureaucratic posts for college graduates.
Egypt can only hope for cash infusions to offset its internal hemorrhaging.
By making aid conditional on economic reform and democratic transition, however, the international community risks political triage.
It should instead focus on financial assistance that blunts Egyptians’ frustrations and that contributes to building the institutions that will facilitate the transition toward democracy.
But, of the $1.56 billion that the US State Department requested for Egypt in 2013, only $250 million is earmarked for non-military programs.
The US should increase funding for projects that focus on governance, civil society, and strengthening the rule of law.
Such programs receive a paltry $25 million in the 2013 budget.
To bolster the economy, the US needs to shift its aid policies away from funding projects toward providing immediate budgetary relief.
Though financing water-efficiency schemes certainly helps society, its effects are felt years after the aid is initially dispensed.
The US, and other Western donors, should instead help Egypt to husband its resources, which are often misspent in an effort to placate its people.
Egypt is the largest wheat importer in the world, and food subsidies account for approximately 2% of GDP.
To preserve its precious foreign-currency reserves, Egypt needs the US and its allies to provide foodstuffs.
Such a policy was adopted in the aftermath of the 1973 war, when America offered $200 million annually for wheat procurement.
Embracing such policies will give institutions and the democratic process the time and space they need to plant firm roots.
Beyond such questions lies the fate of democracy in one of civilization’s most ancient lands.
Whoever triumphs in future elections will lack the legitimacy that only a majority can provide.
Such a majority spoke last year, when it elected Morsi.
To strip him of his post negates a basic pillar of democracy and sets a dangerous precedent.
But, in a country that faces so many problems, the paradox of Morsi’s removal from power and the dilemmas of democracy that occasioned it are not among them.
Preparing for the Unknown Unknowns
LONDON – We live in perilous times.
Just as we seem to get our bearings, something happens to make us feel as if our legs have been knocked out from under us.
Actions and events often are intertwined, and what happens on one level – affecting individuals, states, economic sectors, and companies of all sizes – may have repercussions on others.
The recent terrorist attacks in Paris are a case in point, affecting not only the families and friends of the victims, or even only the people of France.
The reverberations are being felt around the world, and they will continue to have an impact – far beyond Europe – on public policy, electoral politics, media freedom, and more.
The attacks came at a time when the world traditionally tries to make sense of the year ahead – to forecast the risks that lie in wait, the opportunities that will arise, and the challenges that will have to be overcome.
But what about longer-term risks?
Do events like the Paris attacks show that forecasting them is impossible?
Or did the attacks expose precisely the type of risk that long-term projections should identify?
The World Economic Forum has just released its “Global Risks 2015” report which attempts to predict and rank the biggest risks that the world faces over the next ten years.
The WEF’s focus is squarely on the macro level.
For example, “the biggest threat to the stability of the world in the next ten years comes from the risk of international conflict.”
And the menace of war is followed by a raft of social, environmental, geopolitical, technological, and economic risks and trends.
But all of these risks will be felt on an organizational, and ultimately, individual level as well.
That is why we spend time in conference rooms and around kitchen tables trying to identify and mitigate them.
And yet we also know that the pace of change is faster than ever before, and that governments, businesses, and households are finding it increasingly difficult to keep up.
Beneath all of our identifying, quantifying, and mitigating of risk lies the undeniable and timeless truth that the only constant is change.
For Heraclitus, change was the fundamental principle of life.
Machiavelli referred to it as fortuna:the events that shape us and determine our wellbeing are often beyond our reason and control.
Though we can attempt to plan for change, we cannot always predict the precise nature and time at which it will occur.
Moreover, for all the risks that we can and do plan for, it is those for which we cannot prepare that can do the most damage.
That is why, alongside all of the identifying, quantifying, and mitigating, we must also embrace the idea that not all change can be clearly foreseen and planned for.
The implication is that we must instill in our families, organizations, and states the resilience and tools needed to act effectively in times of crisis – and thus to minimize the potentially damaging impact of unexpected change.
This ethos will also help us maximize the potential benefits of such flux.
After all, without unforeseen change, much of human endeavor would be fruitless, and innovation would be unnecessary.
Shocking things like the massacre at Charlie Hebdo in Paris happen, and they seem to be happening more frequently than ever.
They turn our world upside down and make us question our sense of who we are.
It is at such moments that we demonstrate our ability – or lack of it – to confront the unexplained, the unplanned, and the unfathomable.
At the same time, such moments remind us that future generations ultimately will judge us not on the basis of what we accumulated – whether personally, as organizations, or as states – but by the impact we had on those around us, and by how well we responded to their needs.
In perilous times, when the emergence, timing, and diffusion of risks can have a paralyzing effect, what matters is not simply what we accomplish, but how we accomplish it.
In such times, the value we create cannot be measured only in terms of money.
More important is how much stronger, more capable, and more resilient we help our colleagues, partners, children, and fellow citizens become.
Perhaps the main risk this year – and in the decade ahead – is that we lose sight of this fundamental truth.
Weimar Russia Revisited
The phrase “Weimar Russia” first appeared about 13 years ago, at the height of the confrontation between then President Boris Yeltsin and the Supreme Soviet that ended when Yeltsin’s tanks shelled the parliament.
The meaning was clear to all: Weimar Russia, like Weimar Germany, signified a weak republic attacked from within by nationalists yearning to restore authoritarian ways.
In the late 1990’s and the early years of this decade, the problems that incited fears of a dysfunctional state seemed to fade.
But over the past 18 months, the specter of Weimar has once again begun to haunt Russia.
If taken to extremes, Russian society’s response to its wrenching modernization could degenerate into a nationalist revolution led by xenophobes.
A different and healthy conservative response is possible if the tattered remnants of old threads, torn apart in the course of postcommunist modernization, can reconnect and grow together in a new way.
The problem is that everyone writes history in their own manner, and that there are no scales that can fix the precise point at which the remedy of unifying patriotism turns into the lethal poison of rabid nationalism.
Weimar Germany blindly poisoned itself.
In the period from 1991 to 1993, nationalism was on the rise because Yeltsin’s infant democracy seemed weak, with the country in the throes of a deep economic crisis, as well as an acute confrontation between different branches of government.
But what explains today’s resurgence of nationalism, when the regime and economy are strong, and all branches of government appear to operate in total unity?
Indeed, there are no practical reasons for Russia’s current system of governance to fall into crisis (although such reasons may emerge in the event of an economic downturn).
But there is another reason, no less important, that concerns morals and ideology.
Challenges to established political authority have been chilled, fairly effectively, by means of state-sponsored patriotism.
But the virus of nationalism has survived and multiplied.
Opinion polls, for example, indicate that 50% of Russians support the slogan “Russia for Russians.”
Moreover, nationalism has spread from the streets into the elite.
Nationalist statements that would have been confined to the extremist newspaper Den in the early 1990’s are now considered normal, “centrist,” even commonplace.
Today’s hardcore Russian nationalists consider Putin’s regime too soft, too pragmatic, too reasonable – in their language, “weak and indecisive.”
They loathe it for its “surrender” in Ukraine to the “Orange Revolution,” and they condemn the decision to give land along Siberia’s Amur River to China.
The “Putin Center” can be displaced.
Recall that Russia’s pro-Western liberals, ascendant a decade ago, have been relegated to the ideological fringe, with the very word “democrat” (let alone “pro-West”) now a term of abuse.
Fortunately, there is no sign yet (not even on the horizon) of a charismatic leader capable of forging the scattered energies of national-socialist grievances into a critical mass of hatred and “national revival.”
Stalin’s ghost is no substitute for a real live leader; he will never leap out of his portraits, no matter how often they are waved.
Moreover, times have changed.
For example, no one even mentions the idea of introducing a dictatorship, abolishing elections, and so on.
No matter how harshly Russia’s “democrats” are abused, the word “democracy” remains a sacred cow.
Instead, a populist-nationalist revolution might resemble the attempt to overthrow Mikhail Gorbachev in August 1991, or a Russian version of Ukraine’s Orange Revolution.
It might be some sort of “democratic nationalist revolution” – spontaneous, and not made by any one political party but by a popular mass movement.
It would be anti-bureaucrat, anti-oligarch, anti-West, and staunchly pro-nationalist.
These are the key ingredients in the nationalist stew that seems to appeal to Russians nowadays.
Judging by Putin’s most recent address to parliament, his regime is fully aware of the danger posed by populist nationalists.
It is likely that the regime will attempt to counter this eruption of nationalism while maintaining its strong statist rhetoric.
But, in order to defeat the far right, Putin’s regime will be forced to take its stand on more or less liberal ideological grounds.
This won’t be easy for a regime based on the twin pillars of bureaucracy and the security apparatus.
What liberals should do in these circumstances is obvious: support Putin’s regime insofar as it maintains the foundation and institutions of a liberal order.
The populist nationalists, because they reject these fundamentals, are the unremitting political antagonists of all liberals.
Yet an alliance with the nationalists against Putin currently tempts many Russian liberals.