But, while doing so, they are not likely to be expanding private-sector lending to support economic growth.
European banks are far more thinly capitalized, and account for a much larger share of credit extended, than banks in the US, where much more lending originates in capital markets.
Most large US banks – Citi is an exception – passed US Federal Reserve stress tests recently, with enough capital to withstand a hypothetical deep recession (13% unemployment, a 21% further fall in home prices, and a 50% stock-market decline).
Europe’s stress tests have been much weaker.
Some sort of Brady bond to reduce and extend excessive sovereign debt will be necessary.
We can expect further European turmoil – from banks, sovereign debt, and social unrest in response to even modest welfare-state rollbacks – and clashing visions, within and among countries, concerning the desirability of deeper European integration.
Europe has come a long way from the days when its leaders prophesied that the euro would quickly rival the dollar as a global reserve currency.
Yet no one should write off Europe.
It still has great strengths, and, with sensible reforms, the EU can survive and eventually return to greater prosperity and stability.
But Europe remains closer to the beginning of that process of renewal than to the end.
Whither North Korea?
SEOUL – According to North Korean state television, the heart attack that killed Kim Jong-il on December 17 was “due to severe mental and physical stress from overwork.”
That report instantly raised a question in my mind: if we accept the regime’s diagnosis, why did Kim need to work so hard, despite his frail health?
In some sense, his sudden death seems to symbolize the helplessness of a desperate leader confronting overwhelming challenges.
Seen in this light, the more important question is whether or not Kim’s inexperienced son, the twenty-something “Great Successor” Kim Jong-un, will be able to consolidate power and somehow steer the country out of its deep malaise.
So far, the succession in Pyongyang seems to be proceeding in an orderly fashion.
But, despite appearances, few totalitarian regimes, save those of Hitler, Stalin, and Mao, have ever maintained a monolithic inner circle of power.
North Korea is unlikely to be an exception to this rule.
The legitimacy of Kim Jong-un’s claim to power is weak, despite his blood tie to his father and grandfather, the dynasty that has ruled North Korea since its inception.
The “Great Successor” has had barely two years of on-the-job training, compared to the 14 years his father spent studying directly under Kim Il-sung.
Of course, Kim Jong-il’s sister, Kim Kyung-hee, and his sister-in-law, Jang Seong-taek, will assume something of a regency role, acting both as patron to the Great Successor and as a force to mobilize the military to close ranks behind the Kim dynasty.
But it is not clear how faithfully, and for how long, Kim Kyung-hee and Jang will remain supportive of Kim Jong-un.
They might even try to supplant Kim by claiming power for themselves.
Another challenge may come from the country’s senior leaders, especially among the military.&#160; Will they remain faithful to Kim, who is 40-50 years their junior?
It is known that some senior military officers were quietly critical of Kim Jong-il’s failure in managing the country’s relationship with the United States and Japan.
Their expectation might have been that North Korea could improve relations with the US while retaining its nuclear weapons, in exchange for not developing long-range missiles.
After all, if Pakistan did it, why not North Korea?
Had that happened, economic assistance from the US and Japan would have flowed into North Korea, enabling the regime to manage the country’s moribund economy much better without initiating reforms, which the military appears to regard as dangerous.
Instead, with the economy, particularly food production, continuing to falter, perhaps one-third of the country is living at or below starvation levels.
Will Kim Jong-un leader be able to do better?
In the early stages of this precarious succession, China has behaved as expected, trying to prop up the regime in order to ensure stability in its nuclear-armed neighbor.
China’s foreign ministry sent a strong message of support for Kim Jong-un, and encouraged North Koreans to unite under the new leader.
But the key external factor in ensuring a peaceful succession will be the policies of South Korea and the US, which must decide whether they can work with the North in the post-Kim Jong-il era.
Will they wait to see what happens to the new leader, and thus continue their policy of “strategic patience,” which focuses mainly on denuclearization, and not move on to other areas until the North moves first?
In that case, North Korea will gradually become more unstable, despite China’s support, as economic collapse undermines its quasi-legitimate leadership.
Or will South Korea and the US try to take advantage of Kim Jong-il’s passing with new policy initiatives?
If they can develop a two-track policy framework aimed at facilitating economic reform inside North Korea while continuing international pressure for denuclearization, constructive engagement may be possible.
Alas, next year is an election year in South Korea and the US.
In the feverish atmosphere of political high season, it will not be easy for incumbent administrations to pursue bold but risky policies.
This is the agony of democracy, and it is why the next year may prove to be the most unstable, and even dangerous, period in decades for the Korean peninsula and the region.
What happens if things go the wrong way?
What if, for example, Kim Jong-un fails to consolidate power, perceives the domestic political situation as worsening, owing to elite power struggles or popular discontent, and deems the external environment, especially South Korea and the US ever more hostile?
In that case, Kim III may grasp at provocation in one form or another, as his father did with intermittent attacks on South Korea in recent years.
If things do worsen even more, the world, like it or not, must be prepared to manage – and even confront – a scenario in which the Kim dynasty, and with it the North Korean state, collapses.
Unfortunately, considering the current state of ill-preparedness in terms of international coordination, there will be confusion, misunderstanding, and overreaction among South Korea, the US, and China to other actors’ behavior.
So it is past time for all three powers, together with Japan and Russia, to start talking and planning ahead, jointly.
A chaotic, imploding North Korea is in no one’s interest.
Whither Pakistan?
LAHORE – Pakistan remains the world’s never-ending question.
As 2010 concludes, several outstanding issues continue to bedevil the country.
How they are managed in the year ahead will determine not only Pakistan’s immediate future and long-term prospects, but also the security of its region and, indeed, much of the world.
It has been said – without exaggeration – that Pakistan faces an existential threat.
The country has not defined a coherent approach towards those who are resorting to terrorism to advance their agendas, both within Pakistan and abroad.
It remains uncommitted to the idea of denying sanctuaries on its territory to Taliban fighters battling American and NATO troops in Afghanistan.
Relations with India have soured in recent months, because Pakistan’s government is once again lending diplomatic support to the insurgency in Indian-controlled Kashmir.
Domestic terrorism in Pakistan has taken a heavy human and economic toll.
It is no longer aimed at official support of United States-led anti-terrorism activities.
Sunni Islamic extremists now target minority groups as well as other Muslim sects.
Some 800 liberal and Sufi Islamic scholars have died in targeted killings by extremist groups who receive financial assistance from like-minded people in the Middle East, and some well-known and much-visited Sufi shrines have been bombed.
The economy is in shambles, and unable to meet the International Monetary Fund demands for its continued support.
If the IMF terminates its current program, Pakistan will be unable to service its foreign debt.
Indeed, a senior cabinet minister suggested recently that the international community should write off Pakistan’s debts – an amount estimated at $40 billion.
The minister of finance forcefully repudiated the suggestion the following day, indicating that the government has not developed a consistent approach towards the faltering economy.
The economy was also badly hurt by the massive floods of 2010, which caused damage estimated at $10 billion.
This damage could lower annual GDP growth by 1-1.5% for several years to come.
In the 2010-2011 fiscal year, the IMF estimates that economic output will increase by less than 3% – one-third the rate expected in neighboring India and less than half that of Bangladesh.
Slower economic growth will cause a shortfall of jobs for new entrants to the workforce, thereby increasing the incidence of poverty.
Indeed, the number of people living in absolute poverty is likely to increase by 10 million, bringing the total to more than 70 million, or 40% of the population.
Pakistan thus ends 2010 as the sick man of South Asia.
The political system also remains unsettled.
Despite passage in July of the 18th amendment to the Pakistani constitution, which restored it to the form in which it was promulgated in 1973, political and executive authority remains in the hands of President Asif Ali Zardari.
The changes are supposed to make the executive branch accountable to the elected parliament, expand the prime minister’s authority, devolve more power to the provinces, and ensure independence to the judiciary.
In late 2009, the president also approved the seventh National Finance Commission, which will allocate to the provinces a larger share of the revenues collected by the central government.
But a significant transfer of power from the presidency to parliament, or from the central to provincial governments, has yet to be brought about.
Worse yet, the military remains outside civilian control.
General Ashfaq Pervez Kayani’s term in office, which was set to expire in November, was extended by three years.
Thus empowered, the general has been able to exert his influence over foreign policy, in particular in defining the country’s relations with the US, India, and Afghanistan.
Even though the US offered $2 billion of assistance to the military to be disbursed over a period of 3-5 years, Kayani has resisted American pressure to move against the Taliban’s sanctuary in North Waziristan, used to stage operations against US and NATO troops in southern and eastern Afghanistan.
So, is a further increase in violence by various extremist groups likely?
Will the economy collapse if the IMF withdraws its support?
Will the US increase its pressure by intervening militarily if Pakistan continues to harbor Taliban fighters operating from the tribal areas?
Will the military subvert the constitutional changes aimed at reforming the political system?
Despite all the grim news and auguries, there is some hope, owing to the increased political mobilization of Pakistan’s middle classes, whose members have finally begun to question those espousing extremism.
The judiciary is also more active, and is attempting to force the executive to remain within the bounds of the constitution.
Moreover, a trade agreement with Afghanistan that allows Afghan goods to cross Pakistan en route to India may be one step towards an improvement of economic relations with that large and rapidly growing neighbor.
Indeed, an able economic team that has been installed in the government seems – at long last – to be addressing some of the economy’s deep structural flaws.
As India in the 1990’s and Brazil in the early 2000’s showed, economies in deep distress can recover quickly once the right policies are implemented.
It could also happen in Pakistan, which would help to solve other, seemingly intractable problems.
So all hope is not lost in Pakistan.
On the contrary, 2011 may well prove to be a better year for a battered economy and a political system under stress.
Whither the Egyptian Revolution?
WASHINGTON, DC – Egypt’s revolution toppled a dictator in February, but the country’s future as a stable, functioning democracy remains uncertain.
The West is, of course, limited in its ability to shape the transition process.
Nonetheless, the potential for constructive influence remains considerable, and it should be responsive to those in Egypt who favor liberal ideas, democratic institutions, and broad distribution of the benefits of economic development.
The upcoming parliamentary elections are but an early stage in a long (perhaps decades-long) struggle to define the new Egypt.
Will Egypt gravitate toward Islamic theocracy or adopt a secular government that respects minority rights?
Which economic policies – statist, liberal, or some combination of the two – will best ensure social justice and broad distribution of prosperity?
Can civilian control of the military be established?
Will the regional security structure formed around the United States, Egypt, and Israel survive?
The November elections will not resolve these fundamental questions, and whether a workable constitutional framework will develop is uncertain.
A parliamentary system of government will likely emerge, including a prime minister and a cabinet, with the strong possibility that the presidency will be politically overshadowed, particularly if the presidential election is delayed.
The central unknown is the composition of the ruling coalition.
It appears unlikely that a single party will emerge from the election with enough parliamentary seats to govern on its own.
So a coalition government will be necessary.
The political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood (the Freedom and Justice Party) currently is the best-organized party, and may be in the strongest position to form a majority coalition, including Salafist elements.
By contrast, secular liberal parties have yet to develop effective organizations or project compelling visions for the future.
Although sentiment favoring a secular state is considerable, a coalition that can serve as an alternative or counterweight to the Muslim Brotherhood will be difficult to assemble.
In the near term, the most likely counterweight could be a liberal coalition with a heavy component of former members of deposed President Hosni Mubarak’s National Democratic Party (NDP) – that is, those who have not been discredited by their association with Mubarak.
Election rules favor those who were organized before the revolution.
Approximately one-third of the new parliament will comprise “non-party list” candidates.
Established networks based on family, local loyalties, and tribal affiliations will be key determinants in voting.&#160;These circumstances may favor “non-party list” candidates associated with the Muslim Brotherhood and the former NDP, particularly in rural Egypt.
Post-election shifts in the composition of coalitions could complicate the situation, making governance even more difficult.
Power-sharing among coalition partners will be an intricate affair, including behind-the-scenes deals with the military, which will insist on measures to safeguard its interests.
The political atmosphere in Egypt remains volatile.
Expectations of economic improvement are extremely high.
The initial elected government may pay an early political price for failure.
The starting point for the West in trying to assist Egypt’s transition must be recognition that patient, long-term engagement will be required.
The effectiveness of this engagement will depend primarily on the persuasiveness of the West’s policy prescriptions, rather than on the volume of financial assistance.
G-8 countries have already pledged support to post-Mubarak Egypt, including economic aid, debt relief, and loan guarantees.
These steps are important, though delivery will be prolonged and the likely impact modest, at least in the near-term.
Egypt has already declined support from the International Monetary Fund.
But, apart from an IMF-backed reform program, if the Egyptian government’s policy framework is right, resources will flow from the private sector, including foreign investment supportive of job creation and economic development.
This is the message that Egypt needs to grasp and embrace.
G-8 governments should urgently and repeatedly undertake quiet, structured, and consistent communications with Egyptian counterparts about the economic reforms needed to bring about prosperity.
It is far too early to judge the strength of internal forces promoting liberal economic policies.
The need for economic growth could intrinsically push policymakers toward market-oriented economic policies (sensitive to considerations of “social justice”) and an open investment environment.
Powerful forces within the Egyptian business community are silent at the moment, but in time will reassert themselves.
Many business interests with job-creating capacity want the continuation of market-oriented reforms begun a decade ago (which produced impressive growth rates), but support broadening prosperity and rooting out corruption.
Moreover, an independent media might tend to reinforce pro-market and democratic sentiment.
Indeed, Western governments should continue to use their channels to the Egyptian military and future civil leadership to encourage them to uphold the rule of law, to act with restraint, and to respect free expression.
Regional security arrangements will also require careful maintenance.
Finally, countries supportive of a democratic Egypt should focus on encouraging the institutional and social underpinnings of democratic process and market reform.
This depends on the development of a robust civil society, tolerant of open debate, and healthy liberal political parties, as well as active participation by women and an independent media.
Winning broad public support will take time.
Private non-profit organizations and private enterprise, rather than governments directly, are best equipped to provide this type of training and expertise for leadership development and capacity building.
The job of democratic governments is to provide the resources that can make delivery of this aid possible.
Who Are Tomorrow’s Consumers?
SINGAPORE – Luxury-brand companies’ stock prices plunged in July, after their financial results disappointed investors, owing largely to slower sales in emerging markets, especially in China.
Meanwhile, news reports indicate that high-end shopping malls in India and China are increasingly empty.
What is going on?
Many analysts had expected emerging markets to generate exponential growth over the next decade.
But now there is talk of how the global crisis is slowing down these economies and killing off discretionary spending.
But a slowdown in China’s economic growth cannot really be blamed for slower sales of luxury goods or empty malls.
The annual growth rate of China’s $7.5 trillion economy decelerated to 7.6% in the second quarter, from 8.1% in January-March – hardly a cause for panic.
Moreover, two-thirds of the decline is attributable to slower investment rather than slower consumption.
For all of China’s long-term structural problems, it is not exactly slipping into recession.
The real problem is that many analysts had exaggerated the size of the luxury-goods segment in emerging markets.
China is by far the largest emerging-market economy, with 1.6 million households that can be called “rich” (defined as having annual disposable income of more than $150,000).
But this is still smaller than Japan’s 4.6 million and a fraction of the 19.2 million rich households in the United States.
The number of rich households amounts to barely 0.7 million in India and one million in Brazil.
The point is that developed countries still dominate the income bracket that can afford luxury goods.
The explosive growth recorded by this segment in emerging markets in recent years reflected entry into previously untapped markets, with the subsequent slowdown resulting from saturation.
The number of high-income households is still growing, but not enough to justify the 30-40% compounded growth rates expected by some.
This does not mean that growth opportunities in emerging markets have disappeared, but expectations do need to be recalibrated.
A study by the economist Homi Kharas of the Brookings Institution gives us a sense of the scale of this change.
He estimates that 18% of the world’s middle class lived in North America in 2009, while another 36% lived in Europe. Asia’s share was 28% (after including Japan).
But Kharas’s projections suggest that Asia will account for two-thirds of the world’s middle class by 2030.
In other words, Asia will displace not just the West, but even other emerging regions.
This is the real business opportunity.
Of course, the rise of Asia’s middle class is not the only change we should expect.
We are in the middle of a social and demographic shift that will both destroy and create consumer markets.
The impact of aging is already being felt in these countries’ education systems.
The number of students enrolled in primary schools in China has fallen by 18% since 1990, and by an astonishing 33% in South Korea.
At the other end of the demographic scale, the share of the aged is growing explosively.
Meanwhile, the nature of the basic consuming unit – the household – is also changing rapidly.
In most developed countries, the traditional nuclear family is in severe decline and is being replaced by single-individual households.
In Germany, for example, 39% of households consist of just one person.
Couples with children now account for barely 19% and 22% of households in the United Kingdom and the US, respectively.
Nevertheless, it is not all about consumer atomization.
We are simultaneously witnessing the re-emergence of the multigenerational extended family, with as many as 22% of American adults in the 25-35 age group living with parents or relatives.
By contrast, the extended family is giving way in India to nuclear families, which now account for 64% of households.
All of these changes will profoundly affect the future of consumer markets.
For example, we need to revise our mental image of the nuclear family from American suburbia to fit the rapidly expanding cities of India.
By the same token, our mental image of the multigenerational extended family needs to include those in the West.
An aging but increasingly middle-class Asia will be at the core of this new consumer landscape.
Who Beats Corruption?
Corruption undermines the quality of life for people around the world, not only in poor countries.
The US currently is witnessing several corruption scandals.
Even America’s Federal Emergency Management Agency, responsible for providing relief after natural disasters and man-made catastrophes, was in the hands of inept political cronies rather than professionals.
When hurricane Katrina struck America’s Gulf Coast, that incompetence proved fatal.
All societies require an effective government that can provide vital and irreplaceable public services and infrastructure.
Thus, governments are invested with unique powers, especially the powers of policing and judicial control.
But these powers are also readily abused.
How, then, to ensure that governments are law-abiding as well as strong?
The best answer, both in theory and practice, is to find ways to hold governments accountable to the people that they serve.
Elections are obviously one method, though campaign financing can be a source of corruption.
Politicians around the world trade favors for cash needed to win elections, and they often use that cash to buy the votes of desperately poor people.
Clear electoral rules and procedures can help ensure transparency, but accountability also comes from the broad society in between elections.
Privately owned newspapers, independent radio and television networks, trade unions, churches, professional societies, and other groups within civil society provide a bulwark against despotism.
In the poorest countries, where illiteracy is high, desperate people are subject to government manipulation, and there is a lack of independent control through the media and professional organizations, governments face only weak control by society.
They tend to be the most despotic and corrupt, not because poor people care less about good governance – on the contrary, their very lives depend on it – but because they lack the means to keep their government disciplined and law abiding.
The result is a trap in which poverty causes bad governance and bad governance causes poverty – a two-way spiral downward that can lead to such extreme deprivation that the government, lacking computers, telephones, information systems, and trained civil servants, couldn’t function honestly even if it wanted to.
The end result can be collapse into a kind of anarchy, as in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Somalia.
One measure of the quality of governance in over 150 countries is provided by Transparency International, an organization dedicated to strengthening civil society in the fight against government corruption.
Transparency International produces an annual ranking of “corruption perceptions,” measuring the public’s view of the extent of corruption in a country.
In the 2005 rankings, Iceland scored as the least corrupt country, with the Scandinavian countries, New Zealand, and Singapore close behind.
The US ranked seventeenth from the top, a not-so-glorious position for the world’s leading power.
In general, the poorer the country, the lower the ranking: tied for last place are Chad and Bangladesh.
A bit of statistical analysis reveals further important patterns.
First, Sub-Saharan African countries are less corrupt on average than countries at the same income level in other parts of the world.
For example, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali, and Rwanda rank much higher than Bangladesh, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Vietnam. Yet the Asian countries’ economies have tended to grow much faster over the past generation.
Corruption therefore cannot be the unique factor that holds Africa back.
Africa’s problems have more to do with droughts, malaria, AIDS, and lack of infrastructure.
Poor countries achieve lower levels of corruption when civil rights are protected.
When people have the freedom to assemble, to speak, and to publish their views, society benefits not only by increasing the range of ideas that are debated, but also by keeping corruption in check.
It is no surprise that corrupt regimes routinely clamp down on the press, trade unions, and on professional associations.
In Africa, less corrupt countries like Ghana also have much better protection of civil liberties than more corruption-prone countries like Chad and Ethiopia, which are also even poorer.
Finally, the data show that corruption is highest in oil and gas-producing countries.
In general, natural resources like oil, gas, diamonds, and other precious minerals breed corruption, because governments can live off of their export earnings without having to “compromise” with their own societies.
The natural resources are therefore not only a target of corruption but also an instrument of holding power.
Many foreign companies, intent on cashing in, fuel the pathology of corrupt regimes by peddling in bribes and political protection.
The implications for action are clear.
By strengthening civil society – through legal rights and long-term economic development – and instituting clear rules to ensure accountability, political despotism and corruption will be brought under control.
We should be uncompromising, therefore, in our defense of civil liberties.
The rich world should offer impoverished regions like sub-Saharan Africa more economic support to break out of poverty.
Of course, aid should be directed to specific needs – for example, malaria control, food production, safe drinking water, and sanitation – whose fulfillment can be measured and monitored to resist corruption.
By raising living standards, we would also be empowering both civil society and impoverished governments to defend the rule of law.
Who is Gordon Brown?
At long last, Gordon Brown is taking over from Tony Blair as Britain’s Prime Minister, thus attaining his life-long ambition, as if by right.
That is his first problem.
He has not been elected by anyone – not by the Labour Party, and not by Britain’s voters; he has merely come into an inheritance that he has long thought was his due.
How, then, will Brown acquire legitimacy as Britain’s new leader?
The one thing that is clear is that he will not gain legitimacy if he offers only more of what Blair has been dishing up for the past ten years.
Brown’s second problem is the mirror image of the first.
As a senior member of Blair’s government throughout its tenure, he shares responsibility for everything that Blair has done.
Political commentators sometimes claim to detect important differences in their underlying political attitudes.
However, in practice, Brown has remained in the shadows, skillfully managing the economy, but remaining silent and enigmatic on vital political issues, and apparently endorsing everything Blair did.
If Brown is to gain legitimacy, he must offer something new; but he can do that only by distinguishing himself from the Blair legacy in clearly perceptible – and therefore fairly radical – ways.
This will be a difficult trick to pull off.
Perhaps the single most important domestic question Brown faces concerns where he stands on the balance between the free market and the claims of social policy.
Blair’s government moved the Labour Party a long way to the right of its traditional priorities of protecting the underprivileged, and to justify the change he re-named the party “New Labour.”
In many ways, the Blair government’s support of free-market policies turned out to be a shrewd and productive shift.
Britain’s economy grew more steadily and rapidly than it had done for several generations, and the tax revenue generated by growth enabled the government to pour money into education and the National Health Service.
But this has come at a price, or rather several prices.
First, inequality has grown at both ends of the income scale.
At the bottom, the proportion of the population with an income below the poverty line increased from 13% at the start of Blair’s government to 20% now.
That situation is much worse among ethnic minorities.
And, despite the government’s efforts, childhood poverty also has increased under Blair.
At the top, the incomes of the mega-rich have soared, with predictable repercussions, especially in the property market.
Public concern about this issue has been made much worse by claims that the rich get even richer by paying little tax.
There was a time when Brown was thought to be a believer in traditional Labour Party values.
Was it true?
Is it true now?
What will he say about inequality?
Unfortunately, Blair and his government are perceived to be tainted by some of the less attractive features of free-market capitalism.
Blair himself seems to prefer to have “friends” who are very rich and who will lend him their holiday villas in Tuscany.
This “closeness” has led the police to investigate claims that some Labour Party donors have been rewarded with political honors.
In short, Blair’s government exudes an aura of sleaze and cronyism.
Can Brown show that he is different?
The worst part of Blair’s legacy, of course, is the war in Iraq.
Many people predicted, and everyone can now see, that the decision to invade was a disastrous error; that it is having catastrophic consequences, not just for Iraq, but also for the Middle East generally; and that it has seriously damaged the moral standing of the United States and Britain.
The most critical issue facing Brown is whether he chooses to distance himself from Blair’s self-satisfied and delusional claim that the invasion of Iraq was “the right thing to do.”
Britain has already reduced its forces in southern Iraq, and is on course to reduce them still further as they hand over “security” to the Iraqi police and military.
In reality, of course, the civil and guerrilla war under way in the rest of Iraq means that any security in the south can only be a temporary illusion.
The choice facing Brown is whether to cling silently to the existing policy, in the futile hope that the problem will go away, or explicitly recognize Britain’s share in the disaster.
This is partly a question of what to do now in Iraq; but it is also a question of Britain’s relationship with the US.
With hindsight, it is clear that Britain’s participation in the Iraq war was driven solely by Blair’s determination to stick limpet-like to the US.
Brown believes, and has said, that Britain must always be close friends with America; and obviously that is the right thing to believe and say.
But is he prepared to make clear that there is a difference between being close friends and going into an illegal and disastrous war just to please George W Bush?
So far, there is no indication that he will.
While he has publicly regretted the errors in British intelligence about Saddam Hussein, that is merely a way of shifting the blame from the government to the intelligence services.
But it was not the intelligence services that decided to go to war; it was Tony Blair, with the support of Gordon Brown.
Who is to Blame?
PRINCETON – Now that the economic crisis looks less threatening (at least for the moment), and forecasters are spying “green shoots” of recovery, an ever more encompassing blame game is unfolding.
The financial crisis provides an apparently endless opportunity for unmasking deceit, malfeasance, and corruption.
But we are not sure quite who and what should be unmasked.
Leading bankers were initially the most obvious culprits.
They presided over institutions that made large profits for a substantial period of time by mispricing risk, and then argued for public support on the grounds that they were too big to fail.
They appeared arrogant and overpaid, and were easily demonized.
But what about the political process?
Why were the banks not more closely controlled and better regulated?
It is not that politicians were “bought” in a simple sense; rather, they convinced themselves that financial innovation opened the gate to greater general prosperity, increased home ownership, and, of course, popular support in elections.
Governments are now vulnerable, and politicians are under attack almost everywhere.
Administrations have collapsed in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Iceland, and Ireland.
Riots and paralyzing strikes have crippled Thailand, France, and Greece.
In Kuwait, the government dismissed parliament.
Britain is convulsed by a scandal about parliamentary expenses that has no equivalent since the attacks on “old corruption” in the early nineteenth century.
Recriminations after financial crises have a long history, and they recur in regular cycles.
The stock exchange boom of the early 1870’s was followed by collapse in 1873 and a witch-hunt for those responsible.
In 1907, J.P. Morgan was first viewed as the savior of the market, and then as the enemy of the commonweal.
In the 1930’s, bankers and finance ministers were accused.
But for the rest of the twentieth century, the backlash cycle seemed to have stopped.
Today the attacks are not limited to the political and financial establishment.
Critics are trying to identify the ideas as well as the interests that were responsible for financial and economic dysfunction.
In this respect, the contemporary crisis is unlike the historical analogies, in that it looks as if financial innovation was driven by a set of intellectual and even technological innovations.
Since it is an economic crisis, most people seeking its intellectual roots are tempted to begin with economists, who, with a few exceptions, look particularly discredited.
The founder of the rational expectations revolution, Robert Lucas, is endlessly quoted as having stated in 2003 in his presidential address to the American Economic Association that the “central problem of depression-prevention has been solved, for all practical purposes, and has in fact been solved for many decades.”
It is also clear that academic economists had an impact on policy.
Larry Summers, now the highly influential director of President Barack Obama’s National Economic Council, concluded as a young economist that “financial and monetary shocks are less important sources of depression than we had suspected.”
If the economy was foolproof, and if so many good policy options existed to deal with crisis and distress, there was less need to avoid mistakes.
Things could always be set right retrospectively.
Other academic disciplines have looked rather smugly at the public humiliation of their colleagues in economics.
The non-mathematical appear to have their revenge, as the perils of over-reliance on complex symbolic notation and arcane formulae are relentlessly exposed.
In fact, developments or fashions in other academic disciplines and also in the general culture contributed at least as much to a willingness to engage in absurd risks and to provide and accept valuations of complex and inherently unfathomable securities.
The general cultural developments are sometimes termed post-modernism, which involves the replacement of reason by intuition, feeling, and allusion.
But post-modernism has itself been generated by technology, with which it has a deeply ambiguous relationship.
In contrast to a steam engine or an old-fashioned automobile, whose operations were easily comprehensible, modern automobiles or airplanes are so complicated that their operators have no idea how the technology they are using actually works.
The Internet has created a world in which strict logic is less important than the juxtaposition of striking images.
Post-modernism moves away from the rational culture of the so-called “modern era.”
Many people are finding more analogies with medieval life, in which humans were surrounded by processes that they found difficult to comprehend. As a result, they thought they lived in a world populated by demons and mysterious forces.
The recent era of global finance – perhaps we should speak of it as being past? – differed from the financial surge of a century ago.
Its cultural manifestations also appeared to be novel.
It was playful, allusive, and edgy – in short, post-modern.
It treated tradition and history not as a constraint, but as a source of ironic reference.
At the era’s height, major financial players built vastly expensive collections of highly abstract modern art.
A post-modern neglect or disdain for reality generated the sense that the whole world was constantly shifting and malleable, and might be as transient and meaningless as stock quotations.
An alliance was formed between financial experts who thought they were selling truly innovative ideas, a political elite that endorsed the philosophy of “regulation lite,” and a cultural climate that pushed experimentation and the rejection of traditional values.
The result was that every sort of value – including financial values – came to be seen as arbitrary and fundamentally absurd.
When incomprehension no longer produces new heights of prosperity, but rather economic collapse and failure, it is not surprising that it turns to anger.
Finding out who is to blame becomes more and more like the late medieval and early modern search for witches: a way of making sense of a disorderly and hostile universe.
Who Lost Turkey?
PARIS – “Who lost Turkey?”
That question, often raised in the past, has been heating up in the aftermath of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s emotional outburst during the recent World Economic Forum 2009 in Davos, when he abruptly left a panel he was sharing with Israeli President Shimon Peres.
And the Turkish question matters greatly, because it touches on some of the most unstable and unsettling of the world’s diplomatic disputes.
If Turkey has indeed been “lost,” those responsible include the European Union, the United States, Israel, and Turkey itself.
The EU’s growing reservations about Turkey’s membership have been expressed unambiguously by French President Nicolas Sarkozy.
In the US, former President George W. Bush gets some of the blame because of the war in Iraq.
Israel, too, has played its part in Turkey’s alienation from the West, as a result of the Lebanon war of 2006 and its recent military operations in Gaza.
All of these events have disturbed and disoriented Turkey, and are magnified by the domestic impact of worst global economic crisis since the 1930’s.
Of course, Turkey’s secular, pro-Western elites may still consider the EU and the US important, if not indispensable, allies and partners, and they may consider Islamic fundamentalism, Hamas, Hezbollah, and Iran real or at least potential threats.
Yet they are also convinced that Europe has behaved improperly toward Turkey, through a combination of short-term populist reflexes and the absence of a long-term strategic vision.
The Turkish question is, of course, complex.
Turkey’s geography is predominantly Asian, Turkey’s emotions are increasingly Middle Eastern, i.e., Muslim on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and yet Turkey’s elites remain resolutely pro-Western and pro-European.
But for how long?
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, when dialogue with the Islamic world is one of the Western world’s key challenges, Europe would commit a historic strategic blunder if it were to close its doors to Turkey.
To do so would push back the inheritors of the Ottoman Empire back onto an Asian, Muslim, and Middle Eastern historical trajectory.
In the question of Turkish accession to the EU, the journey matters more than the destination.
The reforms that Turkey has already implemented in a very short period of time, thanks to its EU candidate status, are impressive.
Should we in Europe really put at risk that progress by expressing an all-too-audible “no”?
The EU desperately needs a strategic and diplomatic partner that can significantly reinforce its clout in the Middle East.
Europe also needs the dynamism of a youthful Turkey.
Above all, it needs the message of reconciliation sent to Islam that Turkey’s entrance into the Union would represent.
Of course, to want Turkey “in” is an act of will, if not an act of faith that is in many ways counterintuitive.
Most Europeans do not perceive Turkey as a “European Other” but as a “non-European Other.”
Even in Istanbul, the most Westernized of Turkish cities, as soon as one leaves the main arteries, one seems to be immersed in a Middle Eastern or Asian culture.
Israel is not in the European Union, but it, too, is in great danger of losing Turkey.
Far from reinforcing Israel’s security, its last two military adventures, in Lebanon and now in Gaza, have caused further self-isolation and loss of world sympathy.
Nowhere has this phenomenon been stronger than in Turkey, where those military escapades have strained the two countries’ strategic alliance almost to the breaking point.
It is too early to speak of Obama’s policy towards Turkey; suffice it to say that in his willingness to open a respectful dialogue with Islam, he is the only Western leader to move in the right direction.
But can positive American gestures towards Turkey, a key NATO member, be sufficient to offset Israel’s insensitive, if not reckless, policies?
The answer is unclear.
Turkey, too shares some of the responsibility for this mounting process of estrangement.  Erdogan’s behavior in Davos was, at the very least, irresponsible.
He may have gained popularity back home, but in today’s difficult economic times, the temptations of cheap populism are more dangerous than ever.
One does not play lightly with matches next to a pile of dry wood.
Who Needs a Flat Tax?
WASHINGTON, DC – With America’s Republican presidential candidates lining up to declare their fealty to a flat tax – a system of personal-income taxation that assesses a single rate for all – opponents have focused on why it is a bad idea to raise taxes on the poor in order to reduce them for the wealthy.
But, if a flat tax is such a bad idea, why have so many countries embraced it?
A careful study of these countries – mainly post-communist countries in Eastern Europe and a smattering of tiny micro-states worldwide – suggests that there are three main reasons.
First, some countries are so relatively poor and lacking in domestic capital that they opt to drop rates in order to attract foreign investors.
Other countries are so small and ineffective at collecting revenue that they cannot afford a progressive tax system.
Finally, some countries are so corrupt that they have to offer the wealthy a huge rate cut to get them to pay any taxes at all.
The United States, like other developed countries, does not suffer from any of these conditions (yet), so it is not clear why it needs a flat tax.
The formerly communist countries of Eastern Europe that have adopted a flat tax – including Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Romania, Slovakia, and Ukraine, among others – sorely lack investment capital.
Whether on the European Union’s doorstep or just inside, they compete for the attention of foreign direct investors, for whom a flat tax provides an important signal: You are welcome, we will not steal your money, and you can keep what you earn.
For developed countries that already have capital and a track record of inward investment, “the appeal of the flat tax is consequently less,” as a report by the International Monetary Fund concludes.
Thus, the flat tax has not been adopted in any developed countries, or in China.
The other countries that have embraced a flat tax are small or micro-states: Jamaica, Tuvalu, Grenada, Mauritius, Timor-Leste, Belize, and Seychelles.
The only (partial) exception to this rule is Paraguay, which adopted a flat tax in 2010.
Here, flat-tax advocates’ administrative-simplicity arguments have some traction.
If a country is so small that it cannot develop a tax administration effective enough to manage a fair system of progressive taxation, then a flat tax may make sense.
Moreover, some small countries have other sources of revenue, so the benefit of implementing a progressive tax system does not justify the cost.
Tuvalu’s government, for example, derives nearly 10% of its revenues from the sale of rights to its “.tv” Internet domain name, which brings in about $2 million annually.
Countries that are just slightly larger can afford to collect income taxes in a fairer way.
Finally, if a country’s public institutions are in the thrall of oligarchs who are accustomed to stealing with impunity from the public till, a flat tax may be the only way to induce the wealthy to pay any tax at all.
Thus, in 2001 Russia became the first large state to adopt a flat tax, reducing the top marginal rate from 30% to 13%.
In 2003, Ukraine dropped its top rate from 40% to 13%.
In nearly all countries that have introduced a flat tax, government revenues from income tax have declined.
That is why its adoption is often associated with an increase in value-added tax rates (as has occurred throughout Eastern Europe).
In the US, the Republican presidential candidate Herman Cain’s “9-9-9” plan calls for a 9% rate for personal and corporate taxes, together with a new 9% national sales tax.
A country’s tax system reflects its institutional capacity, economic circumstances, and distribution of political power.
If the US were to become the first developed country to experiment with a flat tax, that shift would tend to confirm what many suspect but hope is not true: that America is broke, desperate for inward investment, incompetently governed, and increasingly ruled by a self-regarding oligarchic elite.
Who Needs the Humanities?
WARWICK, UK – Nowadays, in country after country, policymakers have become obsessed with the need to strengthen science education.
But what about the humanities – all those disciplines (literature, history, languages, and so forth) whose relevance to economic competitiveness is not so obvious?
We need the humanities only if we are committed to the idea of humanity.
If the humanities have become obsolete, then it may be that humanity is losing its salience.
I do not mean that we are becoming “less human” in the sense of “inhumane.”
If anything, we live in a time when traditionally human-centered concerns like “rights” have been extended to animals, if not nature as a whole.
Rather, the problem is whether there is anything distinctive about being human that makes special demands of higher education.
I believe that the answer continues to be yes.
Today, it sounds old-fashioned to describe the university’s purpose as being to “cultivate” people, as if it were a glorified finishing school.
However, once we set aside its elitist history, there remains a strong element of truth to this idea, especially when applied to the humanities.
Although we now think of academic disciplines, including the humanities, as being “research-led,” this understates the university’s historic role in converting the primate Homo sapiens into a creature whose interests, aspirations, and achievements extend beyond successful sexual reproduction.
What was originally called the “liberal arts” provided the skills necessary for this transformation.
By submitting to a common regime of speaking, writing, reading, observing, and calculating, the “upright ape” acquired the capacity to reason in public.
This enabled first him and then her to command authority regardless of birth, resulting in the forging of networks and even institutions whose benefits cut deeply across bloodlines.
We too easily forget that our heterogeneous societies rely on at least a watered-down version of this training to maintain political and economic order.
The university began with the humanities at its heart, but today it is playing catch-up with the natural sciences.
This is largely because the natural sciences have most closely imitated the productivity measures associated with industry. The result is a “bigger is better” mentality that stresses ever more publications, patents, and citations.
Yet, this agenda tends to be pursued without much concern for how – or if – these measures feed into something of greater social, cultural, and even economic relevance.
The Science Citation Index, originally designed to help researchers discern aggregate trends in increasingly complex subject domains sciences, has helped measure productivity.
But now these trends are routinely converted into norms against which the performance of particular universities, departments, and even individual researchers is judged.
What is most easily measured has become confused with what is most worth measuring.
But, more profoundly, this entire line of thinking neglects the distinctly transformative capacity of the knowledge in which the humanities specializes.
An adequate assessment of this capacity requires looking at its multiplier effects.
As with John Maynard Keynes’s notion that returns on public investment must be measured as the long-term consequence of other investments that it stimulates across the economy and society, so, too, with the knowledge generated by the humanities.
This idea is lost in today’s cost accounting for universities, which treats what transpires between teacher and student in the classroom as akin to what happens between producer and consumer in the market.
In both cases, it is assumed that the value of the exchanged good is decided shortly after its delivery according to how it satisfies an immediate need.
Not surprisingly, students value their degree by the first job it gets them rather than the life it prepares them for over the next half-century.
Today, it is hard to believe that in the heyday of the welfare state, universities were both more elite and more publicly funded than they are today.
Back then, it was assumed that the benefits of academic training accrued not only, or even primarily, to those who experienced it but also, and more importantly, to the rest of the population, whose lives were variously enriched by the application of the arts and sciences.
Of course, this enrichment included such practical benefits as medical breakthroughs and labor-saving technologies.
But the enrichment provided by the humanities was no less enduring, though its subtler nature makes it harder to track.
Nevertheless, to paraphrase Keynes, every time we turn on the radio or television, read a newspaper, pick up a novel, or watch a movie, we are in the thrall of one or more dead humanists who set the terms of reference through which we see the world.
In its long history as the premier form of academic knowledge, the humanities were frequently criticized for their subversive character.
That some would now question whether the humanities have any impact at all merely reflects the crude and short-sighted way in which the value of academic knowledge is measured and judged today.
Perhaps that befits creatures whose lives are “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short,” to recall Thomas Hobbes’ description of the state of nature. But it does a grave injustice to those of us who still aspire to full-fledged humanity.
Who Needs to Be EU President?
Whoever steps into Europe’s new top job as President of the European Council will set the mold.
If it is someone of worldwide renown, the presidency will immediately be established as a post of global importance.
But if its first occupant is not a household name, the presidency will be doomed as just another of the European Union’s confusing plethora of worthy senior positions that are neither valued nor understood outside Brussels.
The key point here is that Europe won’t be able to upgrade the job later.
If the presidency goes to a politician who lacks fame and charisma, its place will forever be low down in the international pecking order.
Of the half-dozen candidates to become “Europe’s President,” only Tony Blair needs no introduction anywhere.
All the other names in the ring have to be accompanied by a description – the former Finnish this or Austrian that.
Nobody knows whether the current prime ministers of the EU’s 27 member countries will choose Blair.
There is considerable lingering ill will over his role in the invasion of Iraq, and there is the inconvenient fact that he is from Euro-skeptic Britain, and that many on the left view him as a leader whose “third way” was a betrayal of socialism.
But choosing a president for Europe isn’t about Blair the man, or about the political records of any of the others who would like the job.
It is about the job itself.
Europe’s problem is that it lacks a clearly identifiable leader.
As a result, despite the EU’s many successes, it still speaks with too many voices.
This was among the problems that the EU’s controversial Lisbon treaty was designed to fix.
It is now in the final stages of its long and difficult birth, and by the New Year should be bringing new mechanisms to bear to streamline European decision-making.
The jewel in its crown is to be the appointment for a 30-month term of a full-time president of the European Council, which groups the heads of EU member governments, along with a foreign policy chief who will be backed by an embryonic EU diplomatic service.
Now that more than two-thirds of Irish voters have reversed their country’s earlier opposition to the Lisbon treaty – with only the Czech Republic’s Europhobic president, Václav Klaus, holding out against it – the focus is on who will fill these two jobs.
And that, in turn, has triggered a round of bitter political squabbling that threatens to negate the entire idea of a much more powerful European voice on the global stage.
The three Benelux countries, along with a few other smaller EU nations, are opposed to the new European president being from a large nation.
And there are also those who fear that a political heavyweight in the job might eclipse the EU Commission’s President, former Portuguese prime minister José Manuel Barroso, who has just been confirmed for a second five-year term, and devalue the role of the foreign policy chief whose authority Lisbon is due to beef up.
These are specious arguments.
The EU’s external relations involve two different types of politics.
The first is the politics of world theatre, where a political figure of global stature could do much to raise the EU’s profile and ensure that it has a major say in re-ordering the post-crisis global economic rulebook.
The second is the politics of detail, where the new foreign policy chief’s role is to create a single EU stance on the wide range of issues about which European governments still have wildly different national positions.
Europe has an international image problem that in part stems from a complex institutional structure that non-EU countries find baffling.
It is over-represented at G-20 world summits, for instance, but the presence of four European national leaders, plus EU representatives like Barroso, weakens rather than strengthens its political weight.
The same is true of other global bodies like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
The result is that Europe’s achievements in recent years – its expansion to create a single economic market of 500 million people and its creation of the euro as a currency that challenges the dollar – are not accompanied by a significantly greater global standing.
World leaders from Barack Obama to Hu Jintao address themselves to Berlin, Paris, and London, rather than to Brussels.
The result is that EU policy proposals that could do much to advance the economic and geopolitical interests of Europeans are not as influential as they could be.
The text of the Lisbon treaty is studiously vague in its job description of the president’s role – an approach that prevented trouble for treaty’s framers, but merely postponed disagreement.
The real argument now taking place between Europe’s national governments is about the authority that the EU’s president should have.
The risk is that Europe’s squabbling politicians will opt for a figurehead and miss this golden opportunity to create a global leader.
Who Next at the ECB Helm?
TILBURG, THE NETHERLANDS – Two years ago, the leaders of the world’s central banks were considered heroes for their efforts in preventing financial crisis from turning into Great Depression II.
Today, however, central banks are being sharply criticized, and their independence is coming under severe pressure in many countries, particularly in the eurozone, as Mario Draghi, the head of the Bank of Italy, recently pointed out.
The type of person at the helm of any central bank is always important – but now more than ever, because financial crises always threaten central banks’ independence.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve seems to have support only of the Obama administration, hardly something of which to be proud.
Congress has disparaged the Fed’s handling of the crisis, and Representative Ron Paul of Texas, who believes that the Fed’s very existence is unconstitutional, will take over one of the key congressional oversight committees in January.
More than half of all Americans want politicians to have more say over monetary policy – a scary prospect in view of the historical record.
Given the likelihood of a long period of sub-par economic growth, increasing pressure on public finances in the eurozone, and the ongoing debate on the future of the euro, the European Central Bank has become, more than ever before, the last line of defense for Europe’s common currency.
A firm ECB president, unwilling to yield to political pressure, is needed.
During the financial crisis, the ECB has had an outstanding president in the person of Jean-Claude Trichet.
But his non-renewable term will end in October 2011, and European leaders are not waiting until the last moment to appoint his successor.
Indeed, positioning and bargaining among the euro’s member countries has already started.
First and foremost, the next ECB president should excel on monetary matters.
True, the current financial crisis has brought bank supervision to the fore.
But monetary policy, not bank supervision, is the raison d’être of central banks, whereas the banks can be well handled by the newly established European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which will be responsible for macro-prudential supervision in Europe from January 1, 2011.
Furthermore, and contrary to common belief, the ECB president need not be very diplomatic, but should be able to unite all members of the ECB’s Governing Council.
As political pressure on central banks, including the ECB, increases, its president must not hesitate to criticize European politicians and, if necessary, publicly name and shame them.
The ECB’s independence is its most valuable asset – indeed, it is indispensible.
A good central banker must be able to say no to politicians.
This does not mean the ECB president should pick fights whenever possible.
On the contrary, he should be able to build support for the ECB’s independence.
But he should follow the maxim about politicians set down by the ECB’s first president, Wim Duisenberg: “I can hear them, but I do not listen.”
The president should also count on support from a majority of Europeans.
Unfortunately, country of origin is highly important in this respect.
Given the fact that the current ECB vice-president is from southern Europe (Portugal), the next head of the ECB must come from northern Europe.
Only someone from Germany, the Netherlands, or a Scandinavian euro country like Finland can count on support from Germans, which is crucial.
There is certainly someone to be found in the eurozone who possesses all these qualities.
In fact, there is more than one.
Draghi is one.
Others include Klaus Regling, head of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), Axel Weber, President of the Bundesbank, and Jürgen Stark, a current member of the ECB’s Executive Board.
Draghi’s Italian passport and his past service at Goldman Sachs do not help him much.
Regling has a lot of experience, but none in central banking and monetary policy.
Anyone who wants Stark will need a good team of lawyers to figure out how to convert his current, non-renewable appointment on the Executive Board into an appointment as President without violating the ECB’s rules.
Given some of Weber’s statements over 2010, he could be accused of being much too undiplomatic.
Nout Wellink, currently the head of the Dutch central bank, is a wildcard candidate, as is Erkki Liikanen of the Finish central bank.
Both are suitable for the post.
The final decision, of course, rests with European heads of state and government.
But, in our view, Trichet’s successor will most likely answer to the name of Weber, Wellink, or Liikanen.
Who Owns Bolivia?
A few months ago, Evo Morales became Bolivia‘s first democratically elected indigenous head of state.
Indigenous groups constitute 62% of Bolivia’s population, and those with mixed blood another 30%, but for 500 years Bolivians had been ruled by colonial powers and their descendants.
Well into the twentieth century, indigenous groups were effectively deprived of a vote and a voice.
Aymara and Quechua, their languages, were not even recognized for conducting public business.
So Morales’ election was historic, and the excitement in Bolivia is palpable.
But Morales’ nationalization of Bolivia’s oil and gas fields sent shock waves through the international community.
During his campaign, Morales made clear his intention to increase state control over national gas and oil.
But he had made it equally clear that he did not intend to expropriate the property of energy firms – he wanted foreign investors to stay. (Nationalization does not, of course, necessarily mean expropriation without appropriate compensation.)
Perhaps surprising for modern politicians, Morales took his words seriously.
Genuinely concerned about raising the incomes of his desperately poor people, he recognized that Bolivia needs foreigners’ expertise to achieve growth, and that this entails paying fairly for their services.
But are foreign owners getting more than a fair rate of return?
Morales’ actions are widely supported by Bolivians, who see the so-called privatizations (or “capitalizations”) under former President Gonzalo “Goni” Sanchez de Lozada as a rip-off: Bolivia received only 18% of the proceeds!
Bolivians wonder why investments of some $3 billion should entitle foreign investors to 82% of the country’s vast gas reserves, now estimated to be worth $250 billion.
While there has not yet been full disclosure of returns, or an audit of the true value of investments, it appears that investors would, at the old terms, have recouped all their money within just four years.
Bolivians also ask why foreigners reap all the benefits of today’s high prices for oil and gas?
It costs no more to extract oil or gas today than it did when prices were one-third of their current level.
Yet, the foreign oil companies get 82% of the increase – in the case of oil, this would amount to a windfall for them of $32 a barrel or more.
No wonder that Bolivians thought they were being cheated and demanded a new deal.
On May 2, Morales simply reversed the percentages, pending renegotiation of the contracts: the companies operating in the two largest fields would get 18% of the production for themselves.
As part of this new deal, Bolivia should also get a larger share when prices increase. (Bolivia may, of course, not want to bear the risk of a fall in the price, so it may strike a deal to transfer some of the downside risk to foreign companies, giving them in exchange more of the upside potential.)