CAMBRIDGE – Governments around the world are now developing massive fiscal stimulus packages that will cause unprecedented peacetime budget deficits.
The fiscal deficit in the United States this year is likely to exceed 10% of GDP.
A substantial part of the increased deficit will be due to a wide range of new government spending.
Under normal circumstances, I would oppose this rise in the budget deficit and the higher level of government spending.
When an economy is closer to full employment, government borrowing to finance budget deficits can crowd out private investment that would raise productivity and the standard of living.
Budget deficits automatically increase government debt, requiring higher future taxes to pay the interest on that debt.
The resulting higher tax rates distort economic incentives and thus weaken future economic performance.
Of course, some government spending is desirable or necessary.
But an increase in government outlays often means wasteful spending that produces less value than consumers would get from those same dollars.
Now, however, increased government spending and the resulting rise in the fiscal deficit are being justified as necessary to deal with the economic downturn – a sharp change from the reliance on monetary policy that was used to deal with previous recessions.
Countercyclical fiscal policy had been largely discredited because of the delays involved in implementing fiscal changes and households’ weak response to temporary tax cuts.
By contrast, the central bank could lower interest rates rapidly, which worked to raise household and business spending through a variety of channels.
Nevertheless, I support the use of fiscal stimulus in the US, because the current recession is much deeper than and different from previous downturns.
Even with successful countercyclical policy, this recession is likely to last longer and be more damaging than any since the depression of the 1930’s.
The 40% decline in the US stock market and the dramatic fall in house prices have reduced American households’ wealth by more than $10 trillion, which is likely to reduce annual consumer spending by more than $400 billion.
And the collapse of housing starts has lowered construction spending by another $200 billion.
This $600 billion fall in demand is more than 3% of GDP.
If not reversed, it will cause further cuts in production, employment, and earnings, leading to further reductions in consumer spending.
The usual monetary-policy response of lowering interest rates is unable to reverse this sharp drop in demand.
The dysfunctional credit markets caused by the uncertain value of asset-backed securities means that banks and other financial institutions are unable to raise funds and are unwilling to lend.
As a result, the central bank’s lower interest rates do not translate into increased spending on interest-sensitive investment and consumption.
So there is no alternative to fiscal policy if we want to reverse the current downturn.
The resulting increase in the national debt is the price that we and future generations will pay for the mistakes that created the current economic situation. Those mistakes led to an underpricing of risk and the resulting increase in excessive leverage.
There are many reasons for the underpricing of risk and the rise in leverage.
The exceptionally easy monetary policy at the start of the decade contributed to financial investors’ willingness to buy low-quality financial assets in order to get higher yield and to an explosive rise in house prices.
The rating agencies miscalculated the value of asset-backed securities.
The increase in leverage was driven in part by government policies aimed at expanding home ownership among lower-income groups that have proven unable to afford that life style.
Banking supervisors did not deal with many institutions’ low levels of capital and poor asset quality.
A major challenge for the future is to fix the institutional policies that led to these problems.
The new Obama administration and the Congress are still working out the structure of the fiscal stimulus for the US.
Although I support the need for a large fiscal package, I disagree with many of the specific features of the plans now under consideration.
Regardless of what is done to provide a fiscal stimulus, governments around the world must act to fix dysfunctional credit markets.
Otherwise, credit will not flow and growth will not resume.
In the US, reviving the credit markets requires stopping the mortgage defaults driven by negative equity.
The US Treasury Department wasted valuable time in 2008 by not using the funds provided by Congress to deal with those housing-market problems.
There is hope that the Congress and the new administration will now address that issue.
When the recession is over, the US and virtually every other country will have substantially higher debt-to-GDP ratios.
At that point, it will be important to develop policies to reduce gradually the relative level of government spending in order to shift to fiscal surpluses and reduce the debt burden.
The Case for Mitigating Greenhouse Gas Emissions
PALO ALTO &#45;&#45; Last fall, the United Kingdom issued a major government report on global climate change directed by Sir Nicholas Stern, a top-flight economist.
The Stern Review Report on the Economics of Climate Change amounts to a call to action: it argues that huge future costs of global warming can be avoided by incurring relatively modest cost today.
Critics of the Stern Review don’t think serious action to limit CO2 emissions is justified, because there remains substantial uncertainty about the extent of the costs of global climate change, and because these costs will be incurred far in the future.
However, I believe that Stern’s fundamental conclusion is justified: we are much better off reducing CO2 emissions substantially than risking the consequences of failing to act, even if, unlike Stern, one heavily discounts uncertainty and the future.
Two factors differentiate global climate change from other environmental problems.
First, whereas most environmental insults – for example, water pollution, acid rain, or sulfur dioxide emissions – are mitigated promptly or in fairly short order when the source is cleaned up, emissions of CO2 and other trace gases remain in the atmosphere for centuries.
So reducing emissions today is very valuable to humanity in the distant future.
Second, the externality is truly global in scale, because greenhouse gases travel around the world in a few days.
As a result, the nation-state and its subsidiaries, the typical loci for internalizing externalities, are limited in their remedial capacity.
(However, since the United States contributes about 25% of the world’s CO2 emissions, its own policy could make a large difference.)
Thus, global climate change is a public good (bad) par excellence .
Cost-benefit analysis is a principal tool for deciding whether altering it through mitigation policy is warranted.
Two aspects of that calculation are critical.
First, it has to be assumed that individuals prefer to avoid risk.
That is, an uncertain outcome is worth less than the average of the outcomes. Because the possible outcomes of global warming in the absence of mitigation are very uncertain, though surely bad, the uncertain losses should be evaluated as being equivalent to a single loss greater than the expected loss.
The second critical aspect is how one treats future outcomes relative to current ones – an issue that has aroused much attention among philosophers as well as economists.
At what rate should future impacts – particularly losses of future consumption – be discounted to the present?
The consumption discount rate should account for the possibility that, as consumption grows, the marginal unit of consumption may be considered to have less social value.
This is analogous to the idea of diminishing marginal private utility of private consumption, and is relatively uncontroversial, although researchers disagree on its magnitude.
There is greater disagreement about how much to discount the future simply because it is the future, even if future generations are no better off than us.
Whereas the Stern Review follows a tradition among British economists and many philosophers against discounting for pure futurity, most economists take pure time preference as obvious.
However, the case for intervention to keep CO2 levels within bounds (say, aiming to stabilize them at about 550 ppm) is sufficiently strong to be insensitive to this dispute.
Consider some numbers from the Stern Review concerning the future benefits of preventing greenhouse gas concentrations from exceeding 550 ppm, as well as the costs of accomplishing this.
The benefits are the avoided damages, including both market damages and non-market damages that account for health and ecological impacts.
As for the cost of stabilization, estimates in the Stern Review range from 3.4% of GNP to -3.9% (since saving energy reduces energy costs, the latter estimate is not as startling as it appears).
Let’s assume that costs to prevent additional accumulation of CO2 (and equivalents) come to 1% of GNP every year forever, and, in accordance with a fair amount of empirical evidence, that the component of the discount rate attributable to the declining marginal utility of consumption is equal to twice the rate of growth of consumption.
A straightforward calculation shows that mitigation is better than business as usual – that is, the present value of the benefits exceeds the present value of the costs – for any social rate of time preference less than 8.5%.
No estimate of the pure rate of time preference, even by those who believe in relatively strong discounting of the future, has ever approached 8.5%.
These calculations indicate that, even with higher discounting, the Stern Review’s estimates of future benefits and costs imply that mitigation makes economic sense.
These calculations rely on the report’s projected time profiles for benefits and its estimate of annual costs, about which there is much disagreement.
Still, I believe there can be little serious argument about the importance of a policy aimed at avoiding major further increases in CO2 emissions.
The Case for Opening Europe’s Borders
It is time for Europe’s politicians to admit to voters that governments cannot stop people moving across borders.
Despite efforts to build a Fortress Europe, over a million foreigners bypass its defences every year; some enter covertly, but most just overstay their visas and work illicitly.
Even if Europe became a police state, migrants could get through: documents can be forged or stolen, visas overstayed, people smuggled, officials bribed.
While draconian policies can curb migration somewhat, they mostly drive it underground.
These problems are due not to immigrants, but to our immigration controls, which are not only costly and cruel, but also ineffective and counterproductive.
Many services cannot readily be mechanized or imported – old people cannot be cared for by a robot or from abroad – while people increasingly pay others to perform tasks that they once did themselves, freeing up their own time for more productive work or leisure.
Thus, as advanced economies create high-skilled jobs, they inevitably create low-skilled ones, too.
In fact, low-skilled jobs still account for more than a quarter of Western Europe’s workforce.
But, whereas only half of Europeans now aged 55-64 finished secondary education, four in five 25-34-year-olds have done so, and they naturally aspire to better things.
Even Europeans with few or no qualifications increasingly shun dirty, difficult, and dangerous jobs.
The only way to reconcile our aspirations to opportunity for all with the reality of drudgery for some is through immigration.
Consider old-age care, the fastest-growing employment sector in Europe.
Since young Europeans would rather work in a shop than a retirement home, persuading them otherwise would require a huge wage hike.
Given fiscal constraints, that implies either less care for pensioners, budget cuts elsewhere, or tax hikes.
Immigrants, however, face a different set of alternatives; with wages in Brussels far higher than in Manila, for example, Filipino immigrants are generally happy to do such work.
This is not exploitation; everyone – migrants, taxpayers, and Europeans young and old – is better off.
Nor does it undercut wages, since most Europeans do not want these jobs.
And it does not undermine social standards, because legal migrants have recourse to trade unions and the law.
Spain has admitted more immigrants in recent years than any other European country, yet its unemployment rate continues to fall; Britain, Ireland, and Sweden still have low unemployment after opening their labor markets to the Poles and other new EU members in 2004.
This is also because immigrants often complement native workers’ efforts.
A foreign nanny may allow a British doctor to return to work, where hard-working foreign nurses and cleaners enhance her productivity.
While innovation sometimes comes from brilliant individuals – 21 of Britain’s Nobel prizewinners were refugees – it generally comes from the synergy of talented people in close proximity.
Likewise, consider Silicon Valley: Intel, Yahoo!, Google, and eBay were all co-founded by immigrants.
Millions of Europeans want EU governments to lower their barriers to developing countries’ exports, cancel Third World debt, and increase foreign aid.
And returning migrants bring back new skills, new ideas, and the money to start new businesses.
Africa’s first Internet cafés were started by migrants returning from Europe. 
Politicians should have the courage to stop fighting an unwinnable war.
If open borders are not politically feasible for now, our leaders should at least create a legal route for people from developing countries to enter and work.
Of course, problems may arise; learning to live together can be tough.
But Europe would thrive on the cosmopolitan dynamism that results from treating immigration as an opportunity rather than as a threat.
The Case for Palestine
RAMALLAH – Nowhere are the grievances that perpetuate violence and war more evident than they are in Palestine today.
But the world’s politicians continue to dance around the problem, rather than confront it.
The recent deadly violence in Gaza is only the latest proof that people living under occupation and siege need a political horizon, and not simply a cease-fire: the case for an independent state of Palestine has never been so compelling as it is today.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s decision to proceed with plans to seek a vote this week on recognition of Palestine at the United Nations General Assembly has come despite pressure, promises, and threats from Israel and some of its Western allies.
Rather than pursuing the UN route, the Palestinians, according to these interlocutors, should continue to depend on asymmetrical negotiations that have served as little more than a photo opportunity.
The UN vote (which coincides with the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People) would not grant Palestine full membership. Rather, it would upgrade Palestine’s status to a level comparable to that of the Vatican, allowing its political leaders to bring war-crimes charges against Israelis to the International Criminal Court in The Hague.
Zionists in Palestine rejoiced in 1947, following the UN General Assembly vote for partition into a Jewish and an Arab state.
It is ironic that, as rockets from Gaza reach the outskirts of Tel Aviv, those Israelis who celebrated the partition, and their descendants, do not see the importance of fulfilling the other half of the partition plan.
It is true that Palestinians, who comprised the vast majority of the population and owned an overwhelming share of the land, were unhappy with the partition plan, which awarded them 46% of mandatory Palestine.
Today, Palestinians are seeking statehood on a mere 22% of the territory that had been part of mandatory Palestine until Israel was unilaterally established on areas much larger than those awarded by UN General Assembly Resolution 181 in 1947.
Palestine’s quest for statehood within the borders of June 4, 1967, falls squarely within international law.
The UN Security Council resolved in November of that year that “acquisition of territory by war” is unacceptable.
Subsequent Security Council resolutions and international treaties have upheld this principle.
In fact, a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders is exactly what US President Barack Obama has called for.
Similarly, the European Union has long advocated a two-state solution, with Palestine being established on areas occupied by Israel in 1967.
As Abbas has said, the upcoming General Assembly vote is not aimed at delegitimizing Israel.
It follows the Palestinian National Council’s declaration in 1988 of a Palestinian state alongside the state of Israel.
It also follows the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the Arab League at its Beirut Summit in 2002 (and to which Israel has yet to respond).
The Arab League initiative, which was also approved by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, embraces a two-state solution based on the 1967 borders, but goes one step further, calling for a “just” and “agreed upon” solution to the thorny Palestinian refugee issue.
By accepting the words “agreed upon,” Palestinians, Arabs, and other Muslim-majority countries have conceded that Israel will not recognize Palestinian refugees’ inalienable right to return to their homes.
This should allay Israeli fears that the right of return would end Israel’s existence as a Jewish state.
Abbas will go to New York holding an even more important card.
Israel’s recent brutal violence in Gaza has united Palestinians who were split along partisan lines.
Leaders of Abbas’s Fatah faction, which controls the West Bank-based Palestinian Authority, and of Gaza-based Hamas have been meeting regularly to implement the Egyptian-Qatari reconciliation plan.
Political prisoners from both sides have been released, and a senior Fatah delegation just visited Gaza.
Hamas officials, including Mahmoud Ramahi, the leader of a bloc in the Palestinian National Council, have publicly supported the UN recognition bid.
According to Mousa Abu Marzook, Hamas’s deputy leader, his movement is not opposed to Abbas’s diplomatic initiative.
An independent and free Palestine alongside a safe and secure Israel is a plan upon which the entire world agrees.
Palestinians have shown that they are willing to accept minor and agreed-upon land swaps, and will be open to creative ideas for solving the problem of Jerusalem, possibly following the parameters set out by US President Bill Clinton at the end of his second term.
What is needed now more than ever is political will to give the peace process a serious boost.
Obama, now free of electoral shackles, and the international community should give Palestinians’ peaceful effort a chance at life.
The case for Palestine has never been so clear.
A vote for recognition of Palestinian statehood is a vote for peace.
The Case for Slowing Population Growth
Global debates about population policy are confusing.
One side argues that rising human populations threaten our environment and prosperity.
Land, water, energy, and biodiversity all seem to be under greater stress than ever, and population growth appears to be a major source of that stress.
The other side of the debate, mainly in rich countries, argues that households are now having so few children that there won't be enough to care for aging parents.
Those who fret about population growth have the better argument.
Issues confronting Europe, Japan, and to a lesser extent the United States and some middle-income countries concerning aging populations are manageable.
Moreover, the benefits of slower population growth outweigh the adjustment costs.
By contrast, if global populations continue to rise rapidly, the stresses on the world's resources will worsen.
Governments should therefore refrain from deliberate policies to raise birthrates, even in places where birth rates are low.
Part of the confusion of the public debate reflects different population trends in different parts of the world.
The fastest population growth is taking place in the poorest regions.
Poor people, especially poor people living on farms, tend to have the most children (often six or more per woman), and therefore the highest rates of population growth.
Poor farm families rely on their children for farm chores and for security when parents reach old age.
Poor families lack access to contraception and family planning.
Finally, poor families have many children as a kind of insurance policy against high child mortality rates.
As a result of high fertility rates in Africa, the UN Population Division predicts a doubling of Africa's population from around 900 million today to around 1.8 billion in 2050.
Rapidly growing populations are also young populations, because of the high number of children per household.
In Africa, the median age is now a mere 19 years and is projected to rise to around 28 years in 2050.
In Europe, the trends run in the other direction.
The UN projects a decline in population to around 630 million in 2050, from around 725 million people today.
With few children and longer life expectancy, the median age of the population rises sharply in this forecast, from 39 years in 2005 to around 48 years in 2050.
For the world as a whole, population is expected to continue to grow by another 2.5 billion people from 2005 to 2050.
All of that growth will be in the developing world: 1.3 billion more people in Asia, 900 million more in Africa, the rest in Latin America and other regions.
Adding another 2.5 billion people to the planet will put enormous strains not only on societies with rising populations, but on the entire planet.
Total energy use is soaring, reflecting the combined effect of rising per capita incomes - and thus rising per capita energy use - and population growth.
Higher energy use is already changing the world's climate in dangerous ways.
Furthermore, the strains of increased global populations, combined with income growth, are leading to rapid deforestation, depletion of fisheries, land degradation, and the loss of habitat and extinction of a vast number of animal and plant species.
Population growth in developing regions - especially Africa, India, and other parts of Asia - needs to slow.
Public policies can play an important role by extending access to family planning services to the poor, expanding social security systems, reducing child mortality through public health investments, and improving education and job opportunities for women.
A part of the European public, looking at Europe's looming population decline, wants to head in the other direction, promoting a return to larger families.
That would be a big mistake.
Advocates of faster European population growth worry that there won't be enough young workers to pay for public pensions.
But this concern can be met through increased saving by today's young and middle-aged as they prepare for retirement, and by working past the age of 65.
These workers will reap large benefits from living in societies with stable or gradually declining populations.
Most obviously, they will spend much less in direct household expenditures to raise children. They will also save on investments in new roads, power plants, schools, and other public services.
They will enjoy less congested cities and fewer environmental pressures on the countryside.
European economies will face lower costs in limiting emissions of greenhouse gases from energy use, leading to more effective control of climate change.
The quality of life, in short, will tend to improve as Europe's population declines in coming decades.
There is nothing radical in calling for slower population growth.
For tens of thousands of years, the human population tended to rise and fall without a substantial long-term trend.
Only in the past two centuries, with the rise of modern economic life, did the world's population soar, from around one billion people in 1820 to 6.3 billion today and around 9 billion by 2050.
This explosive growth was made possible by huge advances in science and technology.
But this unprecedented growth has also put tremendous pressures on the planet.
We should intensify our efforts to slow population growth through voluntary means, and we should recognize that leveling off of the Earth's population now would add to human happiness and strengthen environmental sustainability later.
Fatal Thaws
MOSCOW – During the Cold War, the Soviet Union and, in a milder way, the United States imposed external limits on the activities of states and societies, causing longstanding conflicts among smaller countries to be “frozen.”
Following the Soviet Union’s collapse in the 1990’s, those conflicts began to “unfreeze.”
With interethnic tensions already on the rise, Yugoslavia was the first country to dissolve into conflict.
Soon after, war broke out between Armenia and Azerbaijan, followed by fighting in Transdniestria and Chechnya.
While some conflicts were addressed – the West finally intervened militarily in the former Yugoslavia; and Russia fought in Chechnya for almost a decade, and imposed peace in Transdniestria – others, such as that between Armenia and Azerbaijan, were simply frozen again.
Fortunately, not all potential conflicts erupted.
The Soviet Union did not dissolve into violence, as most other empires have – an outcome for which no explanation short of divine intervention or sheer luck seems to suffice.
Despite rising nationalist sentiments and mutual suspicions, Central and Eastern European countries also managed to avoid conflict, thanks to their rapid acceptance into NATO and the European Union.
At that point, the world breathed a collective sigh of relief.
But, in the early 2000’s, globalization triggered the “second unfreezing” by facilitating rapid economic growth in Asian countries that, for two centuries, had been constrained by Western dominance, Cold War rules and institutions, and rampant poverty.
With thriving economies came increased strategic clout, leading to the rise of regional geopolitics shaped by national interests and fears, rather than by external forces.
The West’s failures in Iraq and Afghanistan, followed by the global economic crisis (which exposed severe structural weaknesses in the US and the EU that their democratic governments have been unable to resolve), accelerated this process.
As a result, Europe has practically abandoned its global geopolitical role, with virtually no evidence of its presence, aside from trade, remaining in East Asia.
Although the US has retained considerable influence, the combination of structural economic problems, a divided elite, and two de facto military defeats has impeded its ability to exercise that power.
Old alliances – such as the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, the Central Eastern Treaty Organization, and the Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty – have died or are dying.
And forming new alliances has proved difficult, with India rejecting what the US, with uncharacteristic humility, has proposed.
Meanwhile, Asia is being roiled by intensifying territorial disputes in the South and East China Seas, as countries revive old claims against each other.
East and South Asia are embroiled in an arms race, mainly at sea.
Everyone is afraid of China, which remains relatively peaceable, but no longer bothers to conceal its growing military capacity.
With no pan-Asian security architecture expected to emerge in the near future, the West’s departure from the region is generating a security vacuum.
Furthermore, in the Greater Middle East, the fall of one secular dictatorship after another, coupled with the loosening of external control, has incited new – and rekindled old – suspicions, religious disagreements, and mistrust of outsiders in general and the West in particular.
As a result, the region has entered a period of conflict, social degradation, rising nationalism, and growing religious fanaticism.
Most threatening, however, is the possibility that the EU could collapse, triggering a third unfreezing.
The EU, established to break the destructive cycle of European nationalism that had facilitated the rise of two totalitarian systems and caused two world wars, amounted to the creation of a prototype of a humane world order.
After being its own – and thus the world’s – worst enemy for centuries, Europe became a beacon of peace.
But, resting on the laurels of the EU’s founders, successive European leaders largely failed to perceive the competitive challenges posed by globalization.
They seemed to forget that the European project’s underlying motivation was political, not economic, which led them to rush into enlargement and set unrealistic goals.
Now, they must pay for their mistakes by overhauling the entire institutional framework of the EU and the eurozone.
At the same time, Europeans must prepare for an even more profound transformation.
In order to regain economic competitiveness, European countries will have to abandon many of their social-welfare policies and reform their political institutions.
Most Europeans prefer to ignore the looming challenge of radical policy reform, owing to the decline in living standards that it implies.
Global leaders must encourage Europe to tackle its problems decisively by offering advice, financial support, and constructive criticism.
Russia must continue to press for an Alliance of Europe – a new framework for economic and diplomatic relations among the EU, Russia, and the rest of Greater Europe – which could offer a way out of Europe’s systemic crisis.
The first unfreezing had serious consequences.
Now, global leaders must work to minimize the fallout of the second, and use all available means to prevent a third.
The Challenges Of EU Enlargement
For more than 50 years, Europeans have shared aspirations for closer economic cooperation and political ties.
The accession of ten new countries to the European Union earlier this year opened the latest and perhaps most dramatic chapter in this process.
Expansion of the world's second-largest market offers historic opportunities for economic renewal.
But with enlargement come challenges.
At a time of slow growth, lingering high unemployment, and difficult fiscal situations in some countries, it is understandable that longer-standing members of the EU sometimes focus more on the potentially disruptive difficulties than the opportunities.
Those problems are real, but their solutions lie in the new vistas of the enlarged EU: more trade in goods and services, integration of markets and better allocation of capital, and the potentially disciplining effect of economic unification on economic policies.
The advantages for trade and investment - more than 450 million people in 25 countries - are self-evident.
The addition of the faster-growing, middle-income economies of Central and Eastern Europe offers a larger, more diverse internal market with rising purchasing power and a well-educated workforce.
Adoption of the Euro should foster even greater trade integration by eliminating exchange-rate risk, lowering transaction costs, and promoting greater price transparency and competition.
The experience of current euro-area members thus far suggests trade gains of roughly 10% just from the single currency.
Regrettably, one channel of greater integration has been muted: the free movement of labor.
Most established member states - fearing potential dislocations - have chosen to protect, albeit temporarily, their labor markets.
Several new members have adopted reciprocal restrictions.
It is essential that all members keep these artificial barriers to a minimum.
Europe also has much to gain from ongoing financial integration with the eventual goal of a truly pan-European financial market.
Greater market access, market reform, and efforts at regulatory harmonization - including those under the EU's Financial Services Action Plan - should help advance this trend.
Foreign direct investment is the most direct channel for integration.
By some accounts, FDI between the old and new members might be as much as 70% lower than justified by economic fundamentals.
Similarly, with bank credit to the private sector in the new members well below averages in the West, the scope for increasing lending activity is also substantial.
Financial integration could catapult financial development for new member countries, including through the advent of new financial instruments and services.
Enlargement of the euro area promises to spur further financial integration.
Enhanced competition and economies of scale in larger, more closely integrated financial markets should narrow lending margins, lower intermediation costs, and allocate funds more efficiently.
Greater diversification of portfolios and deeper cross-border linkages should help risk sharing, making the region more resilient to shocks.
Ultimately, progress in both trade and financial integration rests on improved economic policies.
New member states should continue pursuing macroeconomic stability and financial discipline, particularly with respect to public finances.
Along with strong prudential supervision, this should help manage the vulnerabilities of capital-account volatility and credit booms, and lay the groundwork for the eventual adoption of the euro.
Indeed, before joining the monetary union, the new member countries will need to make more progress toward the convergence criteria for interest rates, inflation, and public finances.
Fiscal deficits in several new member countries will need to be reduced significantly.
Trimming excessive social transfers and entitlements, together with proper use of EU structural funds, would help achieve this objective while also satisfying the need for public investment and infrastructure upgrades.
Strong financial-market supervision will also be needed to contain risks stemming from credit booms, asset bubbles, and financial-market volatility.
On the structural front, measures to enhance wage and price flexibility would improve resiliency to asymmetric shocks and would help the new countries' cyclical fluctuations become more attuned to the rest of the EU.
For longstanding members, enlargement presents an opportunity to prepare public finances for coming demographic challenges.
Restoring the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact should be a top priority, but the larger challenge requires greater stability for long-term public financing.
A growth-friendly approach to the burdens of aging populations is required, including steps to raise the retirement age and encourage life-long training.
Enlargement should also give fresh impetus to policies to tackle deep-seated structural impediments and reverse sagging income prospects.
The Lisbon Strategy adopted in March 2000 set an ambitious course for the EU, calling for greater focus on research and development, completion of the internal market, bold education and employment objectives, and promotion of active aging, all supported by appropriate macroeconomic policies.
But as we approach the midpoint of this ten-year strategy, Europe stands well short of its many goals.
As the recent Kok report reviewing the Strategy makes clear, "The disappointing delivery is due to an overloaded agenda, poor coordination, and conflicting priorities."
I share this assessment.
The Lisbon Strategy needs to be refocused.
The issue is not the productivity of European workers when they are on the job, but rather the need to increase labor-force participation through policies that raise employment rates and reverse the decline in weekly work hours.
More flexible labor markets and reform of entitlement programs would further allow Europe to confront the demands of greater competition without recourse to insular protections, such as those placed on labor migration.
Evolving market access, competition, and integration may present Europe with challenges and some costs.
But enlargement also creates new opportunities.
Improved policies will amplify these opportunities, ensuring that economic gains will benefit hundreds of millions of people throughout Europe.
China’s Coming Growth Tests
BEIJING – The most recent official data show convincingly that the Chinese economy has bottomed out, and it is now widely expected that annual GDP growth should reach roughly 7.8% in 2012.
This result should come as no surprise.
To rein in rising house prices and pre-empt the inflationary impact of the strongly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies implemented during the global financial crisis, China’s monetary authorities began to tighten financial conditions in January 2010.
Monetary tightening, administrative measures introduced by various municipal governments to stem the run-up in the housing market, and the waning effect of the government’s ¥4 trillion ($642.3 billion) stimulus package resulted in a gradual economic slowdown.
While inflation should have eased in early 2011, rising food prices and commodity prices thwarted expectations.
Annual growth in the consumer price index peaked at 6.5% in July 2011.
Vigorous liquidity tightening eventually mitigated inflationary pressure, but it also impeded economic growth, which had slowed steadily after peaking at 12.8% in the first quarter of 2010.
By the last quarter of 2011, annual growth had slowed to 8.9%, triggering a surge of bearish sentiment about the Chinese economy among foreign pundits.
Most Chinese economists, by contrast, were less pessimistic, and expected that growth would stabilize at around 8% in 2012.
Yet, until recently, economic performance has been disappointing, owing to three factors.
The impact of the slowdown in real-estate investment on the economy was stronger than expected, as was that of Europe’s debt crisis.
And, though the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) lowered the reserve ratio in November 2011, and some fiscal stimulus was provided, the government largely refrained from more expansionary economic policies to boost growth.
In the last quarter of 2012, the long-expected rebound in growth finally materialized.
I, for one, never doubted that it would.
After all, China’s potential growth rate remains about 8%.
Moreover, China’s fiscal position remains strong: even after accounting for all sorts of contingent liabilities – such as local-government loans, large project loans, and commercial banks’ non-performing loans in the event of a housing-market crash, China’s public debt/GDP ratio is still below 60%.
Finally, the PBOC still has ample room to lower the reserve ratio and benchmark interest rate, which still stand at 20% and 6% (for one year loans), respectively, without much fear of stoking inflation.
The true challenges facing China lie in the medium and long term.
Indeed, the current economic rebound is not an achievement worthy of much celebration, especially if it comes at the expense of further reform and structural adjustment.
First, as China ages rapidly, the disappearance of its demographic dividend will lower potential growth significantly.
Moreover, other things being equal, the extremely rapid rise in fixed-asset investment has eroded China’s investment efficiency and capital efficiency, reducing potential output growth further.
And, as China’s economy approaches full technological modernization, its latecomer’s advantage will be exhausted, and its inability to innovate and create may become an important bottleneck to further growth.
Although active participation in global production networks has brought significant benefits, it may have locked China into the lower end of the value chain, reducing its scope for future progress.
Other constraints loom as well.
Rapid economic expansion implies that supplies of energy and raw materials will increasingly limit potential growth.
At the same time, the public’s demand for environmental protection and other basic rights will inevitably increase production costs.
Similarly, the external environment may become less favorable, as the long process of global deleveraging impedes economic recovery in China’s key foreign markets.
Finally, despite China’s status as one of the world’s largest net creditors, it has been running a deficit on its investment balance for years.
If this pattern persists, China may well face a balance-of-payments constraint on growth in the future.
Compared to these economic vulnerabilities, however, the fate of political reform in China will be much more important to the country’s long-term prosperity.
Everything, it is hoped, will go well.
But there is no harm in envisaging a crisis scenario, so that China can prevent it from materializing.
Such a scenario can be summarized as follows.
Thanks to more than 30 years of breakneck economic growth with little regard for social justice and equality, China has become a stratified society.
It is easy to imagine each social group demanding a larger share of national income, which by definition is inflationary.
Indeed, with an increasingly lenient political regime, populism may become irresistible, while the size of the government bureaucracy may continue to bloat.
Given a lower growth rate, China’s fiscal position will deteriorate – gradually at first, and then rapidly – with the public debt/GDP ratio eventually rising to an unsustainable level.
Making matters worse, when China needs to use its savings – accumulated over two generations and packed into US Treasury bills – to alleviate fiscal constraints, it will find that the value of its foreign-exchange reserves has already evaporated.
To judge China’s economic dynamism, the key indicator is its fiscal position.
When, and only when, China’s fiscal position is worsening rapidly will its economy suffer a hard landing.
The next five years hold the key for China’s future; its window of opportunity to complete a difficult process of reform and adjustment may not be longer than that.
The Chancellor Who Played with Fire
BERLIN – German Chancellor Angela Merkel should be happy nowadays: her party’s approval ratings aren’t bad, and her own are very good.
She no longer has serious rivals within the center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU), while the left opposition is fragmented into four parties.
Her response to the European crisis has prevailed – or at least that is the impression that she conveys, and that most Germans believe.
So everything is fine and dandy, right?
Not so fast.
Two issues could complicate Merkel’s re-election bid in the autumn of 2013.
Domestically, her coalition partner, the liberal Free Democrats (FDP), is disintegrating.
Even if the FDP survives the next election (which is by no means certain), the current coalition is unlikely to retain its parliamentary majority, leaving Merkel increasingly dependent on the Social Democrats (SPD).
While this need not matter to her too much as long as she retains the chancellorship, in Sigmar Gabriel, the SPD’s leader, she faces – for the first time – an opponent whom she would underestimate at her peril.
But the real danger to Merkel is external: the European crisis.
If she is unlucky, the crisis will come to a head at the start of the German election year, and all previous calculations could be moot, because, despite Germans’ frustration with Europe, the electorate would punish severely those who allowed Europe to fail.
The European Union’s economy is sliding into a severe and, in all likelihood, long-lasting recession, largely self-inflicted.
While Germany is still trying to banish the specter of hyperinflation with strict eurozone austerity measures, the EU crisis countries are facing a real threat of deflation, with potentially disastrous consequences.
It is only a question of time – no longer very much time – before economic destabilization gives rise to political instability.
Hungary, where democratic backsliding appears to be taking hold, provides a foretaste of a Europe in which the eurozone crisis and deflation persist.
The mood in the Mediterranean EU members, as well as in Ireland, is heating up, owing not only to the tightening squeeze of austerity, but also – and perhaps more importantly – to the absence of policies that offer people hope for a better future.
The explosive nature of current trends, which point to eventual re-nationalization of sovereignty from the bottom up, is greatly underestimated in Berlin.
The crisis has now reached Italy and is threatening to spread to France.
With Mario Monti’s premiership, Italy has mobilized its best people, and neither Italy nor Europe will get a better government for the foreseeable future.
If Monti’s administration is toppled – either in parliament or in the streets – the EU’s fourth-largest economy could come crashing down.
Monti is urgently calling for help.
Where is it?
Developments in France (the second-largest eurozone economy) should also not be underestimated in this presidential election year.
If a majority of the French come to believe that a course of action is being imposed on them from outside – and by Germany, no less! – they will respond with traditional Gallic stubbornness.
What is at stake is less the election’s outcome than the margin between President Nicolas Sarkozy and the far-right National Front leader, Marine Le Pen – and whether she overtakes him to qualify for the second-round run-off against the Socialist candidate.
While she would be unlikely to win the presidency, she could reshape and realign the French right.
For that reason, a Sarkozy debacle would drastically reduce his Socialist successor’s room for maneuver on European policy, fundamentally altering France’s position in Europe.
But, while the French election’s outcome will hinge to a crucial extent on European crisis politics, Germany’s government acts as if this were none of its concern.
The CDU-FDP coalition prefers to sugarcoat the situation by convincing themselves of an Anglo-Saxon conspiracy, abetted by those in the European crisis countries unwilling to perform and reform and whose only purpose is to make the Germans pay.
So far, Merkel’s coalition is like someone driving against traffic, dead certain that everyone else is going the wrong way.
Europe’s disintegration has already advanced much further than it might appear.
Distrust and national egoism are spreading rapidly, devouring European solidarity and common purpose.
Institutionally, Europe has been on the right track since the last summit, but it threatens to disintegrate from the bottom up.
To save the euro – which is essential, because the European project’s fate depends on the success of monetary union – Europe needs action now: in addition to indispensable austerity measures and structural reforms, there is no way to succeed without a viable economic program that will assure growth.
That won’t come cheap.
If Merkel’s government believes that paying lip service to growth is enough, it is playing with fire: a euro collapse in which not only Germans would be badly burned.
The Changing Climate On Climate Change
The message, it seems, has finally gotten through: global warming represents a serious threat to our planet.
At the recent World Economic Forum in Davos, world leaders saw climate change, for the first time, topping the list of global concerns.
Europe and Japan have shown their commitment to reduce global warming by imposing costs on themselves and their producers, even if it places them at a competitive disadvantage.
The biggest obstacle until now has been the United States.
The Clinton administration had called for bold action as far back as 1993, proposing what was in effect a tax on carbon emissions; but an alliance of polluters, led by the coal, oil, and auto industries beat back this initiative.
To the scientific community, the evidence on climate change has, of course, been overwhelming for more than a decade and a half.
I participated in the second assessment of the scientific evidence conducted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which perhaps made one critical mistake: it underestimated the pace at which global warming was occurring.
The Fourth Assessment, which was just issued, confirms the mounting evidence and the increasing conviction that global warming is the result of the increase in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
The increased pace of warming reflects the impact of complex non-linear factors and a variety of “tipping points” that can result in acceleration of the process.
For instance, as the Arctic ice cap melts, less sunlight is reflected.
Seemingly dramatic changes in weather patterns – including the melting of glaciers in Greenland and the thawing of the Siberian permafrost – have at last convinced most business leaders that the time for action is now.
Recently, even President Bush seems to have woken up.
But a closer look at what he is doing, and not doing, shows clearly that he has mostly heard the call of his campaign contributors from the oil and coal industries, and that he has once again put their interests over the global interest in reducing emissions.
If he were truly concerned about global warming, how could he have endorsed the construction of coal-fired electricity plants, even if those plants use more efficient technologies than have been employed in the past?
What is required, first and foremost, are market-based incentives to induce Americans to use less energy and to produce more energy in ways that emit less carbon.
But Bush has neither eliminated massive subsidies to the oil industry (though, fortunately, the Democratic Congress may take action) nor provided adequate incentives for conservation.
Even his call for energy independence should be seen for what it is – a new rationale for old corporate subsidies.
A policy that entails draining America’s limited oil supplies – I call it “drain America first” – will leave the US even more dependent on foreign oil.
The US imposes a tariff of more than 50 cents per gallon on sugar-based ethanol from Brazil, but subsidizes inefficient corn-based American ethanol heavily – indeed , it requires more than a gallon of gasoline to fertilize, harvest, transport, process, and distill corn to yield one gallon of ethanol.
As the world’s largest polluter, accounting for roughly a quarter of global carbon emissions, America’s reluctance to do more is perhaps understandable, if not forgivable.
But claims by Bush that America cannot afford to do anything about global warming ring hollow: other advanced industrial countries with comparable standards of living emit only a fraction of what the US emits per dollar of GDP.
As a result, American firms with access to cheap energy are given a big competitive advantage over firms in Europe and elsewhere.
Some in Europe worry that stringent action on global warming may be counterproductive: energy-intensive industries may simply move to the US or other countries that pay little attention to emissions.
And there is more than a grain of truth to these concerns.
A striking fact about climate change is that there is little overlap between the countries that are most vulnerable to its effects – mainly poor countries in the South that can ill afford to deal with the consequences – and the countries, like the US, that are the largest polluters.
What is at stake is in part a moral issue, a matter of global social justice.
The Kyoto Protocol represented the international community’s attempt to begin to deal with global warming in a fair and efficient way.
But it left out a majority of the sources of emissions, and unless something is done to include the US and the developing countries in a meaningful way, it will be little more than a symbolic gesture.
There needs to be a new “coalition of the willing,” this time perhaps led by Europe – and this time directed at a real danger.
This “coalition of the willing” could agree to certain basic standards: to forego building coal-fired plants, increase automobiles’ fuel efficiency, and provide targeted assistance to developing countries to enhance their energy efficiency and reduce emissions.
Coalition members could also agree to provide stronger incentives to their own producers, through either more stringent caps on emissions or higher taxes on pollution.
They could then agree to impose taxes on products from other countries – including the US – that are produced in ways that unnecessarily add substantially to global warming.
What is at stake is not protecting domestic producers, but protecting our planet.
The changing climate on climate change provides political leaders in Europe and other potential members of this “coalition of the willing” an unprecedented opportunity to move beyond mere rhetoric.
The time to act is now.
The Changing Face of Energy Security
For three decades, the rich world has talked about curbing its addiction to imported oil.
But, despite the anxious rhetoric, the oil-supply problem has become worse and energy security more complex.
Notwithstanding politicians’ repeated calls for energy independence, over the past 30 years the United States, for example, has doubled its dependence on imported oil, which now accounts for nearly two-thirds of its oil needs.
Threats to cut oil supplies in order to change a country’s foreign policy have a long history, particularly where the Middle East is concerned.
Arab members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries called for an embargo at the time of the 1967 war, but it had little effect because the US was then largely self sufficient.
But by the 1973 Yom Kippur war, the Arab oil embargo had a greater effect, owing to America’s growing demand for imported oil.
The embargo drove up prices and unleashed a period of inflation and stagnation worldwide.
It also demonstrated that oil is a fungible commodity.
Even though the embargo was aimed at the US and the Netherlands, market forces shifted oil among consumers, and in the long term all consuming countries suffered shortages of supply and the same price shock.
Oil embargos turned out to be a blunt instrument that hurt many besides the targeted countries.
In the aftermath of the oil price shocks, energy security policy has had four components.
By liberalizing energy prices, governments allowed markets to encourage conservation and new supply.
In addition, governments introduced modest subsidies and regulations to encourage conservation and renewable energy sources.
Some governments began to store oil in strategic petroleum reserves that could be used to for short periods in a crisis.
Rich countries also helped to create the Paris-based International Energy Agency, which coordinates policies (including strategic reserves) among consumer countries.
Such policies still make sense.
They would probably not be adequate, however, to deal with a prolonged disruption of supplies.
The world is not running out of oil, but two-thirds of oil reserves are located in the politically unstable Persian Gulf region.
The US imports only a small portion of its oil from the Persian Gulf.
Its largest supplier is its stable neighbor, Canada.
But the lesson of 1973 is that a disruption of Gulf oil supplies would raise prices and damage both rich and poor economies, regardless of how secure their own sources of supply might be.
Moreover, new dimensions of the problem of energy security have emerged in the last few years.
One is the great increase in energy demand from the rapidly growing economies of Asia, particularly China.
China appears to believe that it can secure its energy imports by locking up oil contracts with pariah states like Sudan.
However, while this short-sighted mercantilist approach creates foreign policy problems over issues like Darfur, it will not really protect China in a time of supply disruption.
It would be far better to bring China (and India) into the IEA, and encourage normal Chinese participation in world markets.
Another new dimension of the energy security problem is the manner in which high prices and increased reserves have transferred power to energy producing countries.
State-owned companies now control far more oil and gas reserves than do the traditional private energy companies once known as the seven sisters.
Many of these state-owned companies in countries like Russia and Venezuela are not responding merely to market forces, but are using their newfound pricing power for political purposes.
Finally, the energy security problem has been complicated by the problem of global climate change.
As the science has become increasingly clear, climate change is now a major political issue at the global and national levels.
Rising sea levels, drought in Africa, and increasingly turbulent storms all pose a new type of threat that must be taken seriously.
So measures to deal with energy security must address the demand side even more than the supply side.
Measures that some legislators favor, such as transforming coal into liquids, increase secure supplies, but they imply more carbon dioxide emissions than imported oil does.
They should be avoided until technologies for clean coal or carbon capture are perfected.
On the other hand, reducing demand through improved energy efficiency and conservation measures are beneficial for both the security of supplies and the global climate.
But it is not enough for the US and European Union countries to improve their energy efficiency unless other countries do so as well.
China and India can pursue security of supply by using their large coal resources, but unless they also have access to improved coal technology, the burdens they impose on the atmosphere will be large.
This year, China will surpass the US in emissions of greenhouse gases.
It builds nearly two new coal-fired electricity plants each week.
In such a world, energy security can no longer be summed up as greater energy independence.
Instead, we must find better ways to cope with energy interdependence.
The Changing Map of Middle East Power
BERLIN – The eruption of the Arab revolts in late 2010 and early 2011 put power relations among Middle Eastern countries in a state of flux, and both winners and losers have emerged.
But, given that the strengths and weaknesses of most of the actors are highly contingent, the regional balance of power remains highly fluid.
As that balance currently stands, Egypt continues to be one of the region’s most influential actors, with the success or failure of its political and economic transition affecting how other Arab countries develop.
But Egypt is weighed down by domestic concerns, including a plummeting economy and a security situation in which the military is used for police tasks.
The expansion of Egypt’s soft power will depend on the ability of its first democratically elected government, led by President Mohamed Morsi, to take difficult decisions and forge domestic consensus.
Success in establishing effective governance would establish a model that many of Egypt’s neighbors would seek to emulate, at least partly.
In this respect, Turkey is a good example.
Turkey’s power rests primarily on its vibrant economy.
Its impressive military strength is of limited use as an instrument of power, and its political clout has been overestimated, particularly in Syria.
A rapprochement with Israel and, more important, a lasting peace with its Kurdish population, would boost Turkey’s regional influence.
Israel also remains an overall winner, despite the changing strategic environment and its virtual lack of soft power in the region.
The impending fall of Israel’s most reliable enemy, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, concerns Israel almost as much as the loss of its ally, Egypt’s former President Hosni Mubarak.
With Israel’s economy and deterrent capability stronger than ever, however, no regional player poses a genuine security threat to Israel in the short term.
Meanwhile, Qatar’s diligent efforts to expand its influence over the last two decades have paid off, with the country developing considerable power of attraction.
Since 2011, Qatar has scaled up its involvement in its neighbors’ affairs, backing the Libyan revolution, the Egyptian government, and the Syrian opposition.
But the Qataris may be overplaying their hand.
Qatar has money, but no other hard power, and it has been criticized for its interference in Syria and its support for the Muslim Brotherhood.
If Qatar fails to use its resources wisely, it may lose the legitimacy that it needs to underpin its patronage.
Meanwhile, Syria’s civil war highlights the loss of that country’s once-considerable influence in the region.
Instead, Syria has become the object of a geopolitical struggle among other regional actors.
But the efforts of the Gulf states to arm the Syrian opposition are insufficient to set the conflict on a definitive course, especially given the heavy weapons that the Assad regime has at its disposal.
And the opposition has not been able to appropriate the reputation and clout that Assad has lost.
In fact, regardless of the balance of power between the regime and its opponents, Syria probably will not reestablish a strong, centralized government for decades, if ever.
At best, Syria will emerge from the current conflict with a decentralized or federal state; at worst, the country will go the way of Somalia.
Either way, Syria is currently firmly in the loser’s camp.
Iraq could have been a winner, had it been able to translate the recovery of its oil industry and the withdrawal of US troops into political stabilization and regional influence.
But, with Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s government widely considered to be another authoritarian and sectarian regime, Iraq has not been able to gain any soft power.
Moreover, the chances that Iraqi Kurdistan will achieve de facto or de jure independence are greater than ever.
Iraq’s Kurds may even be able to extend their influence into Kurdish-populated northern Syria, thereby becoming a more influential regional player than the Iraqi government in Baghdad.
Neighboring Iran seems to be the quintessential survivor.
It has coped with the international community’s increasingly stifling sanctions, while maintaining its nuclear program and continuing to participate in the diplomatic process with the P5+1 (the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, plus Germany).
Iran has strengthened its influence in Iraq, and has helped to keep the Assad regime, a key ally, in power much longer than expected.
But rising political polarization in the region could undermine Iran’s standing.
As regional conflicts are increasingly defined along Sunni-Shia lines, it is becoming more difficult for Shia-dominated Iran to gain influence in Sunni-majority countries.
And Iran’s support for Assad’s brutal regime in Syria is damaging further its once-considerable soft power in other Arab countries.
Saudi Arabia can also be counted as a survivor, as it copes with deep strategic insecurity stemming from Iran’s efforts to undermine its position, social unrest in its neighbor and ally Bahrain, and the Muslim Brotherhood’s rise to power in Egypt.
Saudi leaders have also become increasingly suspicious of their American allies, on whom the country’s security depends.
At the same time, the Saudi leadership is facing significant domestic challenges, including vast economic disparities, inadequate services, growing frustration with the lack of political freedom, and a difficult succession process within the royal family.
Nevertheless, though Saudi Arabia’s soft power is waning, its massive oil wealth will likely ensure that it remains a regional heavyweight.
Non-state actors also play a crucial role in the Middle East’s balance of power.
Religious minorities have become more insecure.
The once-oppressed Kurds are gaining ground.
Of the main transnational political groups, the Muslim Brotherhood has been the clearest winner.
But success brings new challenges.
Islamist-led governments must deliver on the socioeconomic front, while building democratic institutions.
(Ironically, they will be able to claim success in having built a better state only when they accept their first electoral defeat.)
Indeed, the challenge facing all of the region’s current winners is to translate today’s gains into credible, long-term power.
The Chaotic Birth of South Sudan
MADRID – The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) that was reached in 2005 between mostly Christian southern Sudan and the country’s Muslim North, ended one of the bloodiest civil wars in modern times.
Lasting 22 years, that war left more than two million dead.
Now the CPA is poised to face its most vital test: the South’s referendum on independence, scheduled for January 9.
Whether or not a new state is born in one of the most strategically sensitive areas of the world is of utmost concern to Sudan’s neighbors and others.
Vital issues are at stake: the scramble for oil; China’s robust presence in Sudan; the West’s desire to see a mostly Christian state break the contiguity of Muslim regimes – and the consequent threat of Islamic radicalism – in the region; the regional distribution of the Nile’s waters; and the possibility that independence for the South might lead to Sudan’s total dismemberment along ethnic and religious lines.
The fact that Omar al-Bashir, Sudan’s president, is not especially keen to agree to the United Nations’ plan to beef up its peacekeeping force in the country ahead of the referendum raises concern about his intentions.
He would certainly be happy to delay the vote – and, if it is held, to dispute its legitimacy.
He might not find that very difficult.
Preparations for the referendum are lagging and inadequate.
Brinkmanship and broken agreements threaten to turn the referendum’s technical and political difficulties into yet another disaster for the country.
The 2.5 million Southern Sudanese known to live in the North are under explicit instructions by the South’s Sudan People’s Liberation Army to boycott the referendum, as the SPLA has grounds to believe that Bashir would use their registration to rig the results in favor of unity.
Indeed, if not convincingly deterred by the international community, it is extremely difficult to believe that Bashir would let the South secede without a fight.
A crucial bone of contention that might ignite a new war is the future of the country’s oil industry and the North-South border demarcation.
So far, the good offices of the Norwegian government have failed to produce an agreement on the key question of the post-independence distribution of oil revenues between North and South.
Given that most of Sudan’s oil wealth is concentrated in the South, the management of the oil industry and its revenues after secession is an existential problem for Bashir’s regime and its capacity to control his vast and ethnically diverse country.
It is in the oil-rich border areas that a new war might erupt.
As one of the poorest and neediest countries in the world, for which oil revenues would be the only source of income for years to come, an independent South Sudan could not be expected to rescue the debt-ridden North.
Its own challenge lies in reforming the entire oil industry, which for years has been brutally and irresponsibly exploited by Chinese and Malaysian companies, with devastating environmental consequences.
Conspicuously, Bashir’s regime has been disqualified in the eyes of its neighbors in Africa and the Arab world to a degree that makes the South’s secession a more acceptable option to the main regional stakeholders than ever before.
Indeed, the Arab world as a whole seems to have given up on Bashir.
Some Arab leaders still toy with the idea that overthrowing him might yet salvage a united Sudan, but it is probably too late for that.
After failing to moderate Bashir into accepting a secular decentralized or confederate Sudan, Egypt, a key Arab player concerned about the stability of its southern border, has come to accept the inevitability of secession – so long as the new state lines up with it on the issue of the Nile’s waters.
Egypt’s fears are mainly of Sudan’s disintegration into a chaotic tapestry of mini-states controlled by warlords and plunged into lawlessness and bloody tribal feuds.
In that case, what remains of “Sudan” – Khartoum, Gezira, and the two northern states – might degenerate even further, probably turning into a base for global Islamic terrorism.
Black Africa, particularly the East African Community, cannot think of any solution other than secession.
To EAC members, this is a matter of de-colonization, for southern Sudan’s people have been enslaved, dehumanized, and humiliated for centuries by the Arabs.
Hence, as the Kenyans put it, the border between northern and southern Sudan should become the border between Black Africa and the Arab World.
Concerned by Bashir’s delaying tactics, both Kenya and Uganda have advised their southern Sudanese friends not to make demarcation of the border a pre-condition for the referendum, as doing so would only play into Bashir’s hands.
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton rightly defined the upcoming referendum as a “ticking time bomb.”
She also made it clear, however, that the outcome, independence for the South, is “inevitable.”
But, to avoid a cataclysm, the US and its allies must defuse the bomb by enforcing the provisions of the 2005 CPA, which they all endorsed.