The result of neglecting young people collectively while supporting them privately is social inequality on a massive scale.
How to redress generational biases in the political system is a key question for all democracies.
Solutions do exist: mandatory voting, term limits for elected officials, and youth parliaments or special bodies to examine intergenerational issues, for example.
But such measures are either difficult to implement or only moderately effective in view of the magnitude of the challenges.
Current trends are clearly unsustainable politically and socially.
What is unclear is when and how young people will recognize that and make themselves heard.
Your Genes or Mine, How Different Are We?
For some time, scientists have believed that individual human beings were 99.9% genetically identical.
The 0.1% of the genome that was different (approximately 3,000,000 bases of DNA) was comprised of “single nucleotide polymorphisms” (SNPs are alterations of the individual bases of DNA) scattered throughout the genome.
It was thought that some of these DNA alterations may in part explain some of the physical differences that exist between two different, but otherwise normal individuals.
In the summer of 2004, two groups of scientists working independently (one led by researchers at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and the other led by researchers at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories) called this scientific dogma into question.
Their research identified hundreds of regions of the human genome where the number of copies of a particular DNA segment varied from individual to individual.
With only a few exceptions, all DNA segments were thought to exist in two copies (one copy inherited from your mother and one copy inherited from your father). 
Both studies showed that there are hundreds of regions of the genome that could have more or less than the expected two copies.
This alerted scientists to the existence of a larger source of genetic variation than was previously understood, and forced us to speculate on the implications of this discovery.
This discovery was made recently because until now, the technology was not available to comprehensively assess genomic imbalances in a genome-wide fashion.
That has changed over the last five or six years, with the development of a technique known as “array-based comparative genomic hybridization” (array-CGH), revolutionizing genetic research and diagnostics.
About three years ago at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, when we were seeking a potential tool for high-resolution diagnostics, array-CGH offered the hope of providing a reliable and efficient genome-wide test that could detect gains or losses in an unbiased and non-subjective fashion.
When validation experiments were performed that compared the DNA from one “normal, healthy” individual with the DNA from another “normal, healthy” individual, we were astonished to find an average of 12 DNA fragments that showed copy number differences between the two individuals being compared.
These became known as copy number variants, or CNVs.
Combining the data from our study and the study from Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories, over 300 regions of the genome were found to exhibit CNVs among normal individuals.
Since these two initial studies, many other groups, including ours, have confirmed and documented many more CNVs in other individuals studied.
This is the goal of the Structural Genomic Variation Consortium’s Copy Number Variation Project, which aims at providing researchers the most comprehensive list and characterization of CNVs in humans.
The Consortium recently assessed 270 individuals from four populations with ancestry in Africa, Asia or Europe (known as the HapMap collection) to construct a new map of the human genome.
Using two complementary genome-wide technologies, with subsequent validation studies, a total of 1,447 CNVs were identified. 
The data clearly demonstrate that individuals are not as genetically similar as once thought.
Many of the regions in which the CNVs were identified overlapped known disease genes.
Since they are being identified in normal individuals, CNVs may not necessarily be a direct cause of human disease, but many may confer susceptibility to certain diseases, serve as disease markers, and/or indicate potential regions of genomic instability.
Some CNVs are also associated with genes involved in immune response and detoxification-related metabolism (some of the human body’s reactions to the environment that we live in).
Indeed, some CNVs may turn out to explain why some people react differently to specific medications.
Hopefully, a more comprehensive understanding of human genetic variation (i.e. single base pair changes and structural genomic variation, such as CNVs) will ultimately help physicians to prescribe medication in a more individualized manner, that would result in maximum therapeutic effects to each patient, with minimal side effects.
Overall, we anticipate that many of these CNVs will provide explanations to how we adapt and interact with our ever-changing environment.
Indeed, as studies continue to identify and characterize CNVs, we anticipate achieving a better understanding of the relationship between these genetic variations, complex diseases, and human adaptability.
Unburdening the Facebook Generation
LOS ANGELES – Once again, young people have gotten the short end of the political stick.
The outcome of the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum is but another reminder of a yawning generational divide that cuts across political affiliation, income levels, and race.
Almost 75% of UK voters aged 18-24 voted to “Remain” in the European Union, only to have “Leave” imposed on them by older voters.
And this is just one of several ways in which millennials’ economic future, and that of their children, is being determined by others.
I am in my late fifties, and I worry that our generation in the advanced world will be remembered – to our shame and chagrin – as the one that lost the economic plot.
In the run-up to the 2008 global financial crisis, we feasted on leverage, feeling increasingly entitled to use credit to live beyond our means and to assume too much speculative financial risk.
We stopped investing in genuine engines of growth, letting our infrastructure decay, our education system lag, and our worker training and retooling programs erode.
We allowed the budget to be taken hostage by special interests, which has resulted in a fragmentation of the tax system that, no surprise, has imparted yet another unfair anti-growth bias to the economic system.
And we witnessed a dramatic worsening in inequality, not just of income and wealth, but also of opportunity.
The 2008 crisis should have been our economic wake-up call.
It wasn’t.
Rather than using the crisis to catalyze change, we essentially rolled over and went back to doing more of the same.
Specifically, we simply exchanged private factories of credit and leverage for public ones.
We swapped an over-leveraged banking system for experimental liquidity injections by hyperactive monetary authorities.
In the process, we overburdened central banks, risking their credibility and political autonomy, as well as future financial stability.
Emerging from the crisis, we shifted private liabilities from banks’ balance sheets to taxpayers, including future ones, yet we failed to fix fully the bailed-out financial sector.
We let inequality worsen, and stood by as too many young people in Europe languished in joblessness, risking a scary transition from unemployment to unemployability.
In short, we didn’t do nearly enough to reinvigorate the engines of sustainable inclusive growth, thereby also weakening potential output and threatening future economic performance.
And we are compounding these serial miscarriages with a grand failure to act on longer-term sustainability, particularly when it comes to the planet and social cohesion.
Poor economics has naturally spilled over into messy politics, as growing segments of the population have lost trust in the political establishment, business elites, and expert opinion.
The resulting political fragmentation, including the rise of fringe and anti-establishment movements, has made it even harder to devise more appropriate economic-policy responses.
To add insult to injury, we are now permitting a regulatory backlash against technological innovations that disrupt entrenched and inefficient industries, and that provide people with greater control over their lives and wellbeing.
Growing restrictions on companies such as Airbnb and Uber hit the young particularly hard, both as producers and as consumers.
If we do not change course soon, subsequent generations will confront self-reinforcing economic, financial, and political tendencies that burden them with too little growth, too much debt, artificially inflated asset prices, and alarming levels of inequality and partisan political polarization.
Fortunately, we are aware of the mounting problem, worried about its consequences, and have a good sense of how to bring about the much-needed pivot.
Given the role of technological innovation, much of which is youth-led, even a small reorientation of policies could have a meaningful and rapid impact on the economy.
Through a more comprehensive policy approach, we could turn a vicious cycle of economic stagnation, social immobility, and market volatility into a virtuous cycle of inclusive growth, genuine financial stability, and greater political coherence.
What is needed, in particular, is simultaneous progress on pro-growth structural reforms, better demand management, addressing pockets of excessive indebtedness, and improving regional and global policy frameworks.
While highly desirable, such changes will materialize only if greater constructive pressure is placed on politicians.
Simply put, few politicians will champion changes that promise longer-term benefits but often come with short-term disruptions.
And the older voters who back them will resist any meaningful erosion of their entitlements – even turning, when they perceive a threat to their interests, to populist politicians and dangerously simplistic solutions such as Brexit.
Sadly, young people have been overly complacent when it comes to political participation, notably on matters that directly affect their wellbeing and that of their children.
Yes, almost three-quarters of young voters backed the UK’s “Remain” campaign.
But only a third of them turned out.
In contrast, the participation rate for those over 65 was more than 80%. Undoubtedly, the absence of young people at the polls left the decision in the hands of older people, whose preferences and motivations differ, even if innocently.
Millennials have impressively gained a greater say in how they communicate, travel, source and disseminate information, pool their resources, interact with businesses, and much else.
Now they must seek a greater say in electing their political representatives and in holding them accountable.
If they don’t, my generation will – mostly inadvertently – continue to borrow excessively from their future.
A Prisoner’s Reflections on Nelson Mandela
KHARKIV – Incarceration is said to leave you with a feeling of helplessness and vulnerability.
But the truth of life for a political prisoner, even for one on a hunger strike, is the opposite.
As a prisoner, I have been forced to focus on what is essential about myself, my political beliefs, and my country.
So I can almost feel the presence of the brave women and men, old and young, who have gathered in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities to defend their dreams of a democratic and European future.
In prison, your hopes and dreams become your reality.
I am sure that Nelson Mandela would have understood my feelings and agreed.
The South African apartheid regime may have locked him away for almost three decades, but in the great Soweto protests and the other demonstrations for freedom and equality, courageous young South Africans invariably looked to his example and felt his presence.
Around the world, most people now rightly celebrate the gentle dignity with which Mandela led South Africa out of the political wilderness.
Even here, behind prison bars and 24-hour surveillance of the type that he experienced for so long, I can conjure the warmth of his broad smile, merry eyes, and those colorful Hawaiian-style shirts that he wore with such panache.
And I can admire his unyielding – and, yes, sometimes wily – commitment to reconciliation, which saved his country from the race war that those who refused to accept the end of white-minority rule saw as inevitable.
How wrong they were, and how miraculous was Mandela’s achievement in making even his most implacable enemies feel at home in post-apartheid South Africa.
But here, in this place, it is not Mandela the statesman who touches my soul and fires my imagination.
“My” Mandela is the prisoner, the Mandela of Robben Island, who endured 27 years behind bars (18 of them on a rock in the South Atlantic) and yet emerged with his spirit intact, brimming with a vision of a tolerant South Africa, a country liberated even for apartheid’s architects and beneficiaries.
No purges marked the end of white rule.
There were no witch-hunts, nor was there summary justice.
All that Mandela demanded was that the truth about the past be revealed.
Through the unique innovation of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Mandela found the only viable bridge between his country’s racist legacy and its multi-racial present and future – a combination of political genius and humane wisdom that only the greatest of leaders possess.
Mandela was able to guide South Africa to freedom, because he was able to see its future more clearly than those who lived through the apartheid years outside of prison.
Indeed, he possessed that rare clarity of moral vision that prison – perhaps like no other environment – can nurture.
Imprisonment brought Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn this clarity as well.
“Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line separating good and evil passes not through states, nor between classes, nor between political parties, either – but right through every human heart – and through all human hearts,” he wrote in The Gulag Archipelago.
“This line shifts….And even within hearts overwhelmed by evil, one small bridgehead of good is retained.
And even in the best of all hearts, there remains...an un-uprooted small corner of evil.”
The ability to begin to see more clearly than most the inner workings of the human soul is one of the few gifts that imprisonment can bestow.
Forced to reckon with your own vulnerability, isolation, and losses (and seemingly lost cause), you learn to look more carefully into the human heart – yours and that of your jailers.
Mandela epitomized this rare gift.
How else could he have personally invited one of his Robben Island jailers to attend his inauguration as South Africa’s first democratically elected president?
Of course, behind Mandela’s generous spirit was a character of steel.
He bore his imprisonment for the sake of his cause.
And he bore the anguish of the suffering imposed on his family.
And yet he neither broke nor surrendered to the rage that would have consumed most people.
As usual, Mandela’s own words about his day of personal liberation show how well he understood this: “As I walked out the door toward the gate that would lead to my freedom, I knew if I didn’t leave my bitterness and hatred behind, I’d still be in prison.”
And just as Mandela knew in his prison cell that apartheid would one day fall, I know in my solitude that Ukraine’s ultimate triumph as a European democracy is certain.
Sweet Caroline in Tokyo
TOKYO – Fifty years have passed since the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy, with official ceremonies held in Washington, DC, and Dallas to commemorate the anniversary.
But JFK’s eldest daughter, Caroline Kennedy, was not present at either event; she had just taken up her post in Tokyo as the 29th US Ambassador to Japan.
On November 19, thousands of people lined the streets to catch a glimpse of Kennedy as she made her way from Tokyo Station to the Imperial Palace, around a kilometer away, by horse-drawn carriage to present her credentials to the emperor.
Waving to the onlookers, she looked like Snow White.
November 22, 1963, was also the day satellite broadcasting from the United States to Japan began, and many Japanese got up early to watch a speech by JFK in Dallas that began at 5:30 a.m.
But, rather than airing the speech, the broadcast brought the shocking news of the assassination.
The image of young Caroline – the inspiration for Neil Diamond’s famous song – solemnly standing beside her three-year-old brother as he saluted his father’s coffin is deeply engrained in the hearts of Japan’s people.
So there probably is not a single Japanese who would not welcome her as US Ambassador.
US ambassadors to Japan have come in three types.
There have been academic experts on Japan, like the acclaimed scholar Edwin Reischauer.
There have also been political heavyweights, such as Michael Mansfield, a long-time Democratic majority leader of the US Senate, former Vice President Walter Mondale, former Speaker of the House of Representatives Thomas Foley, and Senator Howard Baker, who also served as President Ronald Reagan’s chief of staff.
The third type are presidential political appointees, such as Thomas Schieffer, a former business partner of President George W. Bush, and John Roos, a noted Silicon Valley lawyer.
Clearly, Caroline Kennedy, an important early supporter of President Barack Obama, is in this category.
Indeed, her backing for Obama in the Democratic Party primaries in 2008, when he was still a relatively unknown senator from Illinois, gave his campaign credibility among party insiders who remain loyal to her family’s legacy.
Kennedy’s address to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during her confirmation hearing elicited bipartisan support – a rare occurrence nowadays, given America’s highly polarized national politics – and she received unanimous approval.
Although she lacks formal political or diplomatic experience, her personal connections, particularly to Obama, will have great significance for US-Japan relations.
And there are pressing issues that need the new ambassador’s attention.
For example, there are security questions related to strengthening the alliance between Japan and the US, including the relocation of the Futenma Air Station, the base of operations for the US Marine Corps on Okinawa.
There are also issues related to economic cooperation, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the proposed mega-regional free-trade treaty covering Pacific Rim economies.
Although powerful domestic interest groups, particularly those representing the agricultural sector, have objected to Japanese participation in the TPP negotiations, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government chose to join the talks late in the day.
Instead of banking the political capital that his high approval ratings had given him, he chose to spend some of it on an initiative that his predecessors had rejected, but that will help to transform myriad aspects of Japan’s economy.
Of course, given today’s hyper-partisan environment in the US, there is a danger that fast-track negotiating authority – under which Congress binds itself to an up-or-down vote on trade agreements (thereby precluding amendments and filibusters) – will not be given to the president.
If this roadblock cannot be overcome and the agreement stalls, the Abe government’s approval ratings will suffer, despite progress in the negotiations.
Given the unanimity with which Kennedy was confirmed, she may be able to use her own political capital to help sell fast-track authority in Congress.
The Abe government is banking on its high approval rating not only to participate in the TPP, but also to address the need to escape from 15 years of deflation and strengthen Japan’s national-security posture, which has been hamstrung for decades.
Given the nexus of issues that tie vital US interests to Japan’s reform process, Kennedy, with her character and skills, could well prove to be an essential link between the countries at a crucial point in their relationship.
Who Lost Thailand?
TOKYO – Thailand, Southeast Asia’s most developed and sophisticated economy, is teetering on the edge of the political abyss.
Yet most of the rest of Asia appears to be averting its eyes from the country’s ongoing and increasingly anarchic unrest.
That indifference is not only foolish; it is dangerous.
Asia’s democracies now risk confronting the same harsh question that the United States faced when Mao Zedong marched into Beijing, and again when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ousted the Shah in Iran.
Who, they will have to ask, lost Thailand?
Much of the world is wondering how such a successful economy could allow its politics to spin out of control.
What accounts for the armies of protesters – distinguished, gang-like, by the color of their shirts – whose mutual antipathy often borders on nihilistic rage?
The roots of the current unrest extend back more than a decade, to former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s first electoral victory in 2001.
Thaksin’s triumph did not represent the normal alternation in power that one finds in a democracy.
Instead, his victory heralded the political rise of the country’s poor, long-silenced rural majority.
Bangkok’s entrenched elite recoiled in alarm.
But, instead of learning to compete with Thaksin for the votes of Thailand’s rural poor, the country’s urban elite (including the powerful military) sought to delegitimize his rule.
When he was re-elected by an even larger majority, his government was overthrown, his political party was banned by the Supreme Court, and he was forced to flee the country after corruption charges against him led to a criminal conviction.
Yet Thaksin’s supporters did not abandon him.
When Thailand’s military returned to their barracks, many Thai citizens voted for Thaksin at one remove, with his sister – Yingluck Shinawatra, a long-time executive at Thaksin’s communications firm – becoming Prime Minister, supported by a powerful parliamentary majority.
For much of her term in office, Yingluck garnered praise for her pragmatism, and for seeking to ameliorate the antagonism of her opponents.
But that praise and success appears to have bred a form of hubris.
She proposed an amnesty law that would have not only pardoned opposition leaders, including Abhisit Vejjajiva, her predecessor as prime minister (who faces murder charges), but allowed her brother to return to the country.
And, in defiance of a Supreme Court ruling, she sought a constitutional amendment that would make the Senate, whose members are appointed, an elected body.
The opposition, sensing that its moment had arrived, launched a wave of street protests.
Yingluck, in an effort to defuse the situation, called for a parliamentary election in February.
But the opposition has rejected this and says that it will boycott the vote.
It fears – rightly, most people suspect – that the Thaksin camp will be returned to power in any free and fair vote.
So, in essence, what is happening in Thailand is an attempted nullification of democracy by the opposition and the country’s entrenched elite.
Unable to compete successfully with Thaksin for votes, they now want to dilute Thai democracy in order to prevent the electorate from ever again choosing a government that goes against their will.
If Thailand were an insignificant country with little geostrategic weight, its problems might not matter as much as they do to the rest of Asia.
But Thailand is Southeast Asia’s lynchpin economy.
It is a key partner for Myanmar (Burma) as it makes its own political and economic transition, and it is a hub for trade with neighboring Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.
But the biggest reason that Thailand matters for Asia’s democracies is fierce competition for influence between a rising China and the democratic world.
Until now, Thailand has been a firm member of the democratic camp.
Its military is mostly trained by the United States; indeed, it was the key staging point for the US during the Vietnam War.
Likewise, Japan and India have long regarded Thailand as a democratic bulwark in a neighborhood where some regimes – Cambodia and Laos – are firmly under China’s hegemonic sway.
Indeed, its government has proved to be a strong supporter of Myanmar’s president, Thein Sein, as he seeks to free his country from China’s tight embrace.
By standing aside as Thailand’s opposition and traditional elite seek to undermine the country’s democracy in the name of a permanent right to rule, Asia’s democracies risk driving some elements of the Thaksin camp into the arms of China, which would happily accept the role of patron to so potent a political force.
But this need not happen.
Thailand’s military has long and respectful ties not only with the US military, but with officers in Japan as well.
Thailand’s opposition politicians, many of whom were educated at top Western universities, may also be open to quiet advice that they are pushing things too far, not only putting Thailand’s stability at risk, but also jeopardizing regional security.
Just as, a decade ago, the West objected to the efforts of Turkey’s entrenched secular elite to rob Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s mildly Islamist AKP party of its democratic victory, it needs to speak clearly today in defense of Thai democracy.
The opposition’s claim that it is acting in the interests of the world’s democracies needs to be rebutted.
Thaksin may be no saint, and some constitutional reform will be needed if political reconciliation is to come about.
But Thaksin’s governments, like that of his sister, have kept China at one remove from influence.
That is the key strategic interest that is now at stake.
Should Yingluck be ousted in a coup, or should the country’s democracy be hollowed out to preclude her return to power, the Shinawatras may be left with no choice but to seek support from Thailand’s giant neighbor to the north.
If that happens, we will all know who lost Thailand.
We did.
Equality or Estrangement
TOKYO – Those whom the gods would destroy, they grant their wishes.
Will that bit of ancient wisdom now hold for the United States and Japan?
For a half-century, the US, which wrote Japan’s postwar “peace” constitution, has pressed the Japanese to play a greater role in maintaining Asian and global stability.
But now that Japan finally has a leader who agrees, the US is getting nervous, with Secretary of State John Kerry supposedly calling Japan under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe “unpredictable.”
These strains in the US-Japan relationship – surely the foundation stone of Asian stability – first became noticeable in December, when Abe visited the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo, which houses the “souls” of (among others) Class A war criminals from the Pacific War.
The US has always criticized Japanese officials’ visits to the shrine, but through diplomatic channels.
This time, America voiced its displeasure openly.
The US is rightly concerned about the negative impact of such pilgrimages on Japan’s relations with its neighbors, particularly China and South Korea.
But the harsh tone publicly adopted by President Barack Obama’s administration raised serious concerns among some in Abe’s government who question Obama’s commitment to the alliance and suspect that he was using the Yasukuni issue as a pretext to signal a weakening of America’s defense commitment.
Such suspicions were sharpened after China declared its new Air Defense Identification Zone, which overlaps Japanese sovereign territory.
The US tried to have it both ways: though the Obama administration sent US bombers through the new ADIZ to demonstrate its refusal to recognize China’s move, it also told US commercial airliners to acknowledge the zone and report their flight plans to the Chinese authorities.
Likewise, US acquiescence in China’s de facto ouster of the Philippines from the Scarborough Shoal (a disputed outcropping in the South China Sea) raised questions in Japan about the two countries’ supposed harmony of interests.
In fact, although the US extols the virtues of its partnership with Japan, successive American presidents have been vague about the details.
Ultimately, the idea always seemed to be that Japan would pay more for defense, but the US would set the partnership’s objectives.
Abe’s conception of the US-Japan partnership presupposes much greater equality.
After all, a society like Japan, trying to escape two decades of economic malaise, cannot feel completely comfortable outsourcing its national-security strategy, even to an ally that is as respected and reliable as the US.
Far from being based on chest-thumping nationalism, Abe’s national-security strategy reflects, above all, a deep awareness of how a lost generation of economic growth has affected the Japanese.
His bravura diplomatic performances sometimes give the impression that a self-confident Japan has been a normal feature of the global landscape.
Strangely, it is all but forgotten – particularly by the Chinese – that for two decades Japan has watched China’s rise quietly from the sidelines (even supportively, to the extent that Japanese investors have poured in billions of dollars in the three decades since Deng Xiaoping opened the economy).
Indeed, Abe has succeeded so well in returning Japan to the world stage that his US and Asian critics act as if the only problem now is to moderate Japanese self-confidence – a notion that would have been laughable just two years ago.
But the fact remains that one of Abe’s primary worries is the spiritual malaise that accompanied Japan’s long economic stagnation.
Those who see in his patriotic rhetoric a desire to whitewash history miss his real concern: economic revival is meaningless if it does not secure Japan’s position as a leading Asian power.
The US, however, regards Abe’s worries about Japan’s spirit as peripheral to its efforts to forge a lasting relationship with China and overhaul its strategic presence in the Pacific.
For example, the US views the Trans-Pacific Partnership – the huge trade agreement involving it, Japan, and 10 other leading Pacific Rim countries – as a technical scheme that will bring economic benefits through greater trade.
But, for Abe, the TPP’s value for Japan’s sense of identity – that it is now a more outward-looking nation – is just as important.
In Abe’s view, Japan needs to regain, wherever possible, the right of independent decision-making if it is to manage successfully the challenge posed to it by China.
This does not mean that Abe’s Japan will become an ally like France under Jacques Chirac, spurning US leadership for the sake of it; instead, Abe seeks a policy of cooperation with the US that reflects the alliance's voluntary nature.
He believes that, given the new balance of power in Asia, the alliance will be meaningful only if each partner has a real choice, and the wherewithal, to act autonomously or with regional allies.
Fortunately, Japanese and American analyses of Chinese trends are not very different.
Both generally view China as having embarked on a probing strategy in search of weak spots where it can expand its geopolitical reach.
And both believe that only when China is convinced that such probes will yield no lasting benefit can serious negotiations about a comprehensive security structure for Asia take place.
But even here, there is a difference.
The US, convinced of the importance of intentions in the conduct of foreign policy, believes that once China recognizes the limits to its power, a structure of peace will follow naturally.
Abe, by contrast, believes that only a favorable balance of power can be relied upon, and he is determined that Japan play its part in constructing that balance.
Although Abe has lifted Japan’s sights and self-confidence, he recognizes that Japan faces real limits.
The US, too, should recognize that there are limits to the extent of the subordination that it can ask of an ally.
Some wishes really are better left unfulfilled.
Securing Japan
TOKYO – Shinzo Abe’s second term as Japan’s prime minister began with a laser-like focus on economic revitalization.
That policy, almost instantly dubbed “Abenomics,” comprises what have been called the three “arrows”: bold monetary policy, an expansionary fiscal stance, and structural reforms to stimulate private investment.
Hosting the Olympic Games in Tokyo in 2020 has added a fourth arrow to this quiver in the form of increased infrastructure investment and tourism revenue in the years leading up to the Games.
To be sure, after 15 years of deflationary recession, revitalization of the Japanese economy remains far from complete.
Nonetheless, the effects of Abe’s reforms are becoming visible in areas such as equity prices and exchange rates.
But Abe also confronts a security environment in Asia that is every bit as brittle as Japan’s economy was before his government took office last December.
Indeed, he confronted many of the same issues during his first administration seven years ago.
His efforts back then were halted by his own resignation, and he is now making a second attempt to establish a national-security governance system to meet Japan’s needs – and those of its allies – in twenty-first-century Asia.
In a speech to a plenary session of the lower house of Japan’s Diet on October 25, Abe emphasized that, given the current security situation in Asia, “It is essential to strengthen command functions for implementing the prime minister’s national security policy.”
Now that split control of the Diet’s upper and lower houses has been resolved, with Abe’s Liberal Democrats in strong control of both chambers, a bill to modernize Japan’s national-security governance is certain to pass.
The bill that Abe has submitted aims to establish a Japanese National Security Council, based on lessons from the successes and failures of similar institutions in other countries, such as the NSC in the United States.
The Security Council of Japan – something of a stopgap measure created to provide advice from relevant cabinet members to the prime minister in times of crisis – will now be reorganized as a formal institution.
The new NSC’s membership will be limited to the prime minister, the cabinet secretary, and the foreign and defense ministers, with relevant ministers added on an ad hoc basis.
A permanent National Security Secretariat, headed by a person with abundant diplomatic experience, will be established in the prime minister’s office, with 60 security specialists from various fields laying the policy groundwork for medium- and long-term national security strategy.
This strategy will then be reflected in guidelines issued to Japan’s defense bodies and diplomats.
Japan, like other countries, has faced jurisdictional disputes among foreign-policy, defense, and police agencies that have hindered the aggregation and analysis of intelligence information.
But, with the creation of the NSC, each ministry and agency will report important national-security information to the new secretariat, which will then carry out integrated analysis and issue reports to the prime minister and others.
Of course, as in other countries, bureaucracies are creatures of habit.
As we can already see, it will not be easy to overcome the obstacles posed by vertically integrated ministries and agencies.
Institutionalization will take time – and the importance of its success cannot be understated.
For example, the new NSC will be responsible for sharing intelligence with other countries, including the US, Japan’s most important ally.
As a result, ensuring the protection of information will be a key issue, particularly given the old habit of leaking security information to the press.
That is why the Diet is also considering a bill on the protection of classified information that would impose harsher punishment on government officials who leak secrets, particularly those concerning national security.
The trauma of gag laws that were imposed on the press before and during World War II resulted in the elimination of all restraints afterwards, which had the effect of making Japan a spy’s paradise, with insufficient counterintelligence measures and poor secrecy.
Moreover, the long decades of peace since 1945 have served to lower awareness among politicians of the need for confidentiality.
For example, Japanese newspapers always report when, where, and with whom the Prime Minister met for dinner in the following day’s editions.
In contrast to the US system of presidential government, Japan has a parliamentary form of government.
Yet the goals of national security and crisis management are the same in both systems – indeed, one of British Prime Minister David Cameron’s first acts when he came to power was to establish an NSC to improve coordination of policymaking.
Although the establishment of the Japanese NSC is long overdue, it is not too late for Japan to benefit from the improvement in policy direction and coherence that it seems certain to bring.
How to End an Insurgency
TOKYO – When the Moro Islamic Liberation Front guerrilla movement took up arms in the Philippines in the 1960’s, Ferdinand Marcos had yet to become the country's president – let alone dictator.
Despite the country’s many political transformations in the last half-century, the MILF’s campaign to achieve independence for the Bangsamoro nation – whose territory, they claim, covers the islands of Mindanao, Palawan, Sulu, and Sabah – remained constant, until President Benigno Aquino III resolved to change it.
The MILF was not deterred by the popular overthrow of Marcos’s 20-year dictatorship in 1986, following the assassination of the opposition leader Benigno Aquino, Jr.
Nor did the establishment of democracy – now deeply entrenched – inspire the group’s leaders to reconsider their approach.
The MILF remained engaged in a brutal campaign of beheadings, assassination, kidnappings, and indiscriminate butchery.
Then, last January, Aquino managed to achieve a landmark deal that finally ended Mindanao’s agony.
This is one of the most remarkable feats of peacemaking in Asia since World War II, and at least as worthy of international recognition as former Finnish President and 2008 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Marti Ahtissari’s role in brokering peace in Aceh, Indonesia, in 2005.
In fact, given the myriad security and political risks that Aquino ran in concluding a peace deal with the MILF, he may be an even worthier Nobel laureate.
Aquino’s approach to the negotiations reflected his recognition that the MILF had twice used peace talks – once brokered by Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi – as a cynical ploy to buy time to regroup and raise funds (including from Al Qaeda). With freshly restocked arsenals, they would relaunch their campaign to seize Mindanao by force.
Against this background, it is no surprise that, when Aquino relaunched stalled peace talks in 2012, the Filipino people were highly skeptical.
But, over time, the effort gained credibility.
Though questions about the peace agreement’s durability remain, with full disarmament yet to take place, the political autonomy granted to the country’s Muslim areas seems to have persuaded most MILF fighters that the time has come to end the carnage.
For the people of Mindanao, this is a life-changing development.
In the few short months since the peace deal was reached, Filipino and foreign investment has been flowing into the island.
With nearly half of Mindanao’s population living below the poverty line, these funds could not be more critical.
But the benefits of Aquino’s leadership are not limited to Mindanao.
His entire presidency, which began in 2010, has been characterized by the creativity and doggedness that made peace with the MILF possible.
Whereas other Filipino leaders – including Aquino’s mother, Corazon Aquino, who was elected president after Marcos’s overthrow – spoke out against corruption, Aquino has attacked it at its roots.
He has brought to justice not only small-time wrongdoers – or “flies,” as Chinese President Xi Jinping’s calls such people – but also “tigers” like Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, who helped overthrow Marcos and bring Corazon Aquino to power two decades ago.
As a result, the Philippines has dramatically improved its ranking in Transparency International’s annual corruption index, rising from a 134th-place tie with Nigeria in 2010, to 94th place, alongside India, last year.
Aquino’s efforts to fight corruption and rebuild his country’s economic foundations has enabled the Philippines – at long last – to become Southeast Asia’s fastest-growing economy, with annual GDP growth of 7.2% last year.
While growth is expected to slow slightly this year, to 6.5%, the Philippines can now be counted among Asia’s “tiger” economies.
Of course, the country still has a long way to go.
Some ten million Filipinos – one-quarter of the workforce ­– ­are compelled to seek employment overseas, owing to inadequate opportunities at home.
If the Philippines is to attract enough investment to achieve living standards comparable to Malaysia and Thailand, Aquino must remain persistent in his efforts to open the economy and curtail corruption.
Fortunately, he seems determined to do so.
Aquino’s foreign policy has also been characterized by the same resoluteness.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in his willingness to stand up to China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea.
Indeed, the Philippines is challenging China’s claims in the International Court of Arbitration, using provisions from the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Aquino’s stern criticism of China’s expansionist policies has certainly not endeared him to the Chinese.
But regional powers like the United States and Japan have supported his stance, with Japan promising to deliver enhanced equipment for the Philippine Coast Guard.
And the Filipino people undoubtedly appreciate his tenacity in protecting their interests.
Aquino’s success in bringing the decades-old MILF rebellion to a peaceful end highlights a courage and tenacity that will enable him to play a key role in reining in China’s regional ambitions.
Just as David’s ingenuity enabled him, against all odds, to defeat Goliath, Aquino’s bold and calculated leadership can succeed in bolstering stability and security throughout Asia by bringing China, perhaps against its will, into a rules-based regional order.
Japan’s Russian Dilemma
TOKYO – For Japanese leaders and citizens, President Vladimir Putin’s brutal annexation of Crimea was an unsurprising return to the normal paradigm of Russian history.
Indeed, most Japanese regard the move as having been determined by some expansionist gene in Russia’s political DNA, rather than by Putin himself or the specifics of the Ukraine crisis.
Japan is particularly concerned with Russian expansionism, because it is the only G-7 country that currently has a territorial dispute with Russia, which has occupied its Northern Territories since the waning days of World War II.
That occupation began between August 28 and September 5, 1945, when the Soviet Union hurriedly nullified the existing Soviet-Japanese Neutrality Treaty and invaded not only Japanese-occupied Manchuria, but also southern Sakhalin Island and the ancient Japanese territories of Etorofu Island, Kunashiri Island, Shikotan Island, and the Habomai Islands.
Concerned that America’s development and use of atomic weapons against Japan would deprive the Soviet Union of any territorial gains in the east, Stalin ordered the Red Army to invade.
But Japan, having already endured the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, had accepted the Potsdam Declaration on August 14, meaning that the war was already over when the Red Army marched in.
Since then, these islands have been controlled by either the Soviet Union or its successor state, Russia.
And, as elsewhere in Russia, their residents have been impoverished by consistently incompetent and corrupt government, whether run by Communists or today’s crony capitalists.
In a strange historical twist, given the Crimean annexation, after the Japanese citizens native to the Northern Territories were killed or expelled, many Ukrainians were brought to the islands during the Soviet years, and still live there.
If an independence referendum were to be held on Etorofu Island, where some 60% of the inhabitants have roots in Ukraine, I wonder whether Putin would accept the result as readily as he did the ballot in Crimea, undertaken at the barrel of a gun?
After coming to power at the end of 2012, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe had sought to improve relations with Putin in the hope of beginning serious talks on the Northern Territories.
But now that Putin has made his project of imperial restoration crystal clear, those hopes are stillborn.
Recognizing this, Abe condemned the annexation of Crimea, calling it “a violation of Ukraine’s integrity and the integrity of its sovereignty and territory.”
Abe added that “attempts to change the status quo by force cannot be overlooked,” and that Japan would consider further economic sanctions against Russia in cooperation with the G-7.
Needless to say, these remarks underscored the fact that Japanese territory and territorial waters are being threatened “by force” in the East China Sea by China.
The lesson now being drawn is that, where territorial disputes are concerned, Japan must not kowtow to “attempts to change the status quo backed by force.”
China’s response to the crisis in Ukraine was particularly revealing.
For three decades, China has proclaimed “non-interference” in the internal affairs of sovereign states as the most important rule governing international relations.
But when Putin invaded Ukraine, China showed the hollowness of its adherence to this principle. Instead of condemning Russia for invading and annexing Crimea, it abstained at the United Nations Security Council, and has offered more criticism of Ukraine’s new popular government than it has of Putin’s thuggish behavior.
Every country in Asia is bound to draw only one conclusion from China’s tacit approval of Putin’s Crimean land grab: China, too, thinks that might makes right, and if it believes that it can get away with invading disputed territories, whether in the South China Sea or in the Indian Himalayas, it will do so.
As a result, effective deterrence will require Asian countries to strengthen their defenses and unite to demand adherence to international law, so that China understands that any Putin-style land grabs will cost its economy dearly.
In the immediate future, Japan will work with the G-7 to ensure that Putin’s reckless ambitions do not endanger other parts of Ukraine.
Already, Japan has decided to provide ¥150 billion ($1.5 billion) in economic aid for Ukraine, the largest pledge by any individual country, including the US, thus far.
Before the Crimea invasion, territorial negotiations between Japan and Russia showed signs of progress.
Moreover, several bilateral economic cooperation efforts, such as projects involving liquefied natural gas, were moving forward.
But it is now clear not only that Putin is returning Russia to the stagnation of the late-Soviet era, but also that he subscribes to former Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev’s dictum that “what we have, we hold.”
So Putin’s talk about reaching an agreement with Japan on the Northern Territories was likely as mendacious as his claims that Russians in Crimea were in peril, and thus in need of protection by Russian troops.
More important, Japan understands that business as usual with an aggressive Russia that undermines the international order could embolden others closer to home to embrace Putin’s lawless tactics.
The days of an inward looking Japan are over.
Japan now sees threats elsewhere in the world in the context of its own security, and will react appropriately.
Abenomics’ Women Problem
TOKYO – When Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe addressed the United Nations General Assembly last week, he emphasized his determination to build a society in which women shine.
Indeed, creating opportunities for women in the workforce is an essential pillar of the government’s reform program, so-called “Abenomics.”
Abe is clearly on the right track.
According to an analysis by researchers at Goldman Sachs, closing the gender gap could boost GDP by 9% in the United States and nearly 13% in Japan.
During his stay in New York, Abe also discussed “womenomics” with Hillary Clinton, who had made empowering women in the economy a key policy goal during her tenure as US Secretary of State.
Abe, strange to say, is the first Japanese leader to grasp that the underutilization of women’s skills has been holding back Japan’s economy.
Japan ranked 105th out of 136 countries in the World Economic Forum’s “Global Gender Gap Report 2013,” down from 101st place in 2012.
The problem begins in Abe’s own domain – politics.
In his cabinet reshuffle earlier this month, five female ministers were appointed, but in the face of strong opposition from male MPs.
More important, the appointments amounted to painting over the cracks: Only 39 of the 480 members of the Japanese Diet’s lower house, or 7.9%, are women.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union ranks Japan 158th out of 189 countries in terms of its ratio of female MPs.
Things are just as bad at lower levels of government, where women account for a mere 13.1% of representatives in local parliaments, more than 40% of which have no female members at all.
As the leader of the Liberal Democratic Party, Abe should instruct local party branches to choose more female candidates to run in next April’s local elections.
But, at least so far, Abe seems to lack the will to do so (though he may choose to work with local party bosses behind the scenes to bring in more women).
It is also worrying that some of the women Abe has selected for his cabinet and for key party posts are arch-conservatives who advocate that women stay at home and take care of children.
Given this, one cannot help feeling uncertain about the credibility of his womenomics initiatives.
That is especially true when one considers the lack of women in corporate management positions.
Everyone at the meeting of the Keidanren, the Federation of Economic Organizations, to welcome US Ambassador Caroline Kennedy were men in dark suits.
In 2003, Norway revised its corporation law to state that companies that failed to place women in 40% of management positions could face delisting.
If the same law were applied to Japan today, every company would be delisted.
Women currently hold an estimated 9% of senior management positions in Japan, compared to 40% in the Philippines, 24% in France, and 22% in the United States.
One reason that Japan’s consumer electronics manufacturers are no longer world-beaters is that they have not fully used their female employees in managerial positions, despite their varied experiences.
The exceptions are instructive.
When Akira Matsumoto became CEO of the Japanese snack manufacturer Calbee, he began appointing both female executives and foreigners to the company’s leadership.
Revenues and earnings have increased, and net sales have grown threefold.
Though there is no proof that the former caused the latter, Matsumoto’s commitment to lead in this area suggests that corporate dynamism may well increase with a more prominent role for women.
Likewise, Daiwa Securities CEO Shigeharu Suzuki has appointed women as executive officers to improve sales capabilities, with promising results.
Although the employment rate of women in Japan reached 69.5% in 2013, more than 60% of women leave the workplace prematurely, mostly owing to childbirth.
This pattern results from institutional impediments to achieving a viable work-family balance – impediments that embody the harsh view of male superiors and colleagues toward working mothers.
Changing this view is not easy, because the Confucian belief that women belong in the home remains embedded in Japanese and some other Asian societies.
Moreover, most of the people participating in forums or workshops focused on womenomics are women; too often, these events simply turn into platforms for women to complain among themselves.
Abe’s womenomics will not work unless and until Japanese men change their thinking.
If Abenomics is now stalling, as many fear, the reason may be found in a lack of capacity to implement the policies put forward, particularly with respect to women.
Indeed, the key to Abenomics’ success or failure may turn out to be whether the Japanese people are convinced that women are essential to their country’s economic revival, and are willing to support an earnest effort to establish institutions that support working women.
Tipping Points to Asia’s Future
TOKYO – A week, it is said, is a long time in politics.
But events in Asia over the past week may define the region for decades to come.
Thailand, one of Asia’s most prosperous countries, seems determined to render itself a basket case.
A military coup, imposed following the Thai constitutional court’s ouster of an elected government on spurious legal grounds, can lead only to an artificial peace.
Unless Thailand’s military is prepared to serve as a truly honest broker between deposed Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra (and her supporters) and the anti-democratic Bangkok elite, which has sought a right to permanent minority rule, today’s calm may give way to a new and more dangerous storm.
To Thailand’s east, Vietnam is the latest Asian country to feel pinched by China’s policy of creating facts on the ground, or in this case at sea, to enhance its sovereignty claims on disputed territory.
Vietnam’s government reacted vigorously to China’s placement of a huge, exploratory oilrig near the disputed Paracel Islands in the South China Sea. Ordinary Vietnamese, taking matters into their own hands, reacted even more vigorously, by rioting and targeting Chinese industrial investments for attack.
China’s unilateral behavior has exposed a strain of virulent anti-Chinese sentiment bubbling beneath the surface in many Asian countries.
Renewed protests over China’s mining investments in Myanmar this week confirmed this trend, one that China’s leaders seem either to dismiss as trivial, or to regard as somehow unrelated to their bullying.
Indeed, like Russian President Vladimir Putin, who faces widespread public antipathy in Ukraine, China’s leaders appear to believe that popular protests against them can only be the product of an American plot.
Yet, despite their shared contempt for expressions of the popular will, China’s President Xi Jinping and Putin struggled, during Putin’s two-day visit to Shanghai, to agree on a new gas deal that the Kremlin desperately needs.
Putin had viewed China as his backup option should the West seek to isolate Russia following its annexation of Crimea.
Putin’s idea was that he could pivot Russia’s economy into a partnership with China.
But Xi balked, signing the gas agreement only after Putin offered a steep, long-term discount.
Xi’s self-confidence reflected not only the Chinese leadership’s contempt for Putin’s mismanagement of the Russian economy, but also the fact that China’s energy worries have lessened considerably of late.
Successful deployment of hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) technology in Xinjiang suggests that China, like America, will soon be able to draw on its own reserves of shale energy.
Moreover, plentiful gas supplies from Myanmar and Central Asia will provide China with sufficient supplies of energy for at least a decade.
China’s hard bargaining with Russia has exposed the limits of the two countries’ bilateral cooperation, which has important geo-strategic consequences for Asia and the world.
China, it now seems, is happy to see Putin poke his finger in the West’s eye and challenge America’s global leadership.
But it is not willing to underwrite with hard cash Russian pretensions to world power status.
Instead, China appears interested in turning Russia into the sort of vassal state that Putin is seeking to create in Ukraine.
But the most epochal events of the last week took place in two of Asia’s great democracies: India and Japan.
Narendra Modi’s landslide victory in India’s general election was not only a huge personal triumph for the son of a tea seller, but may well mark a decisive break with India’s traditional inward-looking policies.
Modi is determined to reform India’s economy and lead the country into the front rank of world powers.
Here, Modi will find no stauncher ally than Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who was among the first Asian leaders to embrace him in his bid to lead India.
Given that both countries have almost perfectly aligned regional security interests, there should be plenty of scope for the two to act in tandem to improve regional security and mutual prosperity.
Thailand’s crisis might well mark a good early test of their ability to work together, because both countries have strong interests in Thailand’s rapid return to democracy and the credibility needed to act as an honest broker in ending the country’s crisis.
In the past week, Abe created for himself considerably more political space to act as a strategic partner, not only to India, but also to Japan’s other allies, particularly the United States.
Quietly, a panel appointed by Abe’s government this week offered a reinterpretation of a key element of Article 9 of Japan’s constitution.
For the first time since the Pacific War’s end in 1945, Japan’s Self-Defense Forces would be able to participate in “collective self-defense” – meaning that Japan could come to the aid of its allies should they come under attack.
Of course, China and others in Asia have tried to muddy this change with the alarmist charge of a return to Japanese militarism.
But the new interpretation of Article 9 augurs just the opposite: it embeds Japan’s military within an alliance system that has been, and will remain, the backbone of Asia’s prevailing structure of peace.
Abe will make this clear when he delivers the keynote address in Singapore at this year’s Shangri La Dialogue, the annual meeting of Asian military and civilian military leaders.
Modi’s victory and Abe’s increased ability to stand by Japan’s allies can help to forge deeper bilateral ties and, if properly understood by China, foster a greater strategic equilibrium in the region.
It is now possible for Asia’s greatest powers – China, India, Japan, and the US – to form something akin to the concert system that gave Europe a century of almost complete peace in the nineteenth century.
Of course, such a system would require China to set aside its goal of regional hegemony.
Clear-sighted Chinese must already see that, short of a victorious war, such dominance is impossible.
Now is the moment for China to anchor its rise within a stable and mutually acceptable Asian regional order.
Indeed, for China, this may be the ultimate tipping point in its modernization.
The Pyongyang Purge
TOKYO – During the Cold War, the term “Kremlinology” referred to efforts to understand what was taking place at the commanding heights of the Soviet Union – indeed, behind the entire Iron Curtain.
Kremlinologists monitored (in whatever way possible) who was up and who was down among the core Soviet leadership.
Great significance was read into who signed an official document, or who stood where atop Lenin’s Tomb in Red Square when reviewing military parades.
All of that was grammar-school stuff compared to efforts to decipher the regime in North Korea, where the truth is far more opaque.
Consider what happened on December 17.
Choe Ryong-hae, Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the Korean Workers’ Party, was conspicuously present on stage at the commemoration of the second anniversary of “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il’s death – the first major ceremony following the purge and execution of Jang Song-thaek, the former vice chairman of the National Defense Commission.
Choe’s speech, with its threats against the United States and South Korea, seemed to set the stage for his political elevation.
Jang Song-thaek had been seen as a kind of regent to Kim Jong-un, the young successor to the Kim family dynasty, and was thought to be number two in the regime.
But he owed his position to his wife, Kim Kyong-hui, the only sister of Kim Jong-il, Kim Jong-un’s deceased father.
Jang’s tact, as well as his usefulness as an interlocutor with China, enabled him to keep his position, despite his long-term separation from his wife.
But in North Korea, blood is paramount: everything, including ideology and the national interest, is subservient to the maintenance of the Kim dynasty.
The “legacy” of the “Great Leader” Kim Il-sung and his son, “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il, determines all major decisions.
I have long believed that the true holder of power since Kim Jong-il’s death has been his sister, Kim Kyong-hui, and no one else.
North Korean culture would suggest that women do not take positions of leadership, but it appears that she was the only family member whom Kim Jong-il could trust.
When he was incapacitated by illness, it was she who called the shots.
Her blood tie to the Kim dynasty is the reason why, even after her husband was purged and executed (and the rest of his family rounded up), she maintained her political position.
It has even been suggested that she made the decision to purge her husband.
Though it cannot be known whether she also proposed killing him, it is not surprising that she believed that, with her own health failing, she could not leave the family dynasty to her husband’s care.
Perhaps the most chilling aspect of Jang’s execution is that it appears to be part of a feeding frenzy that has claimed the lives of a number of senior officials and generals.
And the bloodletting has been extremely personal: In August, Kim Jong-un reportedly ordered the execution by firing squad of an ex-girlfriend and other members of her musical ensemble; the killings are said to have been carried out in front of their families.
Elsewhere in the communist world, such murderous purges were renounced long ago, first in the Soviet Union by Khrushchev, following his denunciation of Stalin, and then in China by Deng Xiaoping, following his rehabilitation and return to power in the late 1970’s.
This “reform” did not make these regimes any more beneficent or efficient, but it did bring a degree of stability and predictability to their behavior.
North Korea, always the least predictable of totalitarian communist states, remains in a twilight world.
More disturbing is the question of whether China is going down a parallel path under President Xi Jinping.
Ever since Deng’s rule, there has been an understanding that members of the Chinese Communist Party’s Politburo are not to be touched, even in retirement.
But Xi, under the pretext of his anti-corruption battle, has targeted retired Politburo member Zhou Yongkang, who is now reportedly under house arrest, facing graft charges – and lurid allegations not only that he murdered his first wife but that he tried to assassinate Xi.
China’s emphasis since Deng on rule by consensus may not have made the country any more democratic, but it at least prevented the re-emergence of a new cult of personality à la Mao Zedong.
The question today is whether Xi’s flouting of this internal party convention is another step in re-creating one-man – and thus completely arbitrary – rule in China.
In North Korea, of course, arbitrary rule – no matter how bizarre and inept – is always the norm.
And now, with Jang purged, responsibility for economic failure in North Korea has been shifted to Choe.
All officials and people related to him now live under the shadow of the executioner, for he is certain to bear the blame when the dynasty needs a scapegoat for its mounting problems.
And Jang’s purge may make those problems worse.
While China lost a convenient point of contact with the Kim regime, North Korea may have lost the only channel by which to sustain itself.
The economy cannot be revived so long as international sanctions are maintained, and the sanctions seem certain to remain in place so long as the regime continues with its nuclear brinkmanship.
China, which has been the Kim dynasty’s lifeline, no longer appears willing to offer it a blank check.
So the day is fast approaching when Kim Jong-un and his clan will have to take responsibility for the country’s dire condition, and it may come soon after Kim Kyong-hui dies.
If so, the Kim dynasty’s last chapter may have begun with the current spasm of executions, though the ending – for the Korean Peninsula and East Asia alike – remains very much in doubt.
The New Neutrality
TOKYO – Throughout the Cold War, the Soviet Union used every imaginable threat and inducement – including the ultimate prize of reunification – to bring about a neutral Germany.
But German leaders of both the left and the right, from Konrad Adenauer to Willy Brandt, spurned every Soviet offer.
Will authoritarian mercantilism now succeed where communism failed?
Countries join alliances, or entities such as the European Union, because these groups make the benefits and obligations of membership as unambiguous as anything in international relations can be.
For Germany and South Korea, however, relationships with historic allies – NATO and the United States, respectively – appear to be changing before our eyes.
Through their huge purchases of goods, with promises of even more to come, today’s authoritarian/mercantilist regimes in Russia and China may be about to achieve by commerce what the Soviets could not achieve by bribery and threats.
And the scale of that commerce is breathtaking, with German exports to China growing from $25.9 billion a decade ago to $87.6 billion in 2011, while South Korea’s exports have increased from $53 billion to $133 billion during the same period of time.
A form of stealth neutralism, indeed, appears to be entering both countries’ diplomacy.
Witness Chinese President Xi Jinping’s recent trip to South Korea, German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s unwillingness to impose effective sanctions on Russia for its intervention in Ukraine, and the business-only focus of her just-concluded visit to China.
In both Germany and South Korea, the idea that historic alliances may offer fewer tangible benefits than tacit neutrality – particularly in terms of exports – appears to be taking root, especially among business elites.
Xi’s visit to Seoul was another bold step in China’s systematic efforts to wean South Korea from its commitment to the US-led international economic order.
By offering to permit South Korea to settle its bilateral trade accounts in renminbi, and to launch the first-ever Sino-South Korean initiative toward North Korea, Xi is seeking to convince South Korea’s leaders that the country’s future, including reunification, will be determined in Beijing.
China’s invitation to South Korea to participate in a new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (alongside other countries in Asia and the Arab world, but excluding Japan and India) furthers Xi’s efforts to create an alternative financial system, with the AIIB mimicking the Asia Development Bank’s work.
China’s embrace of South Korea is part of a long-term strategy to turn it into a subordinate state in terms of foreign and national security policy (much as Finland kowtowed to the Soviet Union throughout the Cold War).
And yet, though courted by all sides in the struggle to maintain stability in Northeast Asia, South Korea now runs the risk of becoming isolated.
Every gesture by the South toward one of the protagonists – China, the US, Japan, and North Korea – elicits so much pressure by the others that its government must then somehow devise a compensatory policy.
For example, following President Park Geun-hye’s request that Xi honor the Korean assassin of a Japanese prime minister, to which Xi readily agreed, she began to discuss joining the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade negotiations, in order to assuage the US.
As China continued to pursue an anti-Japanese propaganda campaign throughout 2013, Park felt obliged to make some effort to revive ties with Japan by sending a private envoy to Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to seek talks on reconciling their disputes.
Given its insecurity, a by-product of the Korean Peninsula’s long division, South Korea requires, above all, calm and steady partners.
But frequent changes in US policy toward Northeast Asia in recent years have disoriented South Korean policymakers, while Chinese policy, though consistent, confronts South Korea’s leaders with choices that they appear unprepared to make.
As a result, South Korea’s elite appears to be splitting into pro-Chinese and pro-American factions that transcend party lines.
Over a period of time, the only beneficiaries are likely to be those who call for “Finlandization” of the Korean peninsula.
Meanwhile, the impact on German foreign policy of the country’s deepening economic ties with Russia has been evident throughout the Ukraine crisis.
Though Merkel frequently admonished the Kremlin about its intervention in Ukraine, German public opinion – particularly that of the country’s business leaders – tied her hands.
Indeed, German big businesses have been the main obstacle to imposing the type of systemic sanctions that might have dissuaded Russian President Vladimir Putin from annexing Crimea and continuing to back the insurgency (which Russia itself incited) in eastern Ukraine.
This is not the only recent case in which Germany has distanced itself from its allies and partners.
In Libya in 2011, Germany refused to offer even rudimentary material support to the military intervention staged by its British and French allies.
Germany has also continuously failed to meet its commitment to spend 2% of its GDP on defense, at the same time that it has insisted that troubled EU economies stick to austerity budgets that limit their deficits to a fixed proportion of their economic output.
Indeed, throughout the eurozone crisis, Germany did the absolute minimum – and always at the last possible moment – to assist its EU partners.
And German leaders’ obsession with maintaining their country’s “golden decade” of exports appears to have gagged them on topics like China’s human rights abuses and its aggressive behavior toward its Asian neighbors.
That silence is being rewarded with the first-ever joint cabinet sessions between a democracy and a communist dictatorship, which will take place in Berlin this autumn.
In both Germany and South Korea, economic strength seems to have produced an illusion of policy independence that is opening a chasm between the two countries and their allies – a chasm that revelations of US spying, on Merkel in particular, have deepened.
Germany and South Korea, however, will gain little, and risk much, if they downgrade their alliance ties in favor of commercially motivated, if unofficial, neutrality.
Whatever short-term benefits they receive will be more than offset by their strategic vulnerabilities vis-à-vis Russia and China.
Ending East Asia’s History Wars
TOKYO – Georges Clemenceau, who, as France’s prime minister, led his country to victory in World War I, famously said that “war is too important to be left to the generals.”
Japan is now discovering that history is too important to be left to newspaper editors.
In the 1990s, the newspaper Asahi Shimbun caused a firestorm at home and in South Korea by publishing a series of articles, based upon testimony by the former Japanese soldier Seiji Yoshida, on “comfort women” – Koreans forced to provide sexual services to the Japanese Imperial Army during World War II.
Asahi has now admitted that the soldier’s confessions were unfounded, and has disavowed the core supporting evidence for the articles.
That retraction appears to be causing as much embarrassment – and diplomatic vitriol – in Japan and South Korea today as the original series did.
But, at a time when both countries cannot afford to permit partisan or sloppy abuses of history to roil their bilateral relations, Asahi’s careless work has turned out to be more than abysmal journalism; it has introduced a dangerous element into regional diplomacy.
Some say that Japan and South Korea should follow the example set by France and Germany.
Reconciling in the first two decades following the Nazi Occupation of France, these countries’ leaders understood that their security and economic ties were far too important to their citizens’ wellbeing to allow the old hatreds to fester.
They knew that the unimaginable violence of WWII was a direct result of the antagonisms that had festered since the Napoleonic Wars and that were allowed to persist after 1918.
In Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer, France and Germany had two of the twentieth century’s greatest statesmen, leaders who were able to discern the broad sweep of history through the fog of quotidian politics.
Their loyalty was not only to the citizens who elected them, but also to the generations of the past that had endured the consequences of Franco-German enmity, and to generations yet to come, which would benefit from reconciliation.
Of course, given that Japan and Korea have not fought a series of wars against each other, their relationship is not the same as that between Germany and France.
But it is clear that no one will benefit from a new round of heated historical debate.
To avoid this, political leaders like de Gaulle and Adenauer are needed.
Only when we can discuss the past without endangering the future will the countries of Northeast Asia be able to establish a truly durable structure of peace.
As Admiral Dennis C. Blair, a former commander of the US Pacific Fleet, stated at a recent conference, “The history of Asia from the 1930s to about 1955 or so was not pretty in any way&hellip;.I don’t think any country can have a monopoly on righteousness, or on guilt and shame” for that time.
Blair added that “the attempt to hold a ‘we were right’ and ‘you were wrong’ sweepstakes is not going to help our children and grandchildren understand what happened there.”
Japan and South Korea need to take responsibility for the future, not obsess about the past.
A recent Japanese government white paper called South Korea the country “that shares the closest relationship with Japan historically and in areas such as economy and culture.”
No doubt, many, if not most, South Korean foreign-policy experts and strategists share that sentiment.
But it will take committed leadership to transcend the history wars and tap the full potential of Japanese-Korean cooperation, something that both countries’ key ally, the United States, strongly desires, as it seeks to draw China into a lasting and peaceful Asian order.
For too long, intemperate historical debates – often driven by biased newspaper accounts – have poisoned bilateral relations.
Now, as another war of words heats up, Japanese and South Korean leaders need to step back, recognize where the real interests of their people lie, both today and in the future, and calmly begin to take the measures required to ensure durable reconciliation.
Taming the China Bears
BEIJING – The market is always in search of a story, and investors, it seems, think they have found a new one this year in China.
The country’s growth slowdown and mounting financial risks have spurred a growing wave of pessimism, with economists worldwide warning of an impending crash.
But dire predictions for China have abounded for the last 30 years, and not one has materialized.
Are today’s really so different?
The short answer is no.
Like the predictions of the past, today’s warnings are based on historical precedents and universal indicators against which China, with its unique economic features, simply cannot be judged accurately.
The bottom line is that the complexity and distinctiveness of China’s economy mean that assessing its current state and performance requires a detail-oriented analysis that accounts for as many offsetting factors as possible.
Predictions are largely pointless, given that the assumptions underpinning them will invariably change.
Consider China’s high leverage ratio, which many argue will be a key factor in causing a crisis.
After all, they contend, developing countries that have experienced a large-scale credit boom have all ended up facing a credit crisis and a hard economic landing.
But several specific factors must be accounted for in assessing whether this is China’s fate.
While China’s debt/GDP ratio is very high, the same is true in many successful East Asian economies, such as Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, and Malaysia.
And China’s saving rate is much higher.
Ceteris paribus, the higher the saving rate, the less likely it is that a high debt/GDP ratio will trigger a financial crisis.