Indeed, while the diagnostic process – which typically involves sending a sample of blood, urine, or tissue to a laboratory for analysis – may be cumbersome and expensive, health-care providers and sophisticated laboratories remain widely available.
As a result, the disease burden in the developed world has declined substantially.
By contrast, in the developing world, millions of people die each year from treatable diseases like malaria, owing to the lack of sophisticated laboratories and alternative diagnostic tests.
But there is reason for hope: Advances in the field of microfluidics have the potential to transform health care by allowing “gold standard” laboratory-based testing to be transferred to the point of care (POC).
A POC test that provides an accurate and timely result would provide diagnostic access to underserved populations, enabling earlier treatment and helping to avoid mistreatment (treating another disease with similar symptoms).
In order to meet their potential, however, POC tests must account for the wide range of factors affecting health-care applications.
First, a POC test must meet the particular environmental and operating constraints of where it will be used.
These may include an unreliable power supply, harsh or unpredictable environmental conditions, limited contact time between the health-care provider and patient, lack of user training, severe price constraints, and inadequate local infrastructure, which can impede the maintenance and repair of relevant instruments.
Indeed, POC settings can vary from a semi-trained health-care provider working in a clinic with electricity and access to refrigeration to an untrained individual in an environment with no mechanism for controlling temperature or humidity.
In order to ensure the broadest coverage possible, POC tests should be designed to work in the settings with the fewest resources.
Likewise, POC tests must account for different tests’ requirements for clinical utility.
While diagnosing malaria requires only a positive or negative result, an HIV viral-load test would need to provide a graded output indicating the amount of virus detected.
One of the most successful POC test formats is that of the well-known pregnancy test, which requires only the user’s urine and takes roughly 15 minutes to deliver the result.
This class of “rapid diagnostic tests” (RDTs), which are also used for infectious diseases like malaria and HIV, satisfy many of the key requirements for global health applications: they are fast and inexpensive, can be conducted easily by an untrained user, and do not require refrigeration.
But they lack the sensitivity to provide adequate diagnostic information for many health conditions.
Given this, researchers are working to develop more sophisticated paper-based tests.
For example, a new class of device, about the size of a postage stamp, that splits a sample into multiple zones with different detection chemistries has been used to test multiple conditions associated with liver failure in HIV and tuberculosis patients.
And “paper network” devices include built-in timing mechanisms to enable automated multi-step tests like those used in laboratories, but in a disposable format.
Another mechanism for expanding the capabilities of diagnostic testing would take advantage of the penetration of mobile-phone networks in developing countries.
RDTs are largely limited to applications that require visual interpretation.
A non-dedicated mobile phone could be used to capture and send image data from an RDT to a remote site, where a health-care provider would provide feedback on the results.
But implementing such a program raises a new set of challenges.
In order to ensure accurate test results, the variability of camera positioning by the user and lighting conditions in different test environments must be addressed.
(One promising approach under development would use an adapter to connect the non-dedicated mobile phone to the RDT.)
Moreover, a phone-based test would require software infrastructure, such as communication protocols and prioritization procedures, to coalesce with the health-care system.
And the compatibility issues raised by the wide variety of mobile-phone handsets would need to be addressed.
Finally, the successful deployment of non-dedicated phone-based testing would require acceptance from the medical establishment.
The US Food and Drug Administration’s recent approval of several medical devices supported by dedicated phone-based readers is a promising step.
Effective POC tests are being developed; the proliferation of mobile phones will further augment the capabilities of these tests.
These emergent capabilities promise to extend the reach of high-quality diagnostics to remote populations, improve health management, and reduce health-care costs everywhere.
Elected Dirty Dealers
CHICAGO – Imagine that you are an elected member of the United States House of Representatives in the middle of the debate on the health-care reform act that was passed in 2010.
In a House committee meeting, you learn before anyone else that a proposed public-insurance option – a program that would compete with private insurance – will not be included.
This information will have a large impact on health-care companies’ stock prices. Can you trade these companies’ shares before it is made public?
Morally, it is difficult to separate this example from traditional cases of corporate insider trading. Yet no law prohibits the practice.
The US Congress – the legislative branch of the country’s government – effectively exempts itself from the normal rules of insider trading.
Congress and the US Supreme Court are the only federal agencies whose employees may, without restrictions, trade stocks based on non-public information. All other US government employees who traded on privileged information of the type described above would be acting illegally.
Not only can members of Congress legally trade on confidential information; they do, despite the potential cost to their reputations.
The US television program 60 Minutes recently reported that several current members of Congress allegedly used confidential information that they acquired on the job for personal gain.
While the nexus between the privileged information and the trading is difficult to prove (as it is in most insider trading cases), the timing is highly suspicious.
But it is difficult to challenge this congressional “privilege” in the US, in part because insider trading is an ambiguous concept under US law, with no statutory definitions of the terms “insider,” “inside information,” or “insider trading.”
In contrast, the European Union has tried to define these terms in directives aimed at prohibiting the practice.
According to a directive issued in 1989, “An insider is one who, due to his relationship to the company as manager, director, employee, or major shareholder, possesses inside information (material non-public facts) and knowingly uses such inside information to acquire or dispose of securities to which the information relates for his own account or another.”
But this definition, while forthright, leaves a large loophole for legislators.
For example, it creates the possibility that, say, British MPs could legally trade shares on information acquired in the course of normal business, because they do not qualify as “insiders.”
In 2004, a paper published in the Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis showed that US senators who traded stocks beat the market by 12% per year.
Since even the best hedge-fund managers find it hard to achieve comparable results, we must conclude that these senators either are better than hedge-fund managers, or that they benefit from privileged information.
Even more worrying than insider trading by elected representatives is the political-intelligence industry that now flourishes in Washington, Brussels, and other major global capitals.
In the US, former US congressmen and their staffers collect privileged information and sell it to hedge-fund managers, raking in $100 million annually.
A proposal to ban insider trading by US congressmen has languished in Congress since 2006.
But it appears that the 60 Minutes program generated some attention; within four days of the broadcast, the number of cosponsors of the proposal increased from nine to 57, and a session was called to discuss the legislation next month.
Yet the problem is not simply Congress’s exemption from insider-trading law. The real issue is that the US Congress – like many countries’ legislatures – lives by rules that are very different from those imposed on ordinary citizens.
In particular, the accounting, transparency, and fraud rules that govern businesses do not apply to elected representatives.
It is a problem that goes well beyond insider trading.
If corporate executives lie during a conference call, they can be sued.
Politicians, on the other hand, lie during electoral campaigns and once in office, with few or no consequences.
If the US government had been compelled to abide by the same accounting rules as the private sector does, it would have been forced to consolidate Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – the giant government-backed mortgage companies at the heart of the recent financial crisis – and to report all contingent liabilities at market value.
Rather than just extending insider-trading law to the US Congress (or to other legislatures), citizens should demand that all restrictions and reporting requirements imposed on the private sector apply automatically to elected representatives as well.
This would make these legislatures more credible, and their laws more just.
Elections are Not Enough
There can be no liberal order without political democracy, but today we are frequently reminded that political democracy alone does not guarantee a liberal order.
Free and fair elections may lead to the ascendancy of a president of Iran who wants to “wipe Israel off the map of the Middle East.” Or to a president of Venezuela whose intolerance of the business class causes jubilation in the streets, but emigration by those whose initiative is crucial for the welfare of the people.
Less damaging, yet problematic, is the election – as in Poland – of a minority government that ruthlessly pursues its members’ personal interests and breaks all promises of cooperation made before the polls.
In other words, elections are not enough if one wants to bring democracy to the world.
Elections can lead to illiberal democracies and worse.
They must be embedded in a much more complex institutional framework, which I would describe as the liberal order.
The first feature of the liberal order is that democracies must not tolerate those who set out to destroy democracy.
Some countries, like Germany, have laws that make it possible to ban political parties whose programs are recognizably anti-democratic.
In the past, the law has been used to curb parties of both the extreme left and the extreme right.
This has clearly contributed to preventing any sign of a possible return to the totalitarian ways of the twentieth century.
However, it is not always evident when people and parties stand for election what they are going to do if they win.
This is where rules that impose term limits on officeholders, such as the Twenty-Second Amendment of the United States Constitution, have their place.
Many constitutions contain such a rule, and even President Vladimir Putin of Russia has stated that he will abide by it.
Let us hope that this will in fact be the case.
Elsewhere, notably in many of the Soviet Union’s other successor states and in Latin America, those in power have often simply changed the constitution – including rules on term limits – to their advantage.
This is where the second pillar of a liberal order comes into play: the rule of law.
It cannot be said too often that democracy and the rule of law are not the same thing.
There are lawless democracies and undemocratic “states of law” (Rechtsstaat).
The constitution of liberty requires both, and the rule of law is the more difficult of the two to establish and maintain, for it requires not just a constitution but, almost more importantly, an independent judiciary that is sensitive to violations of constitutional and other legitimate rules.
It is extremely important that Iraq held elections to a constitutional assembly.
This has produced – albeit with a certain amount of external pressure notably on behalf of the Sunnis – a document that may provide the basis for the rule of law.
But the task of finding, appointing, and accepting independent judges remains. It will be particularly difficult in an environment in which the sharia – that is, Islamic religious law administered not by judges but by priests – is never far away.
The rule of secular law is the most delicate prerequisite of a liberal order.
Even then, we know from history that it takes but one Enabling Law to unhinge the rule of law and replace it by an ideological tyranny, as happened when Hitler came to power in Germany.
This is where the third element of a liberal order comes into play: civil society.
A plurality of civic associations and activities – regulated but not controlled by the state, and free to express its views and even to demonstrate its (diverse) sentiments publicly – is the most powerful pillar of a liberal order.
A vibrant civil society will mobilize when the rule of law is violated, and it can also check the illiberal inclinations of democratic majorities.
The near-universal availability of information makes it much easier than it was in earlier times for the voluntary non-governmental organizations that form civil society to emerge.
However, there is no ultimate guarantee against the abuse of power, especially if that power is democratically gained.
The international community must therefore recognize that it is not enough to promote, organize, or monitor elections in hitherto undemocratic countries.
The program of spreading the liberal order requires a much more sophisticated approach. Above all, it requires international agencies and groupings that remain alert to the risks of illiberal democracies.
Elections Without Winners
When football matches – at least those that must produce a winner – end in a draw, a penalty shoot-out must resolve the matter, as this World Cup has demonstrated so dramatically.
The shoot-out’s individual competition for heroism or misery is really alien to such a team game as football, but it is accepted as a necessary way to resolve the stalemate.
But when it comes to elections – which ideally should always produce a winner – there is no such device.
Yet quite a few recent elections have ended in at least a near-stalemate.
Mexico’s presidential election is only the latest example.
Several weeks ago, the general election in the Czech Republic yielded a total impasse, with the left and right each gaining 100 lower-house seats and no resolution in sight.
In Italy, a curious rule that provides for the grouping which has a handful of votes more than the other to get a bonus of several dozen seats in the lower house.
Romano Prodi’s government must operate on a razor’s edge in the Senate.
There are other recent examples, including, perhaps most notoriously, the 2000 presidential election in the United States.
Why are we suddenly experiencing so many close results in democratic elections?
How should we best deal with them?
And what do they do to the legitimacy of the governments that result from them?
The first question is the hardest to answer.
To the committed observer, it does not appear that democratic countries’ electorates are so evenly divided along class or similar lines as to cause political stalemate.
On the contrary, electorates everywhere seem more volatile than anything else, with voters prepared to change their preferences from one poll to the next.
Often, they want change – just that.
Nor is there any sign that political ideology has made a return among ordinary people.
Yet nowadays divisions between candidates for office are deeper than ever – and are even sharper among party activists.
This is certainly true in Latin America, where a wave of leftist populism has swept many countries.
Several Europe countries, too, have revealed a less dramatic left-right split, with Spain and Italy – though not Poland and the Czech Republic – moving somewhat to the left.
But the real issue is not so simple.
Increasingly, the divisiveness of democratic polities reflects a combination of undecided voters, motivated by ephemeral sentiments, and the emergence of political activists, often focused on narrow issues, who exploit electoral volatility for their purposes.
So what can be done in practical terms when division leads to stalemate?
One solution is to form a grand coalition, as in today’s Germany.
It is amazing to watch how quickly Christian Democrats and Social Democrats have forgotten their electoral promises and agreed on a program of higher taxation.
One may doubt whether this will increase popular confidence in the political class, but for now, at least, the arrangement is working.
Another possibility is to turn razor-thin majorities into one-sided governments that remain centrist in policy.
This is what has happened in Italy, and it may well occur in the Czech Republic.
In Latin American countries, on the other hand, an all-or-nothing attitude seems to prevail, with 50.1% of the popular vote regarded as being sufficient to stage a revolution of sentiment, if not of policy.
What does this do to the legitimacy of governments, and of political institutions in general?
As long as winners with razor-thin majorities, once in office, steer a middle course, they are more likely to remain acceptable to an electorate that is more volatile than divided.
By contrast, grand coalitions are, in the long term, likely to raise doubts about the system and encourage radical groups.
The same may also be true if narrow winners adopt a radical agenda, as some think George W. Bush has done in America and many feared Andrés Manuel Lopéz Obrador would do in Mexico.
Yet, as long as such leaders respect the democratic constitution, they are not likely to get very far; the next election will dislodge them.
Playing divisive games with an electorate that is not deeply divided never succeeds for long.
The real question is whether an uncertain electorate is prepared to defend democratic constitutions if an extremist who wins by a hair tries to overturn it and usher in a new era of tyranny.
There is currently no such risk in Europe.
However reluctantly, Silvio Berlusconi accepted in the end that he had lost, if just by a whisker, as did Viktor Orban in Hungary.
But one conclusion is perhaps more compelling than ever.
Britain’s last election also produced a narrow outcome.
However, seats in parliament, not percentages of the vote are what matters, owing to Britain’s winner-take-all electoral system based on single-member constituencies, which encourages political parties to gravitate to the center.
A volatile electorate can replace last time’s winner, but both can try to persuade voters and govern without having to go to extremes to gain a majority.
The first-past-the-post system is still the most effective method of ensuring orderly change.
Ending the War Against Women
ATHENS – On Valentine’s Day, countless couples will celebrate romance by candlelight.
On the same day, one billion women and men worldwide will stand up to shine a light on the darker side of gender relations.
According to the United Nations, one in three women worldwide will be raped or beaten in her lifetime.
In some countries, up to seven in ten women will be beaten, raped, abused, or mutilated.
Often, the victims of such abuses are treated as criminals – dishonored, brutalized, ostracized, imprisoned, and even executed – while perpetrators remain free.
Millions of women suffer in this way, but their stories remain untold.
Last December, the brutal gang rape and murder of a 23-year-old woman in India – two months after Pakistan’s Taliban shot 14-year-old Malala Yousafzai for advocating education – triggered large-scale public protests.
This outcry should mark the start of a global movement to lift the veil of silence that shrouds violence against women – which often begins at home – and protects the perpetrators.
From honor killings to child marriages, from date rape to sex slavery, crimes against women are prevalent in every society.&#160;But, when women are courageous enough to report abuse, doctors are often unhelpful, police are hostile, and the justice system fails them.
For example, one in three women in the United States military is sexually assaulted, usually by a colleague, yet very few attackers are convicted.
Likewise, in the United Kingdom, 473,000 sexual offenses are reported annually, 60,000-95,000 of which are classified as rape.
But, in each of the last three years, only slightly more than 1,000 offenders were convicted of rape.
In the 1970’s, feminists identified the connection between rape, male privilege, and female sexual vilification.&#160;Today, readily accessible Internet pornography is teaching boys and men that sexual acts involving degradation and even violent abuse of women are acceptable.
Meanwhile, many privileged women, instilled with a strong sense of entitlement, dismiss feminism as passé.
But gender discrimination continues to pervade all aspects of society, with most social and political institutions continuing to foster “glass ceilings,” if not outright female subordination.
Women receive equal pay and equal opportunities in very few countries.
Feminism thus has a crucial role to play in the twenty-first century.
After all, as Executive Director of UN Women Michelle Bachelet has put it, “violence against women is…a threat to democracy, a barrier to lasting peace, a burden on national economies, and an appalling human-rights violation.”
Governments must continue to advance women’s rights through legislation, while civil society must promote a cultural shift that rejects women’s marginalization or mistreatment.
Only by enabling women to realize their potential can countries ensure economic and social progress.
This potential was evident during the Arab Spring uprisings, when women, empowered by recent advances in literacy and education, organized and led demonstrations that toppled decades-old regimes.
In Egypt, even as female political activists and reporters were being sexually harassed in Tahrir Square, they continued to contribute to the revolution.
But gender equality remains a distant goal in the region, with women being left out of the political process, exerting little influence in governing bodies or in drafting new constitutions.
In fact, on the Egyptian revolution’s two-year anniversary last week, when thousands of demonstrators took to the streets to protest President Mohamed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood, at least nine female protesters were sexually assaulted in Tahrir Square.
In March, government and civil-society leaders will gather in New York for a meeting of the UN Commission on the Status of Women to agree on a plan to eliminate violence against women.
Global leaders should take this opportunity to pledge to adopt the policies and devote the resources needed to end pervasive violations of women’s human rights.
But, without the political will to enact legislation and enforce it effectively, promises are meaningless.
Although 187 countries have signed the 1979 United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Violence Against Women, statistics show little progress.
Consider&#160;Afghanistan, which ratified the convention in 2009.
A 2012 Action Aid survey found that violence against women has never been more prevalent, with 87% of women suffering domestic abuse.
In the same year, President Hamid Karzai’s government upheld a husband’s legal right to beat his wife.
If an Afghan man murders his wife, he can expect to pay a fine.
Change is possible, but it requires collective action by the international community to challenge the attitudes that lead to violence, oppression, and inequality.
Five steps are particularly important:&#160;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Ratify and enforce all relevant regional and international treaties, and implement laws that prohibit violence against women and ensure effective punishment of offenses.&#160;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Enhance women’s economic and political empowerment, including by directing international aid toward their health, education, and welfare.
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Increase public awareness of the problem through traditional media, as well as through social media and other electronic channels.
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Mobilize men and boys against violence through educational programs.&#160;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Improve support for survivors of violence and their families, including legal assistance, psychological counseling, and health care.
Many international movements and organizations – such as Women Under Siege, V-Day, and Stop Violence Against Women – are already working to deliver justice and security to women.
Governments and political parties should support such initiatives.
All people deserve justice, equality, and freedom from violence.
On February 14, women and men worldwide should support One Billion Rising, a global call for people to show their support for the one billion women who have survived violence and abuse.
Whether you choose to strike, dance, speak out, or simply stand up, your involvement will bring the world closer to ending this deadly war against women.
Empty Promises and Dead Children
LONDON – Buried among the 169 targets contained in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – adopted by the United Nations last September amid a blaze of glitzy events, celebrity endorsements, and back-slapping by world leaders, aid donors, and non-governmental organizations – was the vital pledge to eliminate “preventable child deaths” by 2030.
It is a cause for our generation – but one that will take a lot more than UN communiqués to advance.
The last set of international development targets, the Millennium Development Goals, certainly brought about important progress; the number of children who died before reaching their fifth birthday dropped from ten million in 2000, when the MDGs were adopted, to 5.9 million in 2015.
Some of the world’s poorest countries have registered some of the most significant gains.
This progress was driven by several factors, including falling poverty and heavy investment in community-based health systems.
By deploying nurses, midwives, and other health workers, these systems extended the availability of prenatal care, simple obstetric interventions, clean cord cutting, and post-natal care.
Ethiopia, for example, has deployed a small army of some 38,000 health workers over the last decade.
International cooperation was also crucial.
Aid for child and maternal health has grown dramatically since 2000, and now stands at some $12 billion annually.
Development assistance has enabled the creation of community-based health programs, and played a key role in supporting the development and deployment of the vaccines, mosquito nets, and medical treatments that have cut child deaths from the major killer infectious diseases – pneumonia, diarrhea, malaria, and measles – by some 70% since 2000.
Now for the bad news.
In the time it takes you to read this article, more than 30 children will die from causes that could have been prevented or treated.
Every year, more than one million children die the day they are born, and another million die within their first week of life.
Almost half of all child deaths occur in the neo-natal period (the first 28 days) – and the share is rising.
The vast majority of these deaths could be averted.
Yet, if progress continues at its current rate, there will still be some 3.6 million such deaths per year by 2030.
To jump-start progress, we must develop health-care and other interventions that address the poverty, vulnerability, and inequality that place so many children, and their mothers, at risk.
Making health services more widely available is a starting point.
But, all too often, the poor are excluded, even when the clinics exist.
Consider India, which accounts for one-fifth of child deaths worldwide.
Nearly all women from the richest 20% of households enjoy prenatal care and skilled attendants at delivery; coverage rates for the poorest are less than 10% – worse than in much of sub-Saharan Africa.
Surging economic growth has done nothing to reduce the disparity.
And India is just one example.
Each year, some 36 million women in low- and middle-income countries give birth without a skilled attendant.
An even greater number of children do not receive a post-natal health check.
The vast majority of these women and children have one thing in common: they are poor.
Indeed, being born to a low-income mother raises the risk of child mortality by a factor of 2-3 in much of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
Wealth-based disparities in health outcomes extend far beyond pregnancy and birth.
Children born to poor mothers are less likely to be immunized or taken to clinics for treatment of potentially fatal diseases, such as pneumonia and diarrhea.
Survey evidence points to cost as a major barrier excluding poor women and children from health care.
Forcing desperately poor women to pay for maternal and child health care is a prescription for inequality, inefficiency, and child deaths.
Publicly financed universal health coverage is the proven antidote.
Yet political elites in high-mortality countries like India, Pakistan, and Nigeria – the same elites who have signed up to the SDGs – have conspicuously failed to deliver.
If governments are sincere about delivering on the SDGs’ promise on child mortality, they must get serious about ensuring equity in health care.
They could start by introducing national targets to halve the difference in death rates between the richest 20% and poorest 20% over the next seven years.
But targets not backed by finance aren’t worth the communiqué paper they’re printed on.
Developing-country governments should be spending at least 5% of GDP on health, eliminating charges on child and maternal health care, and ensuring that financial resources – and health workers – are allocated in a way that reduces inequalities in care.
Foreign aid also has a vital role to play.
Here, the emphasis should be shifted from delivering disease-specific interventions to building up health-care systems.
We need a global social compact on health to close the financing gap – around $30 billion – for achieving universal health coverage, which requires linking populations to skilled health workers equipped to provide effective care.
Sub-Saharan Africa alone will need to recruit and train another one million community health workers to deliver universal coverage.
Any strategy for achieving the 2030 target for child mortality must go beyond the health sector and focus on the wider inequalities – for example, in nutrition, education, and access to clean water and sanitation – that fuel child mortality.
Girls will need added protection, so that they are not forced into early marriage and child bearing.
Children worldwide face a lethal combination of inequality, injustice, and gender discrimination.
They deserve better.
The promise to eliminate preventable child deaths by 2030 is our chance to ensure they get it.
The Political Importance of Elizabeth Warren
WASHINGTON, DC – Financial reform in the United States and worldwide hangs in the balance.
The problems that brought us the terrible crisis of 2007-08 have not been fixed.
Some underlying weaknesses are actually worse than they were a decade ago, including the problem of “too big to fail” global megabanks.
Europe is backtracking on financial reform issues; its policymakers are too preoccupied with holding the eurozone together.
In the US, there will be no new legislation under the current Congress – and probably not for a long while to come.
The Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 may turn out to be a framework for effective regulation, or it might become another set of empty promises.
So far, implementation has been slow.
Implementation depends on regulators – some of whom are very good, while others remain in thrall to the big Wall Street banks.
The issues are detailed and technical, and the financial lobby has deployed a small army of highly paid experts on a mission of delay, dilution, and diversion.
The process is still subject to political supervision, but many politicians are easily bamboozled when the conversation really gets into the weeds.
This is why newly elected Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is already proving so effective.
Warren has worked hard on financial-sector issues over many years.
She had the key ideas that led to the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and she helped get that agency on its feet.
But she has also been engaged with all of the other practical details of financial reform for as long as anyone – in part due to her experience as chair of the Congressional Oversight Panel for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP).
Warren is now bringing this expertise to bear where it is needed most – directly on senior regulators.
In her most high-profile intervention to date, she castigated leading officials at a Senate Banking Committee hearing on February 14, beginning with a simple question: When was the last time you took a big bank to trial?
All relevant regulators were present: Mary Miller, Under Secretary for Domestic Finance at the Treasury Department; Dan Tarullo, Governor of the Federal Reserve System; Marty Gruenberg, Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC); Tom Curry, Comptroller of the Currency; Richard Cordray, Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; Elisse Walter, Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission; and Gary Gensler, Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Their answers ranged from unimpressive to downright evasive.
(The Fed, the Treasury, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency bear most responsibility, together with the Department of Justice, which was not at the hearing.)
Then Warren hit them where it hurt.
“There are district attorneys and United States attorneys out there every day squeezing ordinary citizens on sometimes very thin grounds and taking them to trial in order to make an example, as they put it.
I’m really concerned that ‘too big to fail’ has become ‘too big for trial.’”
After the video of Warren’s statement went viral, more than 13,000 people signed a petition demanding real accountability.
The conventional narrative – comforting to the big banks and their friends in the Obama administration – is that the Treasury has done everything within its power to reform the system.
In this account, anyone now complaining about, for example, the lack of legal charges against the banks is some form of dangerous demagogue.
But 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents are pushing for more progress on money market reform.
The Special Inspector General for TARP, based within the Treasury, continues to express reservations about the consequences of unconditional bailouts.
Credible figures, such as Richard Fisher (Dallas Fed president), Tom Hoenig (FDIC), and Jeremiah Norton (FDIC) speak publically about the continuing problems posed by “too big to fail.”
Jeremy Stein, a relatively new appointment to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, recently gave a speech explaining why dangerous incentive problems within large financial institutions will not be fixed by regulation.
Yet a senior Department of Justice official recently said that criminal charges could not be brought against big financial institutions, because experts tell him that to do so would damage the economy.
In other words, equality before the law – a fundamental principle of American justice – has vanished.
The political power of global megabanks is out of control.
They aim to run Washington just as effectively as they did in the run-up to the 2007-2008 crisis.
Sensible officials resist this, but they need political cover – elected representatives who will support them on Capitol Hill.
The group of core senators pushing for financial reform is already strong, including Sherrod Brown, Jeff Merkley, Carl Levin, and Jack Reed.
And now Elizabeth Warren is working hard with her Senate colleagues – Democrat and Republican – to bring responsible, well-informed pressure to bear on regulators and prosecutors.
As Christy Romero, TARP’s current Special Inspector General, put it in written testimony submitted for the February 14 hearing, our largest financial institutions “…continue to be dangerously interconnected.
And, in fact, they have only gotten bigger in the past four years.”
A broad coalition of reformers is hammering home this point at every opportunity.
The political narrative is changing – and Warren is leading the way.
Embracing Science
Long-term economic progress comes mainly from the invention and spread of improved technologies.
The scientific revolution was made possible by the printing press, the industrial revolution by the steam engine, and India’s escape from famine by increased farm yields – the so-called “Green Revolution.”
Today’s era of globalization emerged with the spread of computers and the Internet.
Thus, when we seek solutions to some of the world’s toughest problems, they, too, are likely to be found, at least in part, in new technologies that can resolve old and seemingly intractable problems.
Consider poverty in Africa.
Every conceivable explanation has been given, usually focusing on what Africans do wrong.
But a visit to Africa’s villages makes clear that the problems have more to do with the struggle for survival under difficult physical conditions than with any special problems that are unique to African societies.
Africa’s farmers produce roughly one-third or less food per hectare of farmland than their counterparts around the world, resulting in massive hunger, which is exacerbated by a heavy disease burden.
Malaria poses a unique challenge, owing in large part to Africa’s mosquito species, which are especially adept at transmitting the disease.
Other tropical parasitic diseases imply similarly extraordinary burdens in Africa.
Add the practical difficulties of broken-down roads and few cars and trucks, and economic isolation follows.
So the challenges of survival are enormous.
Yet practical solutions are at hand, because simple and low-cost technologies can address specific problems.
Low farm yields can be addressed through improved seed varieties specially adapted for African conditions, combined with technologies for replenishing soil and managing water.
Malaria can be controlled through newly designed long-lasting mosquito nets and a new generation of effective medicines.
Other tropical diseases also can be controlled, and practical technologies for safe drinking water can dramatically reduce diarrheal diseases.
Mobile phones, local wireless Internet, and more paved roads could do much to break the economic isolation of Africa’s villages.
Donor countries incessantly ask Africans to change their trade policies, government institutions, public administration, and more.
Some of these changes are important, but the role of the rich countries has been lopsided, focusing on everything except how to finance and introduce practical technologies to solve practical problems.
The rich countries’ mistakes wouldn’t matter if African countries had enough money to adopt the needed technologies on their own, but Africa is so poor that it must get financial help to escape poverty.
The development challenges in Africa are just one example of how tough societal problems can be addressed by the design and spread of improved technologies.
The same will be true of how the world best addresses manmade climate change – another of those seemingly intractable global problems.
Right now, rich countries are changing the world’s climate by emitting billions of tons of carbon dioxide each year from the use of coal, oil, and natural gas.
In future years, China and India also will make massive contributions to increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Yet no country, rich or poor, is keen to cut its energy use, owing to concern that to do so would threaten jobs, incomes, and economic growth.
New technologies will provide a key part of the solution.
Already, “hybrid” automobiles, which combine gasoline and battery power, can roughly double fuel efficiency, cutting carbon dioxide emissions by half.
Similarly, engineers have developed ways to capture the carbon dioxide that results from burning coal in power plants and store it safely underground.
This new technology, called “carbon capture and sequestration,” can cut by 80% the carbon dioxide emitted during the production of electricity.
The costs appear relatively small.
Consider also the depletion of ocean fisheries through over-fishing.
Global demand for fish consumption is growing, and so, too, is the global capacity to catch fish, driving some species to the point of extinction.
Improved aquaculture, in which fish are grown at manmade fishponds and reservoirs is still far from being a perfect technology, mainly for environmental reasons, yet it is enormously promising.
On a recent visit to Africa, a senior agricultural scientist said that in today’s world, the scientist is closer than ever before to the farmer, but farther away than ever from the policymakers.
Politicians don’t understand science, and rarely seek the advice of scientists and engineers in addressing major issues.
Everything is viewed as politics and votes, not as technical problems requiring technological expertise, which is why Africa’s poverty is so often attributed to corruption rather than to ecological challenges.
It is easy to dismiss the suggestion that technology can save the day.
After all, technological advance also requires good governance, market forces, effective universities, and more.
Politics will still play its role.
Nevertheless, it’s time to recognize that governments are ill-equipped to understand the sophisticated technological challenges and opportunities facing the world, and that new ways are needed to ensure that science and technology are given the prominence needed to address a wide range of increasingly urgent global problems.
Now is the time for every major international agency and national government to assume responsibility for gaining the scientific and technological expertise that they will need in the twenty-first century.
Embracing the Empire
Bernard Kouchner, France’s new foreign minister, has a long and distinguished record as an advocate of intervention in countries where human rights are abused.
As a co-founder of Doctors Without Borders, he stated that “we were establishing the moral right to interfere inside someone else’s country.”
Saddam Hussein’s mass murder of Iraqi citizens is why he supported the war in Iraq.
One should always be careful about attributing motives to other people’s views.
But Kouchner himself has often said that the murder of his Russian-Jewish grandparents in Auschwitz inspired his humanitarian interventionism.
One may or may not agree with Kouchner’s policies, but his motives are surely impeccable.
The fact that many prominent Jewish intellectuals in Europe and the United States – often, like Kouchner, with a leftist past – are sympathetic to the idea of using American armed force to further the cause of human rights and democracy in the world, may derive from the same wellspring.
Any force is justified to avoid another Shoah, and those who shirk their duty to support such force are regarded as no better than collaborators with evil.
If we were less haunted by memories of appeasing the Nazi regime, and of the ensuing genocide, people might not be as concerned about human rights as they are.
And by no means do all those who work to protect the rights of others invoke the horrors of the Third Reich to justify Anglo-American armed intervention.
But the term “Islamofascism” was not coined for nothing.
It invites us to see a big part of the Islamic world as a natural extension of Nazism.
Saddam Hussein, who was hardly an Islamist, and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who is, are often described as natural successors to Adolf Hitler.
And European weakness, not to mention the “treason” of its liberal scribes, paving the way to an Islamist conquest of Europe (“Eurabia”) is seen as a ghastly echo of the appeasement of the Nazi threat.
Revolutionary Islamism is undoubtedly dangerous and bloody.
Yet analogies with the Third Reich, although highly effective as a way to denounce people with whose views one disagrees, are usually false.
No Islamist armies are about to march into Europe – indeed, most victims of Revolutionary Islamism live in the Middle East, not in Europe – and Ahmadinejad, his nasty rhetoric notwithstanding, does not have a fraction of Hitler’s power.
The refusal of many Muslims to integrate into Western societies, as well as high levels of unemployment and ready access to revolutionary propaganda, can easily explode in acts of violence.
But the prospect of an “Islamized” Europe is also remote.
We are not living a replay of 1938.
So why the high alarm about European appeasement, especially among the neo-conservatives?
Why the easy equation of Islamism with Nazism?
Israel is often mentioned as a reason.
But Israel can mean different things to different people.
To certain evangelical Christians, it is the holy site of the Second Coming of the Messiah.
To many Jews, it is the one state that will always offer refuge.
To neo-conservative ideologues, it is the democratic oasis in a desert of tyrannies.
Defending Israel against its Islamic enemies may indeed be a factor in the existential alarmism that underlies the present “war on terror.”
A nuclear-armed Iran would certainly make Israel feel more vulnerable.
But it is probably overstated as an explanation.
Kouchner did not advocate Western intervention in Bosnia or Kosovo because of Israel.
If concern for Israel played a part in Paul Wolfowitz’s advocacy of war in Iraq, it was probably a minor one.
Both men were motivated by common concerns for human rights and democracy, as well as perhaps by geopolitical considerations.
Still, Islamist rhetoric, adopted by Ahmedinejad among others, is deliberately designed to stir up memories of the Shoah.
So perhaps the existential fear of some Western intellectuals is easier to explain than their remarkable, sometimes fawning trust in the US government to save the world by force.
The explanation of this mysterious trust may lie elsewhere.
Many neo-cons emerged from a leftist past, in which a belief in revolution from above was commonplace: “people’s democracies” yesterday, “liberal democracies” today.
Among Jews and other minorities, another historical memory may also play a part: the protection of the imperial state.
Austrian and Hungarian Jews were among the most fiercely loyal subjects of the Austro-Hungarian Emperor, because he shielded them from the violent nationalism of the majority populations.
Polish and Russian Jews, at least at the beginning of the communist era, were often loyal subjects of the communist state, because it promised (falsely, as it turned out) to protect them against the violence of anti-Semitic nationalists.
If it were really true that the fundamental existence of our democratic Western world were about to be destroyed by an Islamist revolution, it would only make sense to seek protection in the full force of the US informal empire.
But if one sees our current problems in less apocalyptic terms, then another kind of trahison des clercs comes into view: the blind cheering on of a sometimes foolish military power embarked on unnecessary wars that cost more lives than they were intended to save.
Emerging Economies’ Demographic Challenge
WASHINGTON, DC – Population aging is often cited as a major economic challenge for the developed world.
But a new report from the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) shows that shifting demographics pose an even greater threat to the growth prospects of many emerging economies.
Over the last 50 years, the world's 1.6% annual population growth fueled a surging labor force and a rapid increase in GDP in many emerging economies.
Employment more than doubled in China and South Africa, and at least tripled in Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico, and Nigeria.
In most economies, employment is expected to reach its peak within the next half-century; in China, the labor force could shrink by 20% over this period.
Of course, there are exceptions to this trend.
Indonesia and South Africa are projected to continue to experience rising employment (albeit at slower rates).
Nigeria's labor force is expected to triple from 2014 to 2064, and many other economies in Sub-Saharan Africa will experience similar levels of growth.
But, overall, economies' demographic tailwinds will wane, with serious consequences for GDP growth.
With no other change in current trends, emerging economies' rates of GDP growth would fall by one-third, from 4.8% to 3.1% annually, by 2064.
More problematic, the declining share of the working-age population is set to cause per capita GDP to decline by more than 30% in some countries – most notably, Brazil, Mexico, and Saudi Arabia.
The good news is that emerging economies have at their disposal a powerful means to offset these trends: productivity growth.
To be sure, annual productivity growth in emerging economies would need to accelerate by 57%, from 2.8% to 4.4%, to compensate fully for the demographic shift.
But, even if that ambitious goal is not achievable everywhere, emerging economies have considerable scope for catch-up productivity growth.
After all, over the last 50 years, the productivity gap between emerging and developed economies has barely narrowed; in absolute terms, it has more than doubled.
Indeed, though average productivity growth in emerging economies has accelerated in every decade since the 1970s, this largely reflects rapid productivity growth in just one country: China, where the annual average has been 5.7% since 1964.
With a comprehensive approach, 11 emerging economies (Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and Turkey) could, on average, boost their annual productivity growth to as much as 6% by 2025.
Four-fifths of that growth would be achieved through the adoption of approaches that have already been successful elsewhere, with new technological, operational, and business innovations covering the rest.
Opportunities to catch up to developed-country productivity levels abound across key sectors.
In retail, emerging economies could double their productivity by 2025, largely by adopting modern store formats, such as supermarkets and hypermarkets, which are at least three times more productive than traditional small shops.
In Mexico, boosting the share of modern retailers by 10% would yield a 25% increase in the sector's total productivity.
Similarly, if China's huge automotive industry consolidated operations into a smaller number of larger plants operating close to capacity, the sector's productivity – which is well below the developed-country average – could rise by up to 50%.
And many countries can improve the efficiency of food value chains considerably, such as by mechanizing agriculture.
There is also enormous scope for productivity-enhancing innovation, particularly in health care, a sector that is just evolving in most emerging countries.
Digitization of health records enabled India's Bhorugram Rural Dispensary nearly to double the number of immunizations it provided in just four years.
Likewise, it allowed clerks at western Kenya's Mosoriot Rural Health Center to spend two-thirds less time interacting with other staff on administrative tasks, and almost twice as much time registering patients.
In terms of operational innovations, there is the example of India's Aravind Eye Care System, which, by applying principles of industrial engineering to its work flow, has become the world's largest eye-care provider. Aravind can carry out two-thirds the number of operations conducted by the United Kingdom's entire National Health Service at one-sixth the cost – and with a lower infection rate.
Governments can play an important role in promoting such innovation.
Brazil's deregulation of agriculture and encouragement of R&amp;D enabled the Brazilian Agriculture Research Corporation to pioneer more than 9,000 technology projects, including the design of a tropical soybean strain that can thrive in Brazil's climate.
Efficiency soared, placing Brazil's crop yields on par with those of developed economies.
The era of “easy" GDP growth driven by a massive army of young workers is ending.
Emerging economies must face the resulting growth challenge head-on, by pursuing sweeping changes in policies, incentives, and established practices to boost productivity.
Recognizing this imperative is the first step. Now the hard work must begin.
Reigniting Emerging-Economy Growth
HONG KONG – It is no secret that emerging economies are facing serious challenges, which have undermined their once-explosive growth and weakened their development prospects.
Whether they return to the path of convergence with the advanced economies will largely depend on how they approach an increasingly complex economic environment.
Perhaps most important, they knew that they had to focus on generating employment, particularly in urban areas and modernizing sectors, and on inclusiveness more broadly.
As they pursued this agenda, emerging economies experienced stuttering starts and numerous crises, often associated with excessive debt, currency traps, and high inflation.
And, upon reaching middle-income levels, countries confronted the policy and structural pitfalls that accompany the transition to high-income status.
Nonetheless, in an increasingly open global environment, characterized by strong growth (and demand) in the advanced economies, the emerging economies managed to make huge and rapid progress.
That all changed after the 2008 global financial crisis.
To be sure, the core of the development agenda remains the same.
But it is vastly more complicated.
One set of complications arises from external global imbalances, distortions, and heightened volatility in capital flows, exchange rates, and relative prices.
Given that such challenges are essentially new, there is no proven roadmap for overcoming them.
After all, the developed economies have not previously engaged in the kind of unconventional monetary policy seen in recent years – a period characterized by ultra-low interest rates and ultra-fast cross-border capital flows.
For the emerging economies, with their relatively illiquid financial markets, such trends encourage over-dependence on low-cost external capital, which can be withdrawn in a heartbeat.
Rock-bottom borrowing costs also spur excessive reliance on leverage, weakening the will to undertake reforms needed to boost potential growth – and further exacerbating the economy’s vulnerability to a shift in interest rates or investor sentiment.
Making matters worse for the resource-rich emerging economies, commodity prices have plummeted since 2014.
After a prolonged period of accelerating demand growth, notably from China, governments came to regard high commodity prices as semi-permanent – an assumption that caused them to overestimate their future revenues.
Now that prices have dropped, these countries are facing huge imbalances and fiscal strain.
And governments are not alone; the private sector, too, relied on rosy assumptions to justify imprudently high levels of leverage.
Slower growth in the advanced economies has also weakened trade flows, adding to the headwinds.
As Mohamed El-Erian has observed, in the global economy, your neighborhood – the economies to which you have economic or financial links – matters.
That is all the more true for the emerging economies, which have become highly dependent on their neighbors.
In short, emerging economies have been challenged by externally generated macroeconomic shifts, unconventional monetary policies, widespread volatility, and slow growth in developed markets.
Without much of a playbook to guide them, it is unsurprising that their ability to cope with these challenges has varied considerably.
Generally, those that have fared better, such as India, have combined sound growth fundamentals and reforms with pragmatic and activist measures to counter the external sources of volatility.
India has also, of course, benefited from lower oil prices.
Commodity exporters like Brazil have struggled more, but not just because of falling natural-resource prices.
In fact, the decline in prices, together with the reversal of capital flows, exposed weaknesses in the underlying growth patterns that had previously been masked by favorable conditions.
Now there is yet another challenge, which is becoming larger by the year.
Whichever path emerging economies choose for addressing these challenges must also account for the fundamental shift driven by digital capital-intensive technologies.
While digital technologies have created new kinds of jobs in high-tech sectors and the sharing economy, among others, they have been reducing and dis-intermediating “routine” white- and blue-collar jobs.
Here, rapid advances in robotics are particularly relevant, as increasingly sophisticated machines threaten to supplant low-cost labor in a variety of sectors.
The high fixed and low variable costs of these technologies mean that once robots become more cost-effective than human labor, the trend will not reverse, especially given that automated assembly can be located close to markets, rather than where labor is cheapest.
Jobs in electronics assembly, which plays a huge role in global trade and has helped to drive growth in many emerging economies – notably, China – are particularly vulnerable.
While trades involving sewing – textiles, apparel, shoes – are not yet being automated much, it is probably only a matter of time before they are.
As the classic sources of early comparative advantage dwindle, countries – particularly earlier-stage developing countries – will need to implement policies that feature services (including tradable services) more prominently; they will also need to adjust their investment in human capital.
Whether this amounts to removing the bottom rungs on the ladder of development remains to be seen.
The relatively unconventional growth pattern in India, with its early emphasis on services, may hold important lessons.
In any case, the developing countries – and especially the emerging economies – clearly have a lot on their plates.
As these economies add items – protecting themselves from volatility, countering unfavorable external conditions, and adapting to powerful technological trends – to their core structural growth agendas, they will invariably make mistakes, and even stumble.
This will produce high variance in performance across countries and probably reduce the average pace of convergence.
But it will not, in my estimation, derail convergence completely.
The Submerging-Market Threat
WASHINGTON, DC – It is time to put the rise of the emerging economies in perspective.
The rapid economic growth in much of the developing world since the beginning of the century was fueled by a commodity boom and an overextension of credit.
But, because the emerging-market boom was not accompanied by sufficient structural reforms, it was not sustainable.
Today, most of the major emerging economies have experienced a severe reversal of fortune.
Russia and Brazil have plunged into severe crises, with double-digit inflation accompanying a 4% contraction in GDP last year.
South Africa is barely growing.
China’s phenomenal rate of expansion has slowed to below 7%.
Unsurprisingly, Goldman Sachs has closed its money-losing BRIC fund for investment in Brazil, Russia, India, and China.
Indeed, the future of the BRICS (including South Africa) – and that of other emerging markets – looks gloomy.
Outside of Asia, most developing economies are principally commodity exporters, and thus are highly exposed to price shocks.
Plunging oil prices have cut the value of the Russian ruble by more than half against the US dollar, and further declines appear likely – especially if the US Federal Reserve continues to hike interest rates.
Commodity prices are likely to stay low for one or two decades, as they did in the 1980s and 1990s.
When it comes to oil, for example, shale gas, tight oil, liquefied natural gas, and increasingly competitive solar and wind energy are boosting energy supply, even as a decade of high prices has spurred conservation and reduced demand.
The commodity crunch is likely to prove painful to people in emerging markets, who often measure their income in US dollars.
As exchange rates fall, they will quickly feel much poorer.
Governments will suffer, too, as their foreign debt – boosted by fiscal and monetary expansion that yielded little growth – becomes much more burdensome, while the export stimulus from lower exchange rates will be small, owing to the absence of new capacity outside the commodity sectors.
As countries come under pressure to make payments, multiple emerging-market debt crises are likely.
In the short term, Brazil arouses the most worry, given its large public debt and its vast budget deficit.
In the medium term, however, China appears even more frightening.
As a rule of thumb, an emerging economy’s total private- and public-sector debt should not exceed 100% of GDP.
China’s total debt is now more than 250% of GDP.
The BRICS countries’ critical shortcoming is poor governance.
On its corruption perception index of 175 countries, Transparency International ranks South Africa 61st, Brazil and India 76th, China 83rd, and Russia 119th.
Poor governance limits a country’s ability to create lasting wealth and productive capacity – even if the shortcomings become evident and damaging only when booms turn to busts.
As Warren Buffet has put it, “You only find out who is swimming naked when the tide goes out.”
To combat corruption effectively, people need to oust corrupt leaders, which is why democracy is vital.
The regime changes in Ukraine and Argentina, and the opposition’s victory in Venezuela’s recent parliamentary election, are harbingers of what is to come.
Brazil may be next.
The emerging markets may rise again, if and when improved governance and structural reforms are implemented to boost potential growth.
But that will take time.
We should not be surprised to see two decades of slow global growth.
The West cannot afford to be complacent.
After having focused too much on demand management, Europe should be trying to reduce the fiscal and regulatory burden of the state, so that its economies can start growing again.
It should also open up stunted markets for labor, services, capital, and digital products.
The West needs to work together to set global standards while it still can.
Democracy, the rule of law, and market-based economies are all worth fighting for.
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and the wars in North Africa and the Middle East have demonstrated why NATO should be strengthened, and that Europe must become serious about defending itself – rather than simply continuing to depend on the United States.
In coordinating Western sanctions against Russia, the G7 has already achieved renewed significance.
This should be followed by efforts to manage the coming stagnation.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership are both important initiatives in this regard.
Western-led organizations and institutional arrangements will become especially important as international organizations struggle to remain relevant.
The United Nations, in particular, will likely be crippled by Russian and Chinese vetoes in the Security Council.
Only the International Monetary Fund can be expected to rise in prominence, as major emerging economies – most likely Venezuela, Argentina, and Brazil – end up as its wards.
Economics aside, China and Russia are likely to pose the biggest challenge.
These two large emerging countries are still led by authoritarian governments, headed by ruling elites who – given how much wealth they have amassed – may be the most corrupt in history.
As they come under pressure, their transformations are unlikely to be peaceful.
The Kremlin has already shown, with its wars in Ukraine and Syria, that it is ready to counter domestic malaise with external aggression.
That is unlikely to change unless something is done to stop it.
The fall of the emerging economies could have a far more lasting impact than their rise.
Emerging Infectious Diseases
Today’s bio-diversity crisis is not just one of lost habitats and extinct species. It is also a crisis of emerging infectious diseases (EID’s), such as HIV in humans, Ebola in humans and gorillas, West Nile virus and Avian Influenza in humans and birds, chytrid fungi in amphibians, and distemper in sea lions.
There is every reason to take these events seriously, because EID’s appear to have a long evolutionary history.
This is because many pathogens are capable of infecting a range of hosts, but evolved in places where only some of those hosts live.
Pathogens also have specialized means of transmission from host to host.
If, for example, a pathogen is transmitted by an insect that lives in the tops of trees, susceptible hosts will not be infected if they never leave the ground.
For humans, HIV, Ebola, West Nile virus, and Avian flu are only the latest in a long line of EID’s.
When our ancestors moved out of the African forest onto the savannah more than a million years ago, they rapidly became effective predators.
Sharing prey with pre-existing carnivores, they acquired tapeworms that originally inhabited only hyenas, large cats, and African hunting dogs.
When humans began to move out of Africa, they carried some of their pathogens to new areas, where they switched over to native hosts while native pathogens took up residence in the newly arrived humans.
Agriculture and urbanization subsequently exposed us to yet more pathogens.
If doctors were around back then, they would have called all these occurrences EID’s.
Geographical restriction and specialized transmission mean that in most time periods, most pathogens occur in a small number of host species, often only one, but retain the ability to infect more.
But climate change alters everything.
Species move out of their areas of origin and ecosystems change.
Pathogens come into contact with susceptible hosts that they have never before encountered, and that never had the opportunity to evolve resistance.
As a result, EID’s are not just possible; they are inevitable.
Indeed, every episode of climate change has produced them.
Anticipating a problem is always more effective in terms of time and cost than responding to a crisis, no matter how viable the response.
Unfortunately, we usually fight existing diseases but neglect looking forward.
For example, white-tailed deer living in northwestern Costa Rica host six species of tick. None of the ticks is known to carry Lyme Disease, which has never been reported in Costa Rica.