Chinese policymakers had forgotten about Hayek.
Otherwise, they would have expected that labor and capital markets would continue to drift toward growth and innovation in urban centers.
They would also have recognized that market prices naturally transmit complex, specific, and changing local knowledge, which is distributed among individuals and corporations, not controlled by central planners.
And they would have appreciated that if supply is to be matched with demand over time, real-estate and infrastructure investments must reflect that knowledge.
Instead, China’s policymakers inadvertently created bottlenecks in local land supply.
Residential land transactions in first- and second-tier Chinese cities remain thin and heavily influenced by urban planning policies, despite the depth and sophistication of residential property markets.
Fortunately, there is scope for China’s urban planners to relax restrictions on the supply of land and on the floor area ratio (the ratio of gross floor area to the size of the lot on which the building stands).
According to a study by China International Capital Corp, the urban built-up area in Shanghai is only 16%, compared to 44% in Tokyo and 60% in New York City.
Within that area, only 36% is used for residential functions in Shanghai, compared to 60% in Tokyo and 44% in New York City.
In other words, the available residential land for sale in Shanghai is considerably smaller than that available in New York City or even Tokyo, which is a major reason for surging property prices in these cities.
And, in fact, if the supply of land and usable floor area is not increased, more spending on local public infrastructure will cause prices of existing space to rise even higher.
Liu’s observation that households are becoming increasingly confident in the housing market also seems to be correct.
The recent increase in demand for housing may reflect households’ desire to hedge their high savings against inflation or, more fundamentally, the sense that they must secure housing urgently, given limited supply.
Either way, they now seem convinced that investment in housing is a relatively safe bet.
If that is the case, the risk of a property bubble in China is probably being overstated.
But that does not mean that all is well in China’s property sector.
If the government ignores market price signals, mismatches between supply and demand could build up, undermining growth in dynamic regions, while leaving low-growth regions weighed down by excess capacity and bad assets.
The good news is that there is still considerable room for policy maneuver.
The question now is whether the Chinese authorities will manage actually to recognize and respond effectively to market signals.
Righting China’s Property Rights
NEW YORK – China recently adopted new guidelines to strengthen protection of property rights.
The guidelines are an important step toward ensuring long-term economic growth.
But there is more to be done.
The guidelines aim to advance three key objectives.
First, they limit the government’s discretionary ability to take private property from entrepreneurs and private citizens.
In the past, the law defined the state-owned sector as the “foundation” of a “socialist market economy,” and the private sector as its “supplement.”
The new guidelines stress the “equal status” of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and private firms, and the “equal protection” of their property rights.
Now, private property will no longer be inferior to state property – at least officially.
China has lately been facing a new wave of capital flight, driven partly by concerns among entrepreneurs that President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign – so far focused on corrupt government officials – could one day be re-directed at them and their assets.
After all, given that the laws and regulations governing business in China are highly complex and, at times, even contradictory, it has been difficult for Chinese entrepreneurs not to violate some rule or another.
The new guidelines address this by calling for forgiveness of “original sins” – irregular or illegal activities or tax evasion by private entrepreneurs in their firms’ early days.
This amnesty program – together with a broader shift toward equality between SOEs and private firms – could remove a thick cloud of uncertainty for Chinese businesspeople, encouraging them to keep their wealth and talent in the country.
The second objective of the new guidelines is to eliminate the expropriation of state-owned assets by private parties, including by self-dealing managers of SOEs.
Such self-dealing takes many forms, including selling state-owned assets at below-market value to connected private parties and insider trading in the stock market.
One positive effect of the anti-corruption campaign has been the suppression of such behavior.
Even so, to be responsive to Xi’s call to strengthen and expand existing SOEs, it makes sense for the guidelines’ drafters to propose more measures to minimize risks stemming from poor corporate governance.
The third objective of the new guidelines is to encourage innovation, by protecting the fruits of creative efforts.
The engines that have propelled China’s growth over the last few decades – a huge supply of cheap labor, imported technology, and massive physical investment – are petering out.
Now, productivity increases and local innovation must pick up the slack.
And that requires adequate protection of intellectual property.
My own research, carried out with Zhuan Xie and Xiaobo Zhang, shows that Chinese firms – especially in the private sector – have lately accelerated innovation, and are being awarded an increasing number of patents at home and abroad.
Unsurprisingly, they have joined multinational firms and foreign trade negotiators in demanding better intellectual-property protections.
As intellectual property rights become more secure, China’s new growth engines can gain substantial steam.
But the new guidelines are not sufficient to guarantee such an outcome.
For one thing, the amnesty program for entrepreneurs’ “original sins” still lacks sufficient detail.
If it allows the officials implementing the program to define which sins are eligible, and what timing makes them “original,” it could create new rent-seeking opportunities, augmenting the burden on entrepreneurs, rather than removing uncertainty.
Moreover, the guidelines will not eliminate the state-owned sector’s advantages.
Despite the new, more equal terms established in the guidelines, a financial system that is dominated by state-owned banks will give an edge to SOEs in terms of access to funding and the cost of capital.
Similarly, local governments, which own a majority of the SOEs, may struggle to adjudicate fairly disputes that arise between their own firms and private companies.
To ensure genuinely equal status for SOEs and private firms will require reforming the financial system, as well as government divestment from those SOEs lacking a strong national-security dimension – that is, the majority of them.
China’s new legal framework for protecting property rights holds a lot of promise.
But its success will depend heavily on how it is implemented, as well as on the extent to which the government pursues complementary reforms.
For the sake of the entire global economy, one hopes that China gets it right.
Chinese Coal Cuts
HONG KONG – In the fight to limit global warming, no country matters more than China – a massive coal-dependent country, which is responsible for 30% of global carbon-dioxide emissions.
Fortunately, it is moving to improve its environmental record.
But is it doing enough?
If China could pursue only one goal, it should be cutting its reliance on coal energy.
The country is home to one-sixth of the world’s people, yet it accounts for almost one-half of global coal consumption.
If China does not reduce that share and cut its greenhouse-gas emissions, keeping global warming in check will prove impossible.
The good news is that coal use in China seems to have fallen slightly last year – a trend that is expected to continue.
The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis estimates that the share of coal-generated electricity in China will decline from 72.5% in 2014 to 60% in 2020.
While last year’s drop in coal use may have been a technical blip, Chinese coal consumption is expected to peak very soon – probably next year.
That means that CO2 emissions – the largest component of the greenhouse-gas emissions that cause global warming – will begin falling, too, enabling China to fulfill its pledge, made last November as part of a landmark climate agreement with the United States, that emissions would peak around 2030.
In fact, if China’s leaders act boldly, the peak could be reached even sooner, in the early 2020s.
As China’s coal use begins to fall, its renewables sector is growing rapidly.
Last year, China spent a massive $90 billion on renewable energy – far more than the $52 billion invested by the second-largest spender, the US.
China now has the world’s largest installed base of wind power, and its solar power capacity is second only to Germany’s.
From humble beginnings at the turn of the century, Chinese wind and solar companies have grown into some of the world’s largest and most efficient.
The government’s efforts to promote renewables are driven partly by growing pressure from middle-class Chinese, who are increasingly frustrated with pollution levels.
Indeed, the environment is a hot topic in China today, exemplified by the response to the documentary film “Under the Dome,” which takes a critical look at air pollution and the role of the country’s coal and petrochemical companies.
More than 300 million Chinese saw the film after its late-February release, which was timed to coincide with the annual meeting of China’s National People’s Congress in early March.
The 103-minute production, by the prominent journalist Chai Jing, highlights the health risks posed by the thick smog shrouding China’s most productive cities.
The film begins with the story of Chai’s own newborn daughter being diagnosed with a benign tumor.
Though Chai never directly links her daughter’s tumor to air pollution, “Under the Dome” delivers a compelling message.
The public reaction was overwhelming.
The film even drew support from the incoming environment minister, Chen Jining, who compared it to Rachel Carson’s influential book Silent Spring.
Despite – or perhaps because of – this response, “Under the Dome” and related commentary have been removed from China’s media.
But, though the government may not want not to draw attention to its pollution problem, it certainly is trying to address it.
Its investments have already helped to lower global prices of renewables.
Researchers at Harvard University and Tsinghua University say that wind power could, in theory, produce all of China’s electricity for the price of coal by 2030.
Still, China should be acting even more aggressively.
The authorities should focus not only on producing renewable energy, but also on improving the energy efficiency of existing systems.
As it stands, China’s economy is about three times as energy-intensive as America’s (a country that is not particularly energy-efficient itself).
As renewable energy becomes increasingly cost-competitive with fossil fuels and energy consumption becomes more efficient, China will become better able to reduce emissions without undermining economic growth.
According to a recent study by the Tsinghua/MIT China Energy &amp; Climate Project, a combination of carbon taxes – especially on coal – and continued support for renewable power would enable China to reach its carbon-emissions peak in the early to mid-2020s.
Such an outcome would bolster global emission-reduction efforts considerably.
In fact, new data from the International Energy Agency show that, in 2014, global CO2 emissions did not rise, suggesting that efforts to mitigate climate change may already be having a more significant effect than previously thought.
This is particularly notable because the recent pause in emissions growth, unlike the other three that have occurred in the last 40 years, occurred amid economic expansion at a respectable annual rate of 3%.
As greenhouse-gas emissions become decoupled from economic growth, the world’s chances of successfully mitigating climate change become much higher.
As IEA Chief Economist (and future Executive Director) Fatih Birol put it, this development “provides much-needed momentum to negotiators preparing to forge a global climate deal in Paris in December.”
China still has a long way to go.
But its recent progress in reducing emissions shows that, with the right combination of government policies, corporate initiatives, and public pressure, even the largest and most polluted countries can clean up their economies and help fight global warming.
Containing China’s Slowdown
SEOUL – Pundits love debating the Chinese economy’s growth prospects, and nowadays the pessimists are gaining the upper hand.
But many are basing their predictions on other economies’ experiences, whereas China has been breaking the mold on economic growth for the last three decades.
So, are China’s economic prospects as bad as prevailing wisdom seems to indicate?
China is also losing long-term growth momentum, as falling fertility rates and returns on investment weaken labor-force expansion and capital accumulation.
And it is becoming increasingly difficult for China to take advantage of technology-driven productivity gains.
All of these challenges have led former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers and his Harvard colleague Lant Pritchett to argue that China’s growth could slow to 2-4% over the next two decades, as the country succumbs to the historically prevalent growth pattern implied by “regression to the mean.”
But, given that China’s growth pattern has, so far, been exceptional, the notion that it will suddenly start following a common trajectory seems unlikely.
Similarly flawed is the view of Justin Lin, former Chief Economist of the World Bank.
Lin argues that China can achieve 8% annual growth for another two decades, owing to its enduring “latecomer advantage,” which, among other things, entails rapid productivity gains brought about by technological catch-up with the United States.
But this fails to account for the standard growth theory of “conditional convergence”: only economies with comparable structural characteristics, such as labor skills and institutional quality, converge to similar per capita income levels.
For these reasons, I take a more moderate view, predicting that China’s average potential GDP growth will fall to 5-6% by 2030.
This expectation is based on a conditional convergence framework that relies on data generated by China’s unique growth experience, as well as those of other economies, over the last three decades.
Unlike Lin, I believe that China’s inevitable economic slowdown is coming soon.
But, unlike Summers, I do not believe that it has to be dire.
The key to this scenario is that China’s leaders move the economy onto a more balanced and sustainable growth path, based on realistic expectations.
They cannot afford to mishandle unavoidable challenges, such as those stemming from domestic institutional weaknesses, political uncertainty, and external shocks.
The first step in any effective strategy must be to recognize that, in such a large and unpredictable economy, the government cannot rely on direct intervention or macroeconomic policies.
Instead, it must implement reforms that boost productivity and offset downward pressure on growth.
Reforms in factor markets – labor, land, and finance – are essential.
China’s leaders must improve labor-market flexibility and labor mobility; make land use, acquisition, and compensation more efficient; and build a more market-based financial system.
As it stands, China’s financial system is highly regulated and dominated by banks, many of which are state-owned.
To change this, the government needs to promote market-based credit allocation.
China needs a flexible and efficient financial sector, underpinned by an effectively supervised and regulated capital market, to avoid asset bubbles and support productive and innovative firms.
Similarly, policies to promote continuous technological innovation and industrial upgrading can increase productivity.
And measures that increase domestic research capacity – for example, by strengthening protection of intellectual property rights – can nurture innovation.
Reform of China’s massive state-owned-enterprise (SOE) sector would also boost productivity.
The recently announced SOE reforms are a promising step.
Beyond promoting mixed ownership involving private capital, strengthening corporate governance, and facilitating commercial operations, the reforms promise to open up the energy, resources, and telecom industries to non-state investors.
This new round of SOE reform should be pursued diligently.
Such efforts to increase productivity are all the more important as China moves to shift from investment- and export-led growth to a more sustainable model based on domestic consumption and services.
Reallocating resources from export-oriented industries to service activities could cause an irreversible drop in productivity.
Likewise, while policies that encourage firms to increase wages will raise household income and domestic consumption, wage increases can erode export competitiveness and choke off inflows of foreign direct investment.
With rebalancing policies alone unlikely to increase average output growth substantially, enhancing productivity is crucial to China’s long-term prosperity.
The final piece of the puzzle for China is realism.
As it stands, the Chinese government is keen to maintain decent growth of about 7% annually while pushing for rebalancing and reform.
The risk is that, until reform measures take effect, the authorities may rely on short-term stimulus to meet growth targets, aggravating resource misallocation and structural vulnerabilities.
Considering that China’s total debt reached 282% of GDP last year – surpassing America’s debt level – further reckless lending to local governments and private enterprises from the shadow banking sector would hold the economy hostage to the growing risk of a financial crisis.
To avoid such an outcome, China should lower its growth target to about 6% in the coming years.
That way, it could pursue the deep reforms that are needed to move the economy onto a more balanced and sustainable long-term growth path.
China’s Reform Stalemate
BEIJING – China’s reform program has reached an impasse, with fundamental conflicts of interest and subtle resistance mechanisms blocking progress.
Until these barriers are removed, there is little hope that China’s slowing economy – which grew by 7.4% in 2014, its lowest rate in nearly a quarter-century – can rely on reform to give it the push it needs.
Chinese leaders are well acquainted with how difficult it can be to implement drastic reforms.
When Deng Xiaoping launched his radical program of “reform and opening up” in 1978, he faced fierce opposition – mostly from fervent ideologues and revolutionary diehards.
Just as Deng’s status and forcefulness enabled him to face down his opponents and keep China’s economic modernization on course, President Xi Jinping’s determined leadership can overcome vested interests and implement the needed reforms.
Of course, reconciling the fundamental misalignment of interests in China will not be easy – not least because interest groups will not discuss, much less oppose, reforms in an open and transparent manner.
Instead, they argue that the reforms are too risky or purge their substantive provisions.
Only small concessions have been made to scaling back government intervention, affecting powers that are either irrelevant or never actually existed.
There are two types of conflicts of interest among the government bodies.
First, China’s powerful bureaucracy is disinclined to cede its powers in the name of liberalization and a shift toward a more market-oriented economy.
For example, the Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council (SASAC) is the ministry-level government institution responsible for state-owned enterprises.
Its task now includes eliminating the SOEs’ monopoly power, which is hampering market competition.
But reducing the SOEs’ power would also mean a diminished role for SASAC – and, most likely, its eventual obsolescence.
As a result, efforts to fight monopoly are lagging, and the next stage of reform – the transition to a “blended ownership system” – remains distant.
Similarly, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), the subsidiary of the People’s Bank of China that controls the foreign-exchange transactions of commercial banks and households, derives its power from controlling capital inflows and outflows.
Recognizing that progress toward capital-account liberalization would imply its eventual demise, SAFE has made numerous excuses (to which the recent financial crises in the West have lent credence) for retaining tight control over foreign-exchange transactions.
So, despite the government’s stated commitment to liberalize the capital account, the PBOC has yet to make observable progress.
The second major conflict of interest in China is between the central and local governments, which are supposed to be adjusting their revenue-sharing model.
The problem lies in a mismatch between their respective shares of tax revenues and mandatory expenditures.
With local governments forced to cover a large proportion of public spending with a disproportionately low share of revenues, local-government debt has swelled.
But the central government remains reluctant to make significant changes to the revenue-sharing model, wary not only of the effects on its coffers, but also of conferring more authority on local officials.
Moreover, they doubt local governments’ ability to manage their budgets properly and to use the additional tax revenues efficiently.
The fundamental contradiction, as these examples show, is between the goals of the reform process and the incentives that underpin them.
Nowhere is this clearer than in the “mixed ownership system” envisaged by the Third Plenary of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.
Encouraging the private sector to take stakes in SOEs in strategic areas like energy, power, and finance is supposed to increase competition, boost efficiency, and reduce pressure on the government to invest.
But why should private investors put their money in SOEs?
As minority shareholders in firms whose managers are appointed by the Central Personnel Ministry, private actors cannot influence decision-making.
Until the central government is willing to yield its control over SOE management, ownership reforms are likely to spark only tepid interest from the private sector.
If implemented fully, the current round of reforms would have a far-reaching impact on China’s political economy, because they shift the balance of power from officials to markets.
This would enable China to continue its ascent toward high-income status, improving the wellbeing of millions of its citizens along the way.
But vested interests will not back down.
Though they will not oppose reforms outright, they will continue to procrastinate and spread fear about economic instability and social tension to prevent changes that threaten to diminish their status and prerogatives.
Unless and until China’s top leaders overcome such resistance, progress on reform will remain sluggish.
China’s Exchange-Rate Trap
NEW YORK – For months now, China’s exchange-rate policy has been roiling global financial markets.
More precisely, confusion about that policy has been roiling the markets.
Chinese officials have done a poor job communicating their intentions, encouraging the belief that they don’t know what they’re doing.
But criticizing Chinese policy is easier than offering constructive advice.
The fact is that China’s government no longer has any good options.
No question, the country would be better off with a more flexible exchange rate that eliminated one-way bets for speculators and acted as an economic shock absorber.
But the literature on “exit strategies” – on how to replace a currency peg with a more flexible exchange rate – makes clear that the moment when China could have navigated this transition smoothly has now passed.
Countries can exit a pegged rate smoothly only when there is confidence in the economy, encouraging the belief that the more flexible exchange rate can appreciate as well as weaken.
This may have been true of China once; it is no longer true today.
This puts Chinese policymakers in the position of the Irish tourist who asks for directions to Dublin and is told, “Well, sir, if I were you, I wouldn’t start from here.”
What, then, is China’s least bad option?
The authorities could continue with their current strategy of pegging the renminbi to a basket of foreign currencies, and push ahead with their agenda of restructuring and rebalancing the economy.
But convincing skeptical observers that they are committed to this strategy will take time, given recent missteps.
Meanwhile, investors will bet against them.
They already are.
Capital outflows have been running at $100 billion a month.
Simple arithmetic suggests that with $3 trillion of reserves, the authorities can hold out for at least a couple of years.
But capital flight tends to rise dramatically as the end draws near.
A two-year window is an illusion.
Alternatively, the renminbi could be allowed to fluctuate more freely.
The People’s Bank of China can permit it to depreciate against the reference basket by, say, 1% a month, in order to enhance the competitiveness of Chinese exports and address concerns that the currency is overvalued.
But, given weak global demand, this kind of modest depreciation won’t do much to boost exports and support economic growth.
Moreover, with the renminbi losing 1% of its value each month, capital flight would accelerate further.
A third option is a one-time devaluation of, say, 25%.
This would enhance export competitiveness at a stroke.
Depreciate the currency to the point where it is significantly undervalued, the argument goes, and investors will expect it to recover.
Capital will then flow in, not out.
This assumes, of course, that everyone buys into the idea that one devaluation doesn’t augur another.
It assumes that investors would be unperturbed by the authorities’ abandonment of their prior vow to shun a mega-devaluation.
It ignores the fact that Chinese enterprises, already in dire straits, have as much as $1 trillion of foreign-currency debt that would become significantly more difficult to service.
And it minimizes the devastating economic impact of a mega-devaluation on countries with which China competes.
By process of elimination, the only option that remains is tightening capital controls.
Strict controls can prevent residents and foreigners from selling renminbi for foreign currency on onshore markets and transferring the proceeds abroad.
Protected by this financial Great Wall, the authorities could let the exchange rate fluctuate more freely and allow it to depreciate gradually without provoking capital flight.
They would gain the time needed to implement confidence-building reforms.
They could curtail the provision of liquidity to loss-making enterprises, forcing firms to eliminate excess capacity.
They could restructure problematic debts.
They could recapitalize banks that suffered inadvertent balance-sheets damage as a result of these reforms.
They could repair their damaged credibility.
A few observers, like Bank of Japan head Haruhiko Kuroda, have suggested that China might consider tightening controls.
But most economists are reluctant to contemplate this option.
Capital controls would undermine China’s efforts to internationalize the renminbi and would embarrass the International Monetary Fund, which recently added the currency to the basket of four major currencies underpinning its unit of account, the SDR.
The most powerful objection, though, is that reimposing controls would remove the pressure to reform.
Freed of pressure from international capital markets, the Chinese authorities would defer to state-owned enterprises and local officials who prefer continued easy provision of liquidity and would rather see the banks simply roll over their loans.
This risk of backsliding is real.
If it materializes, the time bought by capital controls will be squandered.
The problem would then metastasize, at some point, from an exchange-rate crisis to a growth collapse.
China’s best hope – and the world’s – is that the Chinese authorities understand that a crisis is a terrible thing to waste.
China’s SDR Distraction
WASHINGTON, DC – At the start of October, China’s currency, the renminbi, was added to the basket of currencies that make up the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Rights, or SDR.
Previously, the SDR had been defined as a weighted average of the dollar, euro, British pound, and Japanese yen. Now that the renminbi has been added, it can claim to be one of just five truly global currencies.
Should we care? The Chinese certainly do.
In Beijing, where I was late last month, joining the rarefied SDR club was all people wanted to talk about. (Okay, truth be told, they also wanted to talk about Donald Trump.)
Seeing the renminbi added to the SDR basket was a matter of national pride.
It symbolized China’s emergence as a global power.
And it vindicated the government’s efforts to encourage use of the renminbi in cross-border transactions, freeing China and the rest of the world from over-dependence on the dollar.
But the fact of the matter is that adding the renminbi to the SDR basket has little practical significance.
The SDR is not a currency; it is just the unit in which the IMF reports its financial accounts.
Only a small handful of international bonds are denominated in SDRs, because banks and firms do not find this option particularly attractive.
The main issuer of SDR bonds is the IMF’s sister organization, the World Bank (the Fund itself is not authorized to issue bonds).
The only practical implication of adding the renminbi to the SDR basket is that it now becomes a currency that countries can draw, along with the SDR’s other four constituent currencies, when they borrow from the IMF.
Only time will tell how many wish to do so.
The Chinese argue that the renminbi’s addition to the SDR basket should be seen in a broader context.
The PBOC’s renminbi swaps are almost entirely unused.
Designated clearing banks have not exactly been flooded with business.
Offshore renminbi bank deposits are falling.
The proportion of China’s merchandise trade settled in renminbi has been declining since mid-2015.
And there is no sign that where the Polish government has so boldly ventured, other governments will soon follow.
The fault, to paraphrase Shakespeare, lies not in the stars but in China’s own financial markets.
Since mid-2015, the country’s stock market has been on a rollercoaster.
Every international organization worth its salt, from the IMF to the Bank for International Settlements, has been warning of problems in China’s corporate bond market.
And if defaults on loans to corporations are widespread, as these organizations predict, the implications for the banks could be dire.
The problem is mistaken tactics by the Chinese government.
The government and the PBOC believe that relaxing capital controls and allowing financial capital to flow more freely in and out of the country will force financial market participants to up their game.
Companies will have to upgrade their accounting standards, and banks their risk-management practices, to cope with the faster pace of financial transactions.
The result will be more liquid and stable financial markets, in turn making the renminbi more attractive as a unit of account, means of payment, and store of value for residents and foreigners alike.
Unfortunately, assuming a result doesn’t make it so.
If Chinese banks and firms are slow to adjust, liberalizing international capital flows will lead only to more volatility, fewer offshore deposits, and less reliance on the renminbi for settling merchandise transactions – exactly as has been the case recently.
Chinese policymakers must now put the horse before the cart.
The most important steps they can take to foster renminbi internationalization are to strengthen domestic financial markets, modernize regulation, and streamline contract enforcement.
If China wants to transform the renminbi into a first-class global currency, it should pay less attention to renminbi trading in New York and the currency’s weight in the SDR basket, and more to the development of deep, liquid, and stable financial markets at home.
The Risks of China’s Failure – and Success
NEW DELHI – As the world’s financial leaders gather in Washington, DC, for the annual spring meeting of the International Monetary Fund, their hopes – and fears – center on China.
After all, China is the one country that might be able to jump-start the sputtering global economy’s recovery; and yet its own economic growth is based on a foundation that is increasingly showing signs of strain.
The dilemma is that both Chinese failure and success carry risks for the world economy.
A failure scenario would be unique in post-World War II history.
Because China’s economy is so large, the consequences would reverberate worldwide.
But, unlike in 2008, when the US dollar appreciated, allowing emerging markets to revive quickly, the renminbi would likely depreciate should China’s economy experience a serious downturn, spreading deflation far and wide.
Other currencies might depreciate as well, some as a result of deliberate policy.
Consequently, a China failure scenario could resemble the events of the 1930s, characterized by competitive devaluation and plummeting real economic activity.
But what if China succeeds in its current transition to a consumption-based economic model?
When the Chinese current-account surplus reached 10% of GDP in 2007, saving exceeded 50% of GDP and investment surpassed 40% of GDP.
These numbers seemed far too high to be dynamically efficient or welfare enhancing.
As a result, a consensus rapidly emerged: Saving and investment should be reduced and brought into better balance.
Investment should be reined in by imposing greater financial discipline on wayward public enterprises, while the social safety net should be strengthened, so that households would not have to save so much to meet the costs of having children and growing old.
Fast forward a decade, and what do we see?
The government has built safety nets, and the current-account surplus has receded, exactly as hoped.
Last year, the surplus amounted to less than 3% of GDP, a fraction of its 2007 level.
But this hardly validates the theory.
About half of the reduction in the current-account surplus has occurred because investment has actually increased as a share of GDP.
Meanwhile, there has been some decline in national saving, by perhaps 3.5 percentage points of GDP compared to 2007 (according to IMF estimates, as official data end in 2013).
But this reduction is quite modest compared to the 15-percentage-point increase that occurred during 2000-2007.
Even more striking, all of this modest reduction in saving seems to have come from the corporate sector; household saving is roughly the same, relative to GDP, as it was in 2007.
In other words, what went up during the boom has failed to come down.
This is a real puzzle, and resolving it is important not only for China’s future, but for that of the world.
There are two broad possibilities.
It could be that the theory is basically correct, but needs more time to show results.
In that case, as long as China’s rulers continue to strengthen social safety nets, the decline in saving could match the envisaged decline in investment, keeping the current-account surplus low.
But what happens if the theory is wrong, or incomplete?
For example, the beneficial effects of safety nets on saving may have been overestimated.
Or those effects may be offset by the negative effects of population aging.
Over the next 15 years, the Chinese population aged 60 and above will increase by two-thirds.
These aging workers might now be saving as much as they possibly can, to build up a financial cushion for impending retirement.
If some version of this scenario is realized, the household saving rate may continue to decline only gradually.
In the meantime, the government would be closing unprofitable plants, which might boost corporate saving.
As a result, overall saving could remain high, even as investment falls sharply, causing the current-account surplus to surge again.
This would not be a pleasant prospect for the world economy.
As China slowed, so would global growth, and the remaining demand would be redistributed toward China, aggravating other countries’ already-severe shortfalls.
This would be very different from the previous episode of global imbalances when large Chinese current-account surpluses were at least offset to some extent by rapid Chinese growth.
In short, whereas a hard economic landing for China could spur global deflation, avoiding that outcome could mean the return of global imbalances.
These are the stark possibilities that leaders need to ponder as they gather gloomily at the IMF in Washington.
The Sino-Russian Marriage
LONDON – The Chinese are the most historically minded of peoples.
In his conquest of power, Mao Zedong used military tactics derived from Sun Tzu, who lived around 500 BC; Confucianism, dating from around the same time, remains at the heart of China’s social thinking, despite Mao’s ruthless attempts to suppress it.
So when President Xi Jinping launched his “New Silk Road” initiative in 2013, no one should have been surprised by the historical reference.
“More than two millennia ago,” explains China’s National Development and Reform Commission, “the diligent and courageous people of Eurasia explored and opened up several routes of trade and cultural exchanges that linked the major civilisations of Asia, Europe, and Africa, collectively called the Silk Road by later generations.”
In China, old history is often called to aid new doctrine.
The new doctrine is “multipolarity” – the idea that the world is (or should be) made up of several distinctive poles of attraction.
The contrast is with a “unipolar” (that is, an American- or Western-dominated) world.
Multipolarity is a political idea, but it is about more than power relations.
It rejects the notion that there is a single civilizational ideal to which all countries should conform.
Different world regions have different histories, which have given their peoples different ideas about how to live, govern themselves, and earn a living.
These histories are all worthy of respect: there is no “right” road to the future.
Eurasia is an idea whose time, it is said, has come around again.
Recent historical research has rescued the old Silk Road from historical oblivion.
The late American sociologist Janet Abu-Lughod identified eight overlapping “circuits of trade” between northwest Europe and China that, under the aegis of a Pax Mongolica, flourished between the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
According to Abu-Lughod, Western imperialism superimposed itself on these older circuits, without obliterating them.
Islam continued to spread across geographic and political boundaries.
Chinese and Indian migrations did not stop.
Now a unique conjuncture of economic and political developments has created an opportunity for Eurasia to emerge from its historical slumbers.
In recent years, Western self-assurance was humbled by the financial crisis of 2008-2009 and political catastrophes in the Middle East.
At the same time, the interests of the two potential builders of Eurasia, China and Russia, seem – at least superficially – to have converged.
China’s motive for reviving Pax Mongolica is clear.
Its growth model, based largely on exporting cheap manufactured goods to developed countries, is running out of steam.
Secular stagnation threatens the West, accompanied by rising protectionism sentiment.
And, although Chinese leaders know that they must rebalance the economy from investment and exports to consumption, doing so risks causing serious domestic political problems for the ruling Communist party.
Reorienting investments and exports toward Eurasia offers an alternative.
As China’s labor costs rise, production is being re-located from the coastal regions to the western provinces.
The natural outlet for this production is along the New Silk Road.
The development of the road (actually several “belts,” including a southern maritime route) will require huge investments in transport and urban infrastructure.
As in the nineteenth century, reduction in transport costs will open up new markets for trade.
Russia, too, has an economic motive for developing Eurasia.
It has failed to modernize and diversify its economy.
As a result, it remains predominantly an exporter of petroleum products and an importer of manufactured goods.
China offers a secure and expanding market for its energy exports.
The big transport and construction projects needed to realize Eurasia’s economic potential may help Russia recover the industrial and engineering might it lost with communism’s fall.
This year Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan have joined together in a Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), a customs union with a defense component.
The EEU is seen by its advocates as a step toward re-establishing the old Soviet frontiers in the form of a voluntary economic and political union, modeled on the EU – a project to take the sting out of the West’s “victory” in the Cold War.
Official Russian opinion looks forward to “the interpenetration and integration of the EEU and the Silk Road Economic Belt” into a “Greater Eurasia,” which will afford a “steady developing safe common neighborhood of Russia and China.”
On May 8, Putin and Xi signed an agreement in Moscow that envisages the establishment of coordinating political institutions, investment funds, development banks, currency regimes, and financial systems – all to serve a vast free-trade area linking China with Europe, the Middle East, and Africa.
How realistic is this dream?
Russia and China both feel “encircled” by the United States and its allies.
China’s anti-hegemonic aim, expressed in almost inscrutable prose, is to secure “tolerance among civilizations” and respect for the “modes of development chosen by different countries.”
Putin, meanwhile, has ratcheted up his much more explicit anti-American rhetoric since the Ukraine crisis, which he sees as a prime example of Western interference in Russia’s domestic affairs.
Boosting trade flows between Russia and China, and strengthening political and security coordination, will reduce their vulnerability to outside interference and signal the emergence of a new center of world power.
It may be considered a singular success for Western statesmanship to have brought two old rivals for power and influence in Central Asia to the point of jointly seeking to exclude the West from the region’s future development.
The US, especially, missed opportunities to integrate both countries into a single world system, by rebuffing reforms of the International Monetary Fund that would have strengthened China’s decision-making influence, and by blocking Russia’s overtures for NATO membership.
This led both countries to seek an alternative future in each other’s company.
Whether their marriage of convenience will lead to an enduring union – or, as George Soros predicts, a threat to world peace – remains to be seen.
There is an obvious sphere-of-influence issue in Kazakhstan, and the Chinese have been squeezing the Russians for all they can get in bilateral deals.
For the time being, though, squabbles over the New Silk Road seem less painful to the two powers than enduring lectures from the West.
But a falling dollar would make it cheaper for Chinese consumers and companies to buy American goods.
If prices are stable in the US, as is the case now, the gains from buying American goods should exactly offset the PBC’s balance-sheet losses.
The downgrade could, moreover, force the US Treasury to raise the interest rate on new bonds, in which case China would stand to gain.
But S&amp;P’s downgrade was a poor decision, taken at the wrong time.
If America’s debts had truly become less trustworthy, they would have been even more dubious before the agreement reached on August 2 by Congress and President Barack Obama to raise the government’s debt ceiling.
That agreement allowed the world to hope that the US economy would embark on a more predictable path to recovery.
The downgrade has undermined that hope.
Some people even predict a double-dip recession.
If that happens, the chance of an actual US default would be much higher than it is today.
These new worries are raising alarm bells in China.
Diversification away from dollar assets is the advice of the day.
But this is no easy task, particularly in the short term.
If the PBC started to buy non-dollar assets in large quantities, it would invariably need to convert some current dollar assets into another currency, which would inevitably drive up that currency’s value, thus increasing the PBC’s costs.
Another idea being discussed in Chinese policy circles is to allow the renminbi to appreciate against the dollar.
Much of China’s official foreign reserves have accumulated because the PBC seeks to control the renminbi’s exchange rate, keeping its upward movement within a reasonable range and at a measured pace.
If it allowed the renminbi to appreciate faster, the PBC would not need to buy large quantities of foreign currencies.
But whether renminbi appreciation will work depends on reducing China’s net capital inflows and current-account surplus.
International experience suggests that, in the short run, more capital flows into a country when its currency appreciates, and most empirical studies have shown that gradual appreciation has only a limited effect on countries’ current-account positions.
If appreciation does not reduce the current-account surplus and capital inflows, then the renminbi’s exchange rate is bound to face further upward pressure.
That is why some people are advocating that China undertake a one-shot, big-bang appreciation – large enough to defuse expectations of further strengthening and deter inflows of speculative “hot” money.
Such a revaluation would also discourage exports and encourage imports, thereby reducing China’s chronic trade surplus.
But such a move would be almost suicidal for China’s economy.
Between 2001 and 2008, export growth accounted for more than 40% of China’s overall economic growth.
That is, China’s annual GDP growth rate would drop by four percentage points if its exports did not grow at all.
In addition, a study by the China Center for Economic Research has found that a 20% appreciation against the dollar would entail a 3% drop in employment – more than 20 million jobs.
There is no short-term cure for China’s $3.2 trillion problem.
The government must rely on longer-term measures to mitigate the problem, including internationalization of the renminbi.
Using the renminbi to settle China’s international trade accounts would help China escape America’s beggar-thy-neighbor policy of allowing the dollar’s value to fall dramatically against trade rivals.
But China’s $3.2 trillion problem will become a 20-trillion-renminbi problem if China cannot reduce its current-account surplus and fence off capital inflows.
There is no escape from the need for domestic structural adjustment.
To achieve this, China must increase domestic consumption’s share of GDP.
This has already been written into the government’s 12th Five-Year Plan.
Unfortunately, given high inflation, structural adjustment has been postponed, with efforts to control credit expansion becoming the government’s first priority.
This enforced investment slowdown is itself increasing China’s net savings, i.e., the current-account surplus, while constraining the expansion of domestic consumption.
Real appreciation of the renminbi is inevitable so long as Chinese living standards are catching up with US levels.
Indeed, the Chinese government cannot hold down inflation while maintaining a stable value for the renminbi.
The PBC should target the renminbi’s rate of real appreciation, rather than the inflation rate under a stable renminbi.
And then the government needs to focus more attention on structural adjustment – the only effective cure for China’s $3.2 trillion headache.
China’s Aborted Openness
China’s state-run Xinhua news agency recently reported on a government investigation into a string of forced sterilizations and abortions in the village of Linyi, Shandong province.
The speed of the investigation – said to have begun days after the kidnapping of Chen Guangcheng, a blind activist who had been a public advocate for the victims – and the candor of the report created the impression of greater government responsiveness and bolder official media.
Is this impression right?
The story in Linyi is the kind of news that propaganda officials usually bury in the Communist Party’s secret files.
According to reports, local authorities in Linyi, seeking to avoid exceeding birth quotas under China’s “one-child” policy, forced several women to undergo abortions and forcibly sterilized many couples with more than one child.
Villagers who hid to avoid the campaign reportedly saw their family members jailed.
Some in Linyi alleged degrading treatment, torture, and extortion.
Why investigate and report this scandal?
The Xinhua reports, I believe, are best read as damage control.
China is trying to secure funding from the United Nations to improve reproductive health – an effort that has been set back by reports of forced abortion.
Central authorities did not investigate the Linyi abuses until news of the harassment of Chen Guangcheng – and his abduction with the help of Beijing police – spread into international media.
Chen had reported the abuses to officials and asked a non-governmental organization, the Citizens’ Rights Defense Group, to investigate.
The group went to Linyi in May.
A month later, the network of Chinese Human Rights Defenders reported the group’s findings and demanded the intervention of the central government’s Family Planning Commission (FPC). 
As a volunteer for the network, I was in touch with Chen and followed events closely.
In July, having failed to elicit any government response, Chen began seeking legal aid from prominent lawyers to prepare lawsuits on behalf of the victims, causing alarm among local officials.
Pursued by police, Chen went into hiding.
My “personal safety was threatened,” he wrote on August 30 in the last email I received from him.
Following strenuous international protests over Chen’s kidnapping, the FPC decided to investigate.
Xinhua announced that local officials responsible for the violence might be prosecuted.
Central authorities seemed to sense an immediate need to quell criticism of its controversial population-control efforts.
And Xinhua wasted no time in claiming that the abuses were limited to a few towns.
However, central government authorities have done little to halt intimidation of Linyi’s villagers.
Chen was released from detention but remains under house arrest and was dragged back to the police station on September 2 for unknown reasons.
Police refuse to return Chen’s personal computer and cell phone.
The village, too, is mysteriously without phone service.
Meanwhile, through arrests, threats, and bribery, authorities are forcing villagers to withdraw accounts of abuse and back out of their lawsuits, warning of the dire consequences of cooperating with Chen and the lawyers.
The FPC declines to intervene, citing lack of law-enforcement powers.
On October 10, the villagers’ lawyers were told that the court hearing scheduled that day was canceled.
On their way back to Beijing, thugs reportedly assaulted the lawyers.
Viewed in this context, the belief that the government’s approach to Linyi reflects a new responsiveness to human-rights abuses seems naïve.
If the government were truly becoming more responsive, why have we not seen similar responses to other disputes over the theft of farmland, compromised investors’ rights, or high-level corruption?
In all these cases, authorities have responded with repression, including the hiring of plain-clothes militias to kidnap or beat up people who attempt to publicize problems.
China’s belated bouts of openness about the rural spread of AIDS and the SARS epidemic clearly indicate that the central government regards transparency solely as a matter of expediency.
Others argue that China’s government is simply losing its grip over local authorities.
This prospect is hardly encouraging.
If abuses and repression in the provinces continue no matter how attentive the central government, or how assertive the press might have become, what then? 
More likely, however, the central authorities are following a policy that most Chinese know well: neijin waisong, or “controlled inside, relaxed outside.”
Applied here, the policy means consolidating power at home while disarming critics abroad.  
I believe that the government’s loss of control in the provinces has been stage-managed.
Chaos provides a cover for crackdowns.
It is too convenient when unidentified strongmen beat and harass activists who question Party rule, and it is too easy for officials to blame an out-of-control “criminal society” when international media start asking questions.
Suspiciously targeted “criminal” assaults have, indeed, occurred in places other than Linyi.
Thugs thrashed civil rights activist Lu Banglie in the Guangdong town of Taishi in early October.
Six villagers in the Hebei village of Dingzhou, protesting government seizure of their land, died after bloody clashes with a gang of toughs in July.
The list goes on.
State media recently started releasing year-end “mass incident” statistics.
Last year, the government said, there were 74,000 such incidents.
Observers marvel that China’s leaders admit to such a staggering number of protests.
But here, again, the government is hiding in plain sight.
State-run media organs have been forced to admit that these protests test the Party’s will to maintain power.
They neglect to tell the real story of how the Party exercises that will, trusting that the admission itself will satisfy us.
We should not be so quick to play along.
China’s Afghan Game Plan
MADRID – In his latest book, On China, Henry Kissinger uses the traditional intellectual games favored by China and the West – weiqi and chess – as a way to reveal their differing attitudes toward international power politics.
Chess is about total victory, a Clausewitzian battle for the “center of gravity” and the eventual elimination of the enemy, whereas weiqi is a quest for relative advantage through a strategy of encirclement that avoids direct conflict.
This cultural contrast is a useful guide to the way that China manages its current competition with the West.
China’s Afghan policy is a case in point, but it also is a formidable challenge to the weiqi way.
As the United States prepares to withdraw its troops from the country, China must deal with an uncertain post-war scenario.
Afghanistan is of vital strategic interest to China, yet it never crossed its leaders’ minds to defend those interests through war.
A vital security zone to China’s west, Afghanistan is also an important corridor through which it can secure its interests in Pakistan (a traditional ally in China’s competition with India), and ensure its access to vital natural resources in the region.
Moreover, China’s already restless Muslim-majority province of Xinjiang, which borders on Afghanistan, might be dangerously affected by a Taliban takeover there, or by the country’s dismemberment.
The US fought its longest-ever war in Afghanistan, at a cost (so far) of more than $555 billion, not to mention tens of thousands of Afghan civilian casualties and close to 3,100 US troops killed.
But China’s strategy in the country was mostly focused on business development, and on satiating its vast appetite for energy and minerals.
The US Defense Department has valued Afghanistan’s untapped mineral deposits at $1 trillion.
But it is China that is now poised to exploit much of these resources.
Indeed, China’s development of the Aynak Copper Mine was the largest single foreign direct investment in Afghanistan’s history.
China was also engaged in constructing a $500 million electric plant and railway link between Tajikistan and Pakistan.
Last December, China’s state-owned National Petroleum Corporation signed a deal with the Afghan authorities that would make it the first foreign company to exploit Afghanistan’s oil and natural-gas reserves.
Once China’s enormous economic and security interests in Afghanistan are left without America’s military shield, the Chinese are bound to play an even larger role there, one that Afghans hope will reach “strategic levels.”
China would prefer to accomplish this the Chinese way – that is, essentially through a display of soft power – or, as the Chinese government put it on the occasion of Afghan President Hamid Karzai’s official visit to Beijing in early June, through “non-traditional security areas.”
Judging by China’s behavior in other parts of the world, any military cooperation is likely to be extremely modest and cautious.
China has already made it clear it will not contribute to the $4.1 billion multilateral fund to sustain Afghan national security forces.
Rather, the two countries’ recently signed bilateral cooperation agreement is about “safeguarding Afghanistan’s national stability” through social and economic development.
China is especially keen on combating drug trafficking, as Badakhshan, the Afghan province bordering on Xinjiang, has become the main transit route for Afghan opium.
But preventing the spillover into Xinjiang of Taliban-inspired religious extremism remains a high priority as well.
China went to great lengths to present the recent summit in Beijing of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which includes China, Russia, and major Central Asian countries, as an attempt to create a fair balance of interests among regional stakeholders. &nbsp;Moreover, the SCO sought a consensus on how, in Chinese President Hu Jintao’s words, to guard the region “against shocks from turbulence outside the region.”
Yet, however focused it is on soft-power projection in Afghanistan, China will likely find it difficult not to be drawn into the role of policeman in an extremely complex and historically conflict-ridden region.
China’s regional outreach, moreover, clashes with that of other regional powers, such as Russia and India.
Nor is its own ally, Pakistan, particularly eager to confront terrorist groups that threaten the security of its neighbors, China among them.
Pakistan might find it extremely difficult to reconcile the security of its Chinese ally with its de facto proxy war with India.
China might then be forced to bolster its military presence in Pakistan and in tribal areas along the Afghan border in order to counter terrorist groups such as the Pakistan-based East Turkestan Islamic Movement, which the Chinese believe is responsible for attacks in Xinjiang.
The preferred Chinese way would be that of cooptation and dialogue.
Indeed, Chinese diplomacy has been busy lately in trilateral talks with Pakistan and Afghanistan aimed at achieving reconciliation with the Taliban.
Nor is China interested in stirring up the conflict between its Pakistani allies and its Indian rivals.
On the contrary, China has argued for years that the main problem affecting Afghanistan’s stability is the India-Pakistan proxy fighting, and that peace in Kashmir is therefore the key to peace in Afghanistan.
The task of defending its interests in Afghanistan after US withdrawal is a truly formidable challenge for Chinese diplomacy.
It is inconceivable, though, that the Chinese would enter into the kind of massive US-style military intervention to which the world has grown accustomed in recent years.
For China, the Afghan contest will most likely turn out to be a very measured combination of chess and weiqi.
China’s African Mischief
TOKYO – As Libya’s National Transitional Council attempts to establish a functioning government for a newly liberated country, the truth about what went on under Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime is starting to come to light.
Various treasures have been unearthed from Tripoli mansions that were hastily vacated by their owners, and what happened to the tortured, the murdered, and the missing is beginning to be revealed.
So, too, are some of Qaddafi’s dirtiest diplomatic secrets being exposed.
On September 2, the Canadian newspaper The Globe and Mail reported on recent negotiations between the embattled Qaddafi regime and Chinese armaments companies with direct ties to China’s government for contracts worth $200 million.
Such contracts were in flagrant violation of the arms embargo instituted under UN Security Council Resolution 1970, which China approved.
China’s rulers have denied that the secret arms deals were valid, and insist that the government did not authorize them.
But a travel report explicitly states that Qaddafi’s security officials met with three Chinese arms manufacturers: China North Industries Corp. (Norinco), the China National Precision Machinery Import &amp; Export Corp.
(CPMIC), and China XinXing Import &amp; Export Corp. The agenda included not only these companies’ available weapons stockpiles, but also the Chinese firms’ promise to provide additional weapons if required.
Qaddafi’s turn to China in his hour of desperation is somewhat surprising.
After all, he reacted to China’s growing activities in Africa – which his officials maintained was “reminiscent of imperialism” – by receiving an official visit in 2006 from Taiwan’s then-President Chen Shui-bian.
As the pressure from the rebels grew, Qaddafi’s last hope for maintaining power became China, and so fear of its influence in Africa was brushed aside.
For decades, Qaddafi had behaved as if he were, as his propagandists proclaimed him, “King among African Kings,” using his country’s abundant oil revenues to provide aid to his neighbors.
He announced investments of $97 billion to “free Africa from the West.”
President Compaoré of Burkina Faso (initially rumored to be a likely destination for Qaddafi’s exile) received military training from Libya in the 1980’s before rising to power in a coup d’état.
President Idriss Déby of Chad also brought about political change in 1990 with Qaddafi’s backing.
Niger’s President Mahamadou Issoufou, who is now harboring Qaddafi’s third son, Saadi, was able to win his country’s presidential election last March thanks to financial support from Qaddafi.
But, in recent years, China became an obstacle to Qaddafi’s African ambitions, and China did so by copying his methods: buying the support of dictators with weaponry and finance.
Since 2000, China has actively courted Africa’s unstable and dictatorial countries with offers of aid and a refusal to back United Nations sanctions against them.
Indeed, China has blithely entered into business with African countries that Europe and America refuse to engage with, owing to sanctions.
International sanctions, it now seems, were the door through which China rushed to gain access to Africa’s mineral wealth for its voracious industries.
For example, instead of making an effort to foster peace in Sudan, as a permanent, veto-wielding member of the UN Security Council should, China’s deep involvement with Sudan, through the provision of oil infrastructure and weapons, actually prolonged the Darfur conflict.
A letter to Chinese officials, signed by many members of the US Congress, and a report by Amnesty International state that China exported weapons to Sudan in violation of UN resolutions.
The Oscar-winning film director Steven Spielberg embarrassed China by resigning from an advisory post for the 2008 Beijing Olympics because of its support for the government in Khartoum, calling the Chinese games the “genocide Olympics.”
As Qaddafi fought his opponents this summer, ten states in southern Sudan broke away, claiming independence as the 54th country on the African continent.
Roughly 80% of Sudan’s oil production of 490,000 barrels per day is concentrated in South Sudan.
In 2010, China imported almost half of this output, roughly 250,000 barrels per day, which accounts for about 5% of China’s oil imports.
Given its support for the brutal national government in Khartoum, China is now desperately trying to repair relations with South Sudan, so that it can continue to exploit the new country’s oil reserves.
Like Sudan, Angola, Africa’s second largest oil producer, has experienced continued conflict for decades.
It was subject to UN sanctions until 2002.
Yet, during the years of Angola’s pariah status, China provided large-scale infrastructure finance in return for oil.
Today, China is the second biggest destination for Angolan oil (the US, which jumped on the bandwagon after sanctions were lifted, is the largest).
Indeed, Angola produces more oil for China than Saudi Arabia does, and, at times, as many as 100,000 Chinese workers have been working on Angolan infrastructure projects.