Talk about the creeping “new protectionism” was rife.
What took place subsequently would belie such pessimism about the trade regime.
Instead of heading south, global trade exploded in the 1990s and 2000s, driven by the creation of the World Trade Organization, the proliferation of bilateral and regional trade and investment agreements, and the rise of China.
A new age of globalization – in fact something more like hyper-globalization – was launched.
In hindsight, the “new protectionism” of the 1980s was not a radical break with the past.
It was more a case of regime maintenance than regime disruption, as the political scientist John Ruggie has written.
The import “safeguards” and VERs of the time were ad hoc, but they were necessary responses to the distributional and adjustment challenges posed by the emergence of new trade relationships.
The economists and trade specialists who cried wolf at the time were wrong.
Had governments listened to their advice and not responded to their constituents, they would have possibly made things worse.
What looked to contemporaries like damaging protectionism was in fact a way of letting off steam to prevent an excessive buildup of political pressure.
Are observers being similarly alarmist about today’s globalization backlash?
The International Monetary Fund, among others, has recently warned that slow growth and populism might lead to an outbreak of protectionism.
“It is vitally important to defend the prospects for increasing trade integration,’’ according to the IMF’s chief economist, Maurice Obstfeld.
So far, however, there are few signs that governments are moving decidedly away from an open economy.
The website globaltradealert.org maintains a database of protectionist measures and is a frequent source for claims of creeping protectionism.
Click on its interactive map of protectionist measures, and you will see an explosion of fireworks – red circles all over the globe.
It looks alarming until you click on liberalizing measures and discover a comparable number of green circles.
The difference this time is that populist political forces seem much more powerful and closer to winning elections – partly a response to the advanced stage of globalization achieved since the 1980s.
Not so long ago, it would have been unimaginable to contemplate a British exit from the European Union, or a Republican presidential candidate in the United States promising to renege on trade agreements, build a wall against Mexican immigrants, and punish companies that move offshore.
The nation-state seems intent on reasserting itself.
But the lesson from the 1980s is that some reversal from hyper-globalization need not be a bad thing, as long as it serves to maintain a reasonably open world economy.
As I have frequently argued, we need a better balance between national autonomy and globalization.
In particular, we need to place the requirements of liberal democracy ahead of those of international trade and investment.
Such a rebalancing would leave plenty of room for an open global economy; in fact, it would enable and sustain it.
What makes a populist like Donald Trump dangerous is not his specific proposals on trade.
It is that they don’t add up to a coherent vision of how the US and an open world economy can prosper side by side (it is also of course the nativist, illiberal platform on which he is campaigning and would likely govern).
The key challenge facing mainstream political parties in the advanced economies today is to devise such a vision, along with a narrative that steals the populists’ thunder.
These center-right and center-left parties should not be asked to save hyper-globalization at all costs.
The presumptive Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, is at best a lukewarm supporter of freer trade, and of the Trans-Pacific Partnership in particular.
Her Republican counterpart, Donald Trump, is downright hostile to trade deals that would throw open US markets.
Breaking with modern Republican tradition, Trump envisages a 35% tariff on imported cars and parts produced by Ford plants in Mexico and a 45% tariff on imports from China.
Economists are all but unanimous in arguing that the macroeconomic effects of Trump’s plan would be disastrous.
Repudiation of free and open trade would devastate confidence and depress investment.
Other countries would retaliate by imposing tariffs of their own, flattening US exports.
The consequences would resemble those of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, enacted by the US Congress in 1930 and signed by an earlier, disgraced Republican president, Herbert Hoover – a measure that exacerbated the Great Depression.
But just because economists agree doesn’t mean they’re right.
When the economy is in a liquidity trap – when demand is deficient, prices are stagnant or falling, and interest rates approach zero – normal macroeconomic logic goes out the window.
That conclusion applies to the macroeconomic effects of tariff protection in general, and to the Smoot-Hawley Tariff in particular.
This is a point I demonstrated in an academic paper written – I hesitate to admit – fully 30 years ago.
Consider the following thought experiment.
President Trump signs a bill slapping a tariff on imports from China.
This shifts US spending toward goods produced by domestic firms.
It puts upward pressure on US prices, which is helpful when there is a risk of deflation.
But then President Xi Jinping retaliates with a Chinese tariff, which shifts demand away from US goods.
From the standpoint of American consumers, the only effect is that imports from China (now subject to tax) and their US-produced substitutes are both more costly than before.
Under normal circumstances, this would be an undesirable outcome.
But when deflation looms, upward pressure on prices is just what the doctor ordered.
Higher prices encourage firms to raise production and households to increase their spending. They also reduce the burden of debts.
And because inflation is still too low, owing to depressed macroeconomic conditions, there is no need for the Fed to raise interest rates and offset any inflationary effects of the increase in spending.
To prevent this thought experiment from being misconstrued, I want to be clear: there are other, better ways of raising prices and stimulating economic activity in liquidity-trap conditions.
The obvious alternative to import tariffs is plain-vanilla fiscal policy – tax cuts and increases in public spending.
Still, the point about tariffs is important.
Just as tariff protection is not a macroeconomic problem in deflationary, liquidity-trap-like conditions, freer trade, the economist’s familiar nostrum, is not a solution.
Those seeking a cure for the current malaise of “secular stagnation” – slow growth and sub-2% inflation – shouldn’t claim too much for the beneficial macroeconomic effects of trade agreements.
And they shouldn’t invoke the old saw that Smoot-Hawley caused the Great Depression, because it didn’t.
False claims, even when made in pursuit of good causes, do no one any good.
But Smoot-Hawley did have a variety of other damaging consequences.
First, it disrupted the operation of the international financial system.
Free trade and free international capital flows go together.
Countries that borrow abroad must export in order to service their debts.
Smoot-Hawley and foreign retaliation made exporting more difficult.
The result was widespread defaults on foreign debts, financial distress, and the collapse of international capital flows.
Second, trade wars fanned geopolitical tensions.
The French Chamber of Deputies was outraged by American taxation of French specialty exports and urged an economic war against the US.
The UK taxed imports from the US while giving special preferences to its Commonwealth and Empire, angering Hoover and his successor, Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Canadian Prime Minister Mackenzie King warned of an outbreak of “border warfare,” diplomacy-speak for deteriorating political relations.
Efforts to stabilize the international monetary system and end the global slump were set back by these diplomatic conflicts.
Worse, US, British, French, and Canadian leaders were at one another’s throats at a time when they should have been working together to advance other common goals.
After all, economic policy aside, there was an even greater threat in the 1930s, namely the rise of Hitler and German re-militarization.
Unilateral resort to trade restrictions, by making diplomatic cooperation more difficult, complicated efforts to mobilize a coalition of the willing to contain the Nazi threat.
Tariff protection may not be bad macroeconomic policy in a liquidity trap.
But this doesn’t make it good foreign policy – for Trump or anyone else.
Protectionism Rides Again
Round up the usual suspects.
In any US presidential election campaign, you can be sure that protectionism will break in, as it has.
But America's swing back toward protectionism started long before, with President George W. Bush's steel tariff of 2001.
It was hard to understand what the underlying calculus was when the Bush administration imposed that tariff on steel imports.
The tariff was bad economics: it made America poorer.
The tariff was bad mercantilism: it robbed more in profits and unionized jobs from steel-consuming industries than it gave to steel-making industries, and the former were at least as well-organized and vocal in Washington as the latter.
Finally, the tariff was also bad diplomacy: why should anyone enter into an agreement with a US government that appears eager to demonstrate that it will break its commitments for the tiniest of imagined domestic political benefits?
Unfortunately, America's swing back toward protectionism did not stop there.
It continued last year when the Bush administration, recognizing that it had no policies to boost employment, explored whether China's undervalued exchange rate might be blamed for closed factories in Ohio.
No surprise, then, that the Democratic Party has now picked up the protectionist baton.
Its leading candidate for the presidential nomination, John Kerry, talks about how "Benedict Arnold CEO's" betray America by outsourcing jobs.
Kerry's remaining competitor, John Edwards, talks about how the gap on trade between him and Kerry is wide and deep - with Kerry on the free-trade side.
The past three years have seen much less progress on freeing up world trade than almost any free-trade advocate would have hoped.
Unless the swing of the pendulum in the US can be stopped, the rest of this decade will be as bad.
Neither the European Union nor Japan can be counted upon to do anything more than allow themselves to be dragged kicking and screaming into trade liberalization agreements.
Without aggressive US leadership - which means a US executive and congress that believe in free trade - trade liberalization simply will not happen, and there will be more "emergency" tariffs, "extraordinary" quotas and "voluntary" export restraints.
All of these steps will have minimal impact on the US. But they have the potential to cause countless disasters for emerging market countries that export to America.
Can anything halt this swing of the pendulum?
Absent a sudden, immediate, and strong boost in US domestic demand that turns into a durable boom with rapid employment growth, probably not.
The fall over the past three years in the proportion of the working-age population with jobs in America has been the biggest in percentage terms since the Great Depression.
American workers and voters are more anxious about job security and more willing to blame anything for job insecurity because they have seen the most profound deterioration in labor market conditions in the memory of anyone younger than eighty-five.
That slack labor market is powering this swing of the protectionist pendulum.
So we probably must accept that protectionist sentiment will remain strong.
But we should seek ways to diminish the time spent and the damage done at the protectionist end of this political cycle.
There are two arguments and one economic shift that could accelerate a return to trade liberalization.
The two arguments in favor of free trade are powerful, but by and large they have not been deployed.
The first argument needs to be made by countries that export to the US: they should tell journalists, politicians, voters, and workers in the US about all the American jobs that would not exist without their exports to America.
Fear that expanded trade will destroy jobs and disrupt the American economy needs to be balanced by fear that reduced trade will destroy jobs and disrupt the American economy.
The second argument needs to be made by those who care about America's national security.
The 21st century will see the world constantly at war against terrorism.
An important part of that war will consist of shaping the foes of terrorism into a durable alliance.
Increased world trade can be an important part of that alliance-building process.
An economic shift also needs to be carried out by Europe and Japan: a shift from deflation to reflation.
Strong demand growth in Japan and Europe that produces a higher level of American exports would be the most powerful pro-trade liberalization force imaginable.
For too long, Europe and Japan have subordinated the quest for full employment to other goals, whether extremely low inflation (Europe) or avoiding the costs of a bubble economy (Japan).
Convincing ordinary American voters that trade liberalization is a positive force will be easier when the US is not the only locomotive pulling world demand forward, and not the world's importer of last resort.
Akhir Kehidupan dan Harapan di Laut Lepas
HALIFAX, KANADA – Kehidupan hiu dan kerabat dekatnya, ikan pari, sudah dimulai bahkan sebelum dinosaurus ada.
Jenis hiu dan pari bertahan dari malapetaka kepunahan massal yang membinasakan Tyrannosaurus Rex dan seluruh dinosaurus lainnya, termasuk kepunahan Permian-Triassic yang memusnahkan 96% spesies laut.
Bahkan garis keturunan hiu yang lebih baru berevolusi, seperti hiu martil, sudah ada selama lebih dari 30 juta tahun.
Namun dalam beberapa dekade saja, seperempat jenis hiu dan pari terancam punah.
Kejadian ini timbul karena kesalahan kita sendiri – dan menjadi tanggung jawab kita untuk memperbaikinya.
Populasi hiu dan pari bukan satu-satunya spesies yang terancam punah.
Sebagian besar keanekaragaman hayati di laut – khususnya karang, mamalia laut, burung laut, dan penyu – juga kesulitan melawan tekanan manusia.
Sebagai akibatnya, ekosistem laut berisiko menjadi terurai, tidak stabil dan kurang produktif.
Mengingat besarnya ancaman terhadap kehidupan laut – termasuk penangkapan ikan berlebih (overfishing), perubahan iklim, polusi dan pembangunan tepi pantai – mudah bagi kita, bahkan mungkin sangat wajar, untuk bersikap pesimis.
Tetapi tahun ini bisa menandai awal dari suatu pendekatan yang lebih kuat untuk melindungi ekosistem laut, khususnya terkait dengan maraknya overfishing yang merupakan penyebab penurunan jumlah sebagian besar spesies secara drastis.
Tantangan di masa depan tidak bisa diremehkan.
Apabila keterlibatan dalam proses internasional menciptakan beban atau pengorbanan, akan selalu muncul alasan untuk menghindari peraturan, melemahkan upaya penegakan, atau bahkan sama sekali tidak mau melibatkan diri dalam proses tersebut.
Kondisi seperti ini umum diamati dalam persoalan lingkungan hidup, dimana modal politik yang diperlukan cukup besar; kebutuhan akan dukungan suara mayoritas sangat vital; isu-isu yang dibahas bersifat kontroversial; dan keuntungan yang diperoleh atasnya tidak didistribusikan secara merata dan dicapai dalam periode yang sangat lama.
Kedekatan yang erat dengan Realpolitik perubahan iklim menunjukkan bahwa hal ini merupakan tantangan yang mengintimidasi, atau bahkan terlampau sulit untuk dikendalikan, serta mengungkap unsur-unsur dilema politik dan sosial yang sangat sulit, seperti: dilema narapidana (prisoner’s dilemma), masalah penumpang gelap (free-rider problem), dan tragedi kepemilikan bersama (tragedy of the commons).
Saat ini, sejumlah peraturan – termasuk Konvensi PBB tentang Hukum Laut (UN Convention on Law of the Sea), pedoman-pedoman yang diterbitkan FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization guidelines), Perjanjian Stok Ikan (Fish Stocks Agreement), serta Konvensi tentang Konservasi Spesies Hewan Migrasi Liar (Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals) – mengatur tindakan-tindakan yang berdampak pada keanekaragaman hayati di laut lepas.
Namun perlindungan terhadap sumber daya hayati masih terbatas dan penuh dengan celah.
Sebagai contoh, tidak semua negara menandatangani perjanjian-perjanjian tersebut, sehingga kapal dapat memilih berbendera negara asing tertentu untuk menghindari kepatuhan peraturan-peraturan (“flag of convenience”/penggunaan bendera negara kemudahan).
Beberapa kegiatan penangkapan ikan masih dilakukan di luar jurisdiksi lembaga internasional yang berwenang di bidang pengelolaan sumber daya.
Sebagai dampaknya, marak terjadi penangkapan ikan yang melanggar hukum, tidak dilaporkan serta tidak diatur yang bernilai milyaran dolar per tahun.
Satu langkah yang memberi harapan, hasil rekomendasi kelompok kerja di PBB pada bulan Januari, adalah perumusan perjanjian baru yang mengikat secara hukum tentang keanekaragaman hayati di laut lepas yang saat ini tengah dipersiapkan untuk tinjauan di hadapan Majelis Umum PBB pada bulan September yang akan datang.
Kerangka kerja yang terkoordinasi dan selaras akan membantu mengurangi kesenjangan mengenai pengelolaan di kawasan; memaksa lembaga yang mengatur bekerja demi meningkatkan pengaruhnya; dan pada akhirnya memungkinkan pembentukan lembaga-lembaga baru yang berfokus pada pengelolaan dan perlindungan ekosistem, tidak hanya cadangan ikan.
Hal ini dapat mendorong kerjasama yang diperlukan untuk menciptakan kawasan perlindungan laut di laut lepas, sehingga memungkinkan pemulihan ekosistem yang rusak atau habis.
Tentu saja kawasan tersebut harus diawasi supaya efektif.
Terdapat perkembangan yang menjanjikan melalui penggunaan teknologi satelit yang mampu mendeteksi dan mengambil tindakan atas pelanggaran penangkapan ikan yang dilakukan kapal.
Teknologi ini dapat menciptakan perubahan yang sangat besar dalam perbaikan pengelolaan di laut, khususnya bagi negara-negara dengan ZEE yang luas dan memiliki keterbatasan penegakan di laut.
Keberadaan suatu sistem terkoordinasi yang mampu merespon terjadi pelanggaran juga sangat penting.
Penutupan pelabuhan dan penghentian kapal-kapal yang melanggar peraturan akan dimungkinkan melalui Port State Measures Agreement, yang saat ini menunggu proses ratifikasi.
Pengelolaan dan konservasi laut merupakan persoalan kritis.
Sumber daya laut tidak bisa selamanya dieksploitasi secara berlebihan.
Perjanjian berikutnya mengenai “keanekaragaman hayati di luar wilayah jurisdiksi nasional”, yang didasarkan pada cara-cara terbaru untuk memantau kepatuhan, dapat meningkatkan pengelolaan laut dengan pesat.
Kesulitannya adalah, bagaimana pun juga, pengelolaan yang lebih baik mengharuskan kita memilih keberlanjutan jangka panjang dibandingkan keuntungan jangka pendek.
Saat ini belum terlihat apakah kita akan mampu mengalahkan keinginan untuk memilih keuntungan semata.
The Public Sphere’s New Enemies
NEW YORK – Before November’s terrorist attacks in Paris, it was legal to stage a demonstration in a public square in that city.
Now it isn’t.
In Uganda, although citizens campaigning against corruption or in favor of gay rights often faced a hostile public, they didn’t face jail time for demonstrating.
But under a frighteningly vague new statute, now they do.
In Egypt, government authorities recently raided and shut down prominent cultural institutions – an art gallery, a theater, and a publishing house – where artists and activists once gathered.
All around the world, it seems, the walls are closing in on the space that people need to assemble, associate, express themselves freely, and register dissent.
Even as the Internet and communications technology have made speaking up publicly technically easier than ever, ubiquitous state and commercial surveillance has ensured that expression, association, and protest remain constrained.
In short, speaking up has never required more courage.
For me, this shift could not hit closer to home.
In November, the Open Society Foundations (the global philanthropies of George Soros, which I lead) became the second organization blacklisted under a Russian law, enacted in May, that allows the country’s prosecutor general to ban foreign organizations and suspend their financial support of local activists.
Because anyone who engages with us is subject to possible prosecution and imprisonment, we have had no choice but to cut off relations with the dozens of Russian citizens we supported in their efforts to preserve some fragment of democracy in their country.
Of course, there is nothing wrong with regulating public space and the organizations that use it.
In the early 1990s, some new governments in Eastern Europe, Africa, and Latin America, underestimating the power of an active citizenry and civil society, failed to regulate adequately advocacy organizations and the space in which they work.
But over the last two decades, as active citizens have toppled regimes in dozens of countries, governments have moved too far in the opposite direction, imposing excessive regulations on those organizations and that space.
In the process, they are criminalizing the most basic forms of democratic practice.
In some cases, governments do not even bother to create a legal precedent for their actions.
Last spring in Burundi, President Pierre Nkurunziza assumed a third term in office, despite the two-term limit enshrined in the constitution.
When citizens took to the streets to protest, they were violently suppressed.
Even countries with some of the world’s most robust democratic traditions have been cracking down.
After the Paris attacks, France and Belgium (where the plot was planned and organized) suspended civil liberties indefinitely, transforming themselves overnight into what are, at least by statute, police states.
In both countries, demonstrations have been banned; places of worship have been closed; and hundreds of people have been detained and interrogated for having voiced an unconventional opinion.
This approach is exacting a heavy toll.
Thousands of people who had planned to protest at the United Nations climate talks last month had to settle for leaving their shoes.
It was a startling image, illustrating how fear can overrun the commitments needed to maintain open societies and political freedoms even in Europe, the birthplace of modern citizenship.
There is no simple formula for regulating public space or safeguarding peaceful political dissent in an age of terrorism and globalization.
But two basic principles are clear.
First, the world needs stronger international governance of the movement of people and money, and fewer restrictions on speech, association, and dissent.
Lately, governments have been moving in the wrong direction.
But 2016 offers plenty of opportunities for correction, in areas ranging from trade to migration.
Second, non-profit organizations working to improve public policy need the same rights to secure international funding as for-profit entrepreneurs seeking to provide goods and services.
Foreign direct investment should be encouraged, not hindered, regardless of whether it will support goods production and job creation or stronger public policies and more active citizenship.
The responsibility for changing course does not fall exclusively on governments.
All of us who value open public space must stand shoulder to shoulder in support of the policy frameworks and institutions that safeguard it.
Now is a time for solidarity across movements, causes, and countries.
When simply taking up the activism of a concerned citizen can land you in jail and fear of surveillance encourages mass passivity, single-issue politics is not a winning strategy.
The best way to defend public space is to occupy it, even if you are championing a cause different from that of the person standing next to you.
In 2016, we must fill – and thus protect – that space together.
Psychiatry’s Conceptual Malpractice
NEW YORK – The American Psychiatric Association’s recent proposed changes to its official diagnostic manual – the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (“DSM”), often called the “bible of psychiatry” – may discredit psychiatric diagnosis more than improve it.
The DSM specifies the symptoms by which every mental disorder is diagnosed, in effect defining what is psychologically normal and abnormal in the United States – and, increasingly, for much of the rest of the world as well.
Revising the DSM’s diagnostic criteria for the upcoming fifth edition (“DSM-5”) is a heavy responsibility.
Draw the line between normality and disorder too broadly, and individuals may suffer incorrect diagnoses and undergo needless and potentially harmful treatment.
Indeed, the DSM’s history reveals many such errors of over-inclusiveness.
But if the line is drawn too narrowly, individuals may not get needed help.
Although psychiatrists tend to worry more about identifying potential patients in need of help and less about eliminating normal eccentricity and distress from diagnosis, it is crucial in any society that respects human variation and encourages individual moral responsibility to distinguish normal suffering and eccentricity from mental disorder.
These are delicate issues of conceptual analysis.
Yet the psychiatrists who formulated the DSM-5’s proposed changes are not trained in conceptual analysis, and, though amply forewarned, they have addressed the normal-versus-disordered issue in an unsystematic, ad hoc manner.
The result is a form of conceptual malpractice: intellectual negligence resulting in the formulation of invalid diagnostic criteria that will misdiagnose normal individuals as disordered.
Consider the following proposed new disorders:
(1)&#160;&#160; Binge eating disorder. If you overeat once a week for three months, lacking self-control and experiencing over-fullness afterward, and are distressed, embarrassed, and disgusted with yourself, you are diagnosable.
Apparently, people who feel bad about not being fully controlled in their eating when confronted by weekend buffet-style feasts are disordered.
(2)&#160;&#160; Hoarding disorder. If you resist discarding possessions that others (a spouse, say, or a clinician) find of limited value, and consequently clutter your living space, and you are distressed about this or are creating what others consider an unsafe environment, you are diagnosable.
This category will be welcomed by neatniks irritated by acquisitive partners.
(3)&#160;&#160; Hypersexual disorder. If you are highly sexual for six months in a way that feels uncontrolled and becomes distressing, and use sexuality for relieving feelings of stress and boredom or without consideration of the emotional effect on others (formerly known as being a “cad”), you are diagnosable.
This disorder presumes that using sex to relieve unhappiness, and feeling guilty about it, is also diagnosable.
Other proposed DSM-5 changes open the door to future abuses.
“Pathological gambling” would be placed in a new super-category of “behavioral addictions,” opening the way for “internet addiction” and many other behaviors to be deemed pathological.
Likewise, loose or quirky thinking that is not now a disorder but indicates an increased risk of developing a psychotic disorder would be classified as a “psychotic risk disorder.”
Those diagnosed with this condition would be more likely to be treated with potent drugs, though most never develop a psychotic disorder – setting a precedent for confusing risk factors with actual disorders.
Other changes undermine the validity of existing categories.
For example, the DSM currently distinguishes substance dependence – essentially addiction (a disorder) – from substance abuse, a weaker category that includes dubious criteria such as driving while intoxicated or arguing with others about substance use.
The DSM-5 proposes to eliminate the weak “abuse” category, but only by combining its misconceived criteria with current dependence criteria to form a unified “substance use disorder” category, and reducing the number of symptoms needed for diagnosis from three to two.
As a result, substance dependence would disappear as a valid category.
Under the proposal, if you occasionally drive your car home from parties after drinking and argue with your spouse about it afterwards, you would have alcohol-use disorder.
The vacuity of the abuse category will now infect the dependence category.
A second example: it has been known since antiquity that normal people who recently experienced a significant loss – especially of a loved one – can have the same symptoms (e.g., sadness, insomnia, fatigue, loss of interest in usual activities, lessened appetite) as those indicating major depressive disorder.
Thus, the DSM currently eliminates the recently bereaved from depression diagnosis unless they have certain extreme symptoms suggesting more than intense grief.
By contrast, the DSM-5 proposes to eliminate the bereavement exclusion.
Anyone with depressive symptoms for just two weeks after suffering a significant loss would be diagnosed with major depressive disorder, massively pathologizing normal intense grief.
Moreover, some obviously invalid current categories have not been addressed.
For example, if you are sad for two weeks and have one other related symptom, such as fatigue, insomnia, or lessened appetite, and you are distressed or impaired at work or in other roles, then you have “subsyndromal depression.”
But research shows that virtually anyone with two weeks of sadness feels distressed and is likely to be role-impaired, so in effect this category elevates moderately prolonged normal sadness into a mental disorder.
All the above categories encompass some genuine disorders.
The problem is that the criteria are drawn so broadly that they pathologize mostly the non-disordered.
Normal individuals often need and deserve help, but the decision as to the kind of help they get should not be biased by incorrect labeling of their conditions as mental disorders that suggest something is internally wrong with them.&#160;
The current symptom-based diagnostic system was developed partly to answer criticism that psychiatry is just social control of undesirable behavior dressed up as medicine.
By failing to distinguish adequately normal distress and eccentricity from disorder, the DSM-5’s proposals threaten to increase dramatically the types of abuses that the DSM was designed to prevent.
Another anti-psychiatric backlash may not be far behind.
Public Health versus Private Freedom?
PRINCETON – In contrasting decisions last month, a United States Court of Appeals struck down a US Food and Drug Administration requirement that cigarettes be sold in packs with graphic health warnings, while Australia’s highest court upheld a law that goes much further.
The Australian law requires not only health warnings and images of the physical damage that smoking causes, but also that the packs themselves be plain, with brand names in small generic type, no logos, and no color other than a drab olive-brown.
The US decision was based on America’s constitutional protection of free speech.
The court accepted that the government may require factually accurate health warnings, but the majority, in a split decision, said that it could not go as far as requiring images.
In Australia, the issue was whether the law implied uncompensated expropriation – in this case, of the tobacco companies’ intellectual property in their brands.
The High Court ruled that it did not.
Underlying these differences, however, is the larger issue: who decides the proper balance between public health and freedom of expression?
In the US, courts make that decision, essentially by interpreting a 225-year-old text, and if that deprives the government of some techniques that might reduce the death toll from cigarettes – currently estimated at 443,000 Americans every year – so be it.
In Australia, where freedom of expression is not given explicit constitutional protection, courts are much more likely to respect the right of democratically elected governments to strike the proper balance.
There is widespread agreement that governments ought to prohibit the sale of at least some dangerous products.
Countless food additives are either banned or permitted only in limited quantities, as are children’s toys painted with substances that could be harmful if ingested.
New York City has banned trans fats from restaurants and is now limiting the permitted serving size of sugary drinks.
Many countries prohibit the sale of unsafe tools, such as power saws without safety guards.
Although there are arguments for prohibiting a variety of different dangerous products, cigarettes are unique, because no other product, legal or illegal, comes close to killing the same number of people – more than traffic accidents, malaria, and AIDS combined.
Cigarettes are also highly addictive.
Moreover, wherever health-care costs are paid by everyone – including the US, with its public health-care programs for the poor and the elderly – everyone pays the cost of efforts to treat the diseases caused by cigarettes.
Whether to prohibit cigarettes altogether is another question, because doing so would no doubt create a new revenue source for organized crime.
It seems odd, however, to hold that the state may, in principle, prohibit the sale of a product, but may not permit it to be sold only in packs that carry graphic images of the damage it causes to human health.
The tobacco industry will now take its battle against Australia’s legislation to the World Trade Organization.
The industry fears that the law could be copied in much larger markets, like India and China.
That is, after all, where such legislation is most needed.
Indeed, only about 15% of Australians and 20% of Americans smoke, but in 14 low and middle-income countries covered in a survey recently published in The Lancet, an average of 41% of men smoked, with an increasing number of young women taking up the habit.
The World Health Organization estimates that about 100 million people died from smoking in the twentieth century, but smoking will kill up to one billion people in the twenty-first century.
Discussions of how far the state may go in promoting the health of its population often start with John Stuart Mill’s principle of limiting the state’s coercive power to acts that prevent harm to others.
Mill could have accepted requirements for health warnings on cigarette packs, and even graphic photos of diseased lungs if that helps people to understand the choice that they are making; but he would have rejected a ban.
Mill’s defense of individual liberty, however, assumes that individuals are the best judges and guardians of their own interests – an idea that today verges on naiveté.
The development of modern advertising techniques marks an important difference between Mill’s era and ours.
Corporations have learned how to sell us unhealthy products by appealing to our unconscious desires for status, attractiveness, and social acceptance.
As a result, we find ourselves drawn to a product without quite knowing why.
And cigarette makers have learned how to manipulate the properties of their product to make it maximally addictive.
Graphic images of the damage that smoking causes can counter-balance the power of these appeals to the unconscious, thereby facilitating more deliberative decision-making and making it easier for people to stick to a resolution to quit smoking.
Instead of rejecting such laws as restricting freedom, therefore, we should defend them as ways to level the playing field between individuals and giant corporations that make no pretense of appealing to our capacities for reasoning and reflection.
Requiring that cigarettes be sold in plain packs with health warnings and graphic images is equal-opportunity legislation for the rational beings inside us.
The Return of Public Investment
CAMBRIDGE – The idea that public investment in infrastructure – roads, dams, power plants, and so forth – is an indispensable driver of economic growth has always held powerful sway over the minds of policymakers in poor countries.
It also lay behind early development assistance programs following World War II, when the World Bank and bilateral donors funneled resources to newly independent countries to finance large-scale projects.
And it motivates the new China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), which aims to fill the region’s supposed $8 trillion infrastructure gap.
But this kind of public-investment-driven growth model – often derisively called “capital fundamentalism” – has long been out of fashion among development experts.
Since the 1970s, economists have been advising policymakers to de-emphasize the public sector, physical capital, and infrastructure, and to prioritize private markets, human capital (skills and training), and reforms in governance and institutions.
From all appearances, development strategies have been transformed wholesale as a result.
It may be time to reconsider that change.
If one looks at the countries that, despite strengthening global economic headwinds, are still growing very rapidly, one will find public investment is doing a lot of the work.
In Africa, Ethiopia is the most astounding success story of the last decade.
Its economy has grown at an average annual rate exceeding 10% since 2004, which has translated into significant poverty reduction and improved health outcomes.
The country is resource-poor and did not benefit from commodity booms, unlike many of its continental peers. Nor did economic liberalization and structural reforms of the type typically recommended by the World Bank and other donors play much of a role.
Rapid growth was the result, instead, of a massive increase in public investment, from 5% of GDP in the early 1990s to 19% in 2011 – the third highest rate in the world.
The Ethiopian government went on a spending spree, building roads, railways, power plants, and an agricultural extension system that significantly enhanced productivity in rural areas, where most of the poor reside.
Expenditures were financed partly by foreign aid and partly by heterodox policies (such as financial repression) that channeled private saving to the government.
In India, rapid growth is also underpinned by a substantial increase in investment, which now stands at around one-third of GDP.
Much of this increase has come from private sources, reflecting gradual relaxation of the shackles on the business sector since the early 1980s.
But the public sector continues to play an important role.
The government has had to step in as both private investment and total factor productivity growth have faltered in recent years.
“That is why... public investment is going to fill in the gap.”
Turning to Latin America, Bolivia is one of the rare mineral exporters that has managed to avoid others’ fate in the current commodity-price downturn.
Annual GDP growth is expected to remain above 4% in 2015, in a region where overall output is shrinking (by 0.3%, according to the International Monetary Fund’s latest projections).
Much of that has to do with public investment, which President Evo Morales regards as the engine of the Bolivian economy.
From 2005 to 2014, total public investment has more than doubled relative to national income, from 6% to 13%, and the government intends to push the ratio even higher in coming years.
We know that hikes in public investment, just like commodity booms, all too often end in tears.
The economic and social returns decline and money dries up, setting the stage for a debt crisis.
A recent IMF study finds that, after some early positive effects, most public-investment drives falter.
But much depends on local conditions.
Public investment can enhance an economy’s productivity for a substantial period of time, even a decade or more, as it clearly has done in Ethiopia.
It can also catalyze private investment, and there is some evidence that this has happened in India in recent years.
The potential benefits of public investment are not limited to developing countries.
In fact, today it may be the advanced economies of North America and Western Europe that stand to gain the most from ramping up domestic public investment.
In the aftermath of the great recession, there are many ways in which these economies could put additional public spending to good use: to increase demand and employment, restore crumbling infrastructure, and boost research and development, particularly in green technologies.
Such arguments are typically countered in policy debates by objections related to fiscal balance and macroeconomic stability.
But public investment is different from other types of official outlays, such as expenditures on public-sector wages or social transfers. Public investment serves to accumulate assets, rather than consume them.
So long as the return on those assets exceeds the cost of funds, public investment in fact strengthens the government’s balance sheet.
We do not know how the experiments in Ethiopia, India, or Bolivia will eventually turn out; so caution is warranted before one extrapolates from these to other cases.
Nonetheless, all three are examples that other countries, including developed ones, should watch closely as they search for viable growth strategies in an increasingly hostile global economic environment.
Why Public Investment?
MILAN – The world is facing the prospect of an extended period of weak economic growth.
But risk is not fate: The best way to avoid such an outcome is to figure out how to channel large pools of savings into productivity-enhancing public-sector investment.
Productivity gains are vital to long-term growth, because they typically translate into higher incomes, in turn boosting demand.
That process takes time, of course – especially if, say, the initial recipients of increased income already have a high savings rate.
But, with ample investment in the right areas, productivity growth can be sustained.
The danger lies in debt-fueled investment that shifts future demand to the present, without stimulating productivity growth.
This approach inevitably leads to a growth slowdown, possibly even triggering a financial crisis like the one that recently shook the United States and Europe.
Such crises cause major negative demand shocks, as excess debt and falling asset prices damage balance sheets, which then require increased savings to heal – a combination that is lethal to growth.
If the crisis occurs in a systemically important economy – such as the US or Europe (emerging economies' two largest external markets) – the result is a global shortage of aggregate demand.
And, indeed, severe demand constraints are a key feature of today's global economic environment.
Though the US is finally emerging from an extended period in which potential output exceeded demand, high unemployment continues to suppress demand in Europe.
One of the main casualties is the tradable sector in China, where domestic demand remains inadequate to cover the shortfall and prevent a slowdown in GDP growth.
Another notable trend is that individual economies are recovering from the recent demand shocks at varying rates, with the more flexible and dynamic economies of the US and China performing better than their counterparts in the advanced and emerging worlds.
Excessive regulation of Japan's non-tradable sector has constrained GDP growth for years, while structural rigidities in Europe's economies impede adaptation to technological advances and global market forces.
Reforms aimed at increasing an economy's flexibility are always hard – and even more so at a time of weak growth – because they require eliminating protections for vested interests in the short term for the sake of greater long-term prosperity.
Given this, finding ways to boost demand is key to facilitating structural reform in the relevant economies.
That brings us to the third factor behind the global economy's anemic performance: underinvestment, particularly by the public sector.
In the US, infrastructure investment remains suboptimal, and investment in the economy's knowledge and technology base is declining, partly because the pressure to remain ahead in these areas has waned since the Cold War ended.
Europe, for its part, is constrained by excessive public debt and weak fiscal positions.
In the emerging world, India and Brazil are just two examples of economies where inadequate investment has kept growth below potential (though that may be changing in India).
The notable exception is China, which has maintained high (and occasionally perhaps excessive) levels of public investment throughout the post-crisis period.
Properly targeted public investment can do much to boost economic performance, generating aggregate demand quickly, fueling productivity growth by improving human capital, encouraging technological innovation, and spurring private-sector investment by increasing returns.
Though public investment cannot fix a large demand shortfall overnight, it can accelerate the recovery and establish more sustainable growth patterns.
The problem is that unconventional monetary policies in some major economies have created a low-yield environment, leaving investors somewhat desperate for high-yield options.
Many pension funds are underwater, because the returns required to meet their longer-term liabilities seem unattainable.
Meanwhile, capital is accumulating on high-net-worth balance sheets and in sovereign-wealth funds.
Though monetary stimulus is important to facilitate deleveraging, prevent financial-system dysfunction, and bolster investor confidence, it cannot place an economy on a sustainable growth path alone – a point that central bankers themselves have repeatedly emphasized.
Structural reforms, together with increased investment, are also needed.
Given the extent to which insufficient demand is constraining growth, investment should come first.
Faced with tight fiscal (and political) constraints, policymakers should abandon the flawed notion that investments with broad – and, to some extent, non-appropriable – public benefits must be financed entirely with public funds.
Instead, they should establish intermediation channels for long-term financing.
At the same time, this approach means that policymakers must find ways to ensure that public investments provide returns for private investors.
Fortunately, there are existing models, such as those applied to ports, roads, and rail systems, as well as the royalties system for intellectual property.
Such efforts should not be constrained by national borders.
Given that roughly one-third of output in advanced economies is tradable – a share that will only increase, as technological advances enable more services to be traded – the benefits of a program to channel savings into public investment would spill over to other economies.
That is why the G-20 should work to encourage public investment within member countries, while international financial institutions, development banks, and national governments should seek to channel private capital toward public investment, with appropriate returns.
With such an approach, the global economy's “new normal" could shift from its current mediocre trajectory to one of strong and sustainable growth.
Publicly Funded Inequality
WASHINGTON, DC – One of the factors driving the massive rise in global inequality and the concentration of wealth at the very top of the income distribution is the interplay between innovation and global markets.
In the hands of a capable entrepreneur, a technological breakthrough can be worth billions of dollars, owing to regulatory protections and the winner-take-all nature of global markets.
What is often overlooked, however, is the role that public money plays in creating this modern concentration of private wealth.
As the development economist Dani Rodrik recently pointed out, much of the basic investment in new technologies in the United States has been financed with public funds.
The funding can be direct, through institutions like the Defense Department or the National Institutes of Health (NIH), or indirect, via tax breaks, procurement practices, and subsidies to academic labs or research centers.
When a research avenue hits a dead end – as many inevitably do – the public sector bears the cost.
For those that yield fruit, however, the situation is often very different.
Once a new technology is established, private entrepreneurs, with the help of venture capital, adapt it to global market demand, build temporary or long-term monopoly positions, and thereby capture large profits.
The government, which bore the burden of a large part of its development, sees little or no return.
One example, flagged by the economist Jeffrey Sachs, is Sovaldi, a drug used to cure hepatitis C. As Sachs explains, the company that sells it, Gilead Sciences, holds a patent for the treatment that will not expire until 2028.
As a result, Gilead can charge monopoly prices: $84,000 for a 12-week course of treatment, far more than the few hundred dollars it costs to produce the drug.
Last year, sales of Sovaldi and Harvoni – another drug the company sells for $94,000 – amounted to $12.4 billion.
Sachs estimates that the private sector spent less than $500 million on research and development to develop Sovaldi – an amount that Gilead was able to recoup in a few weeks of sales.
The NIH and the US Department of Veterans Affairs, however, had heavily funded the start-up that developed the drug and was later acquired by Gilead.
There can be no doubting that the imagination, marketing savvy, and management skills of private entrepreneurs are critical to the successful application of a new technology.
And the lower prices, better products, and consumer surplus provided by the commercialization of many innovations clearly provide large societal gains.
But one should not overlook the role of government in these successes.
Joint OECD-Eurostat data show that direct government expenditures accounted for 31% of R&amp;D spending in the US in 2012.
Adding indirect expenditures, like tax breaks, would bring this figure to at least 35%.
Thanks to such public outlays, a few private players are often making huge returns, which are a major cause of excessive income concentration.
There are several ways to change such a system.
Rodrik proposes the creation of public venture capital firms – sovereign wealth funds – that take equity positions in exchange for the intellectual advances created through public financing.
Another solution would be to reform the tax code to reduce returns when an individual or firm is cashing in on publicly funded research.
Both solutions face difficulties.
Sovereign wealth funds would have to be shielded from partisan politics, perhaps by giving them only non-voting shares.
Raising taxes on the beneficiaries of publicly funded research would be a challenge, given that the link between an original breakthrough and the wealth it created might be hard to quantify.
There is also the complication of global capital mobility and tax avoidance, which the G-20 is only beginning to address.
Other approaches are also possible: tightening up patent laws or imposing price controls for monopolistic industries, such as pharmaceuticals, as many market economies have done.
What would not be a solution, however, would be to channel fewer public resources into research and innovation – key drivers of economic growth.
It does not take huge rates of returns to mobilize a lot of talent; something like a 50% profit margin for a few years would be an acceptable reward for particularly good entrepreneurship.
Multiples of that amount, however, simply end up as gifts by the public to a few individuals.
A combination of measures and international agreements must be found that would allow taxpayers to obtain decent returns on their investments, without removing the incentives for savvy entrepreneurs to commercialize innovative products.
The seriousness of this problem should not be understated.
The amounts involved contribute to the creation of a new aristocracy that can pass on its wealth through inheritance.
If huge sums can be spent to protect privilege by financing election campaigns (as is now the case in the US), the implications of this problem, for both democracy and long-term economic efficiency, could become systemic.
The possible solutions are far from simple, but they are well worth seeking.
Muzzling the Dogs of War
WASHINGTON, DC – Sitting in Paris as the United States’s first ambassador to France, Thomas Jefferson reflected on how the new US government could avoid the errors of European “despots” who kept their people subjugated through war and debt.
Writing to James Madison, he observed that the US Constitution had at least checked “the Dog of war,” by transferring “the power of letting him loose from the Executive to the Legislative body, from those who are to spend to those who are to pay.”
At the same time, however, the Constitution designates the executive as the “Commander in Chief,” a power that American presidents have invoked to use military force without Congressional authorization on more than 200 occasions.
President Barack Obama relied on that power when he told both Congress and the American people that he had the authority to order limited strikes on Syria without going to Congress.
By simultaneously claiming that authority and seeking Congressional authorization to use it, Obama enters a small class of leaders who actively seek to constrain their own power.
That is because he sees his historical legacy as that of a president who ended wars and made them harder to start, instead reinvesting America’s resources in its own people.
He opposed the Iraq war in 2003 and promised in 2008 that he would end the unlimited “war on terror,” which had become a potential blank check for US presidents to use force anywhere in the world.
But, beyond the system of political “checks and balances” created by the US Constitution, does it make sense for leaders to take decisions regarding the use of force to the people?
It certainly makes the leaders’ lives harder.
British Prime Minister David Cameron came up short when he turned to Parliament to authorize British participation in US strikes against Syria.
French President François Hollande faced intense criticism from right-wing parties in the National Assembly for his agreement to participate in the strikes.
And Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who volunteered to participate in a military coalition, is facing strong domestic opposition to his Syria policy.
There are several arguments for not allowing the people’s representatives to intervene in the complicated foreign-policy dance between force and diplomacy.
For starters, there is the traditional idea that politics end at the water’s edge, where messy domestic disagreements are supposed to give way to the abstraction of one state with a unified national interest.
A related argument is that domestic political processes can hamstring a government in the great game of poker or chess that international politics is supposed to be.
As Obama has just discovered, having a legislature that clearly does not want to go to war weakens the executive’s hand in international negotiations.
Timing is another problem.
Legislative processes are slow and often tortuous, while international diplomacy can change overnight, owing to shifting coalitions, unexpected opportunities, and well-hidden traps.
Moreover, diplomacy thrives on back-room deals of the kind that US Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov have just struck over Syria’s chemical weapons.
In high-stakes negotiations, the last thing the players need is public debate about the cards that each of them holds.
A threat to turn from talks to tanks must be credible, which it will not be if an opposing player can simply count votes to see if the necessary legislative majority exists.
Still, Jefferson had it right.
Though turning to the legislature may prove to be inconvenient, frustrating, and even counter-productive, it is the right thing to do, for three reasons.
First, the use of force is costly in terms of lives, money, and leaders’ energy and attention.
The people pay these costs, so their representatives should decide whether to incur them.
Second, it is never more important for a democracy to follow its procedures and uphold its principles than in an armed conflict involving non-democracies.
The Syrian people, oppressed and brutalized by their own government, should see that the American people have a different relationship with their leaders.
Finally, a core component of democracy is a set of rules and procedures designed to require public officials to justify their policies with reasons that can be accepted or countered in public debate.
When contemplating foreign military intervention, leaders must explain their actions in ways that make clear how their country’s strategic and moral interests are at stake – for example, how unbridled aggression and hideous suffering can fester and spread.
Leaders would prefer to speak in the language of readily calculable interests.
Talk of care and moral scruples is uncomfortable and unstable terrain.
As the Turkish political analyst Mustafa Akyol has put it, for most of the Turkish population, “care for Syria does not translate into, ‘Let’s go liberate it.’”
Yet leaders who need their people’s support to address complex, interdependent problems beyond their borders must socialize them into a twenty-first-century world in which caring without acting imperils us all.
These arguments do not mean that leaders will not use force from time to time without turning to their people first.
Obama does have constitutional authority to conduct limited military strikes to deter and degrade Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s ability to use chemical weapons.
All leaders can order their forces into battle in cases of national emergency or self-defense.
They must preserve their legal and operational ability to act swiftly and decisively when necessary.
But, two centuries after Jefferson, states are no longer merely colored shapes on a map; increasingly, they are transparent and open territories that we view as home to millions of fellow human beings.
It is thus ever more important that the people of one country participate in the decision to attack the people of another.
Investing in Happy Endings
LONDON – Public and private investment in the real economy has been under attack since the 2008 financial crisis.
In difficult economic times, it may seem logical to cut investments that yield results only in the long term, and thereby conserve money and resources to address short-term problems.
In fact, cutting investment in our future – be it in people, the planet, political institutions, or business – is deeply irrational.
It is only through investment in visionary ideas, blue-skies thinking, research and development, and innovation that we can ensure that the future will be better – freer, more peaceful, and more prosperous – than the past.
Early-childhood education, preventive medicine, libraries, physical infrastructure, and basic scientific research, for example, all cost money – and studies show that they are worthwhile.
But when policymakers need to cut spending, investment in these public goods is often the first thing to go, because voters do not feel the effects in the short term.
Most of the pain is deferred, which is precisely why such cuts are politically attractive.
But this is low-hanging fruit that societies cannot afford to pick.
We must start investing in people at the earliest possible moment – right from birth.
Universal access to high-quality nutrition and preventive health care, as well as early-childhood learning programs, are necessary to provide strong foundations upon which countries around the world can ensure their future social advancement and economic growth.
Likewise, for children and adults alike, there is real value in, say, public libraries – secular and free gathering spaces that offer universal access to learning and, increasingly, provide a gateway to digital services.
The same is true of cultural programs and institutions that stimulate growth in the arts and sciences; they, too, are necessary to ensure that citizens can contribute productively to their societies and economies.
The temptation to cut long-term investment in economic hard times stalks the private sphere as well.
And companies around the world, big and small, have been succumbing to it since the beginning of the global economic downturn.
As companies are forced to look to their bottom line and become leaner, they cut investment in research and development, employee development and training, infrastructure, and more.
Making matters worse, these budget lines are the last to be restored when economic prospects brighten.
For example, in the face of investor pressure, pharmaceutical companies have cut their research activities dramatically, relying instead on acquisition strategies.
The aim is to “de-risk” by buying up firms that have already carried out all of the costly blue skies research and have developed proven drugs.
Obviously, such strategies will not work in the long term if no one is willing to invest in the earliest stages of research in critical areas like biotechnology, digital technology, renewable energy sources, and the like.
With early-stage investors scarce, governments turning away from blue-sky science, and funders of university-based research increasingly demanding that grantees’ show the “impact” of their work, who will fund risk-taking?
If no one does, the well will run dry, and there will be nothing to acquire.
Likewise, instead of investing in new infrastructure, companies patch up the old.
But patching broken things can work for only so long.
By not committing resources to invest in new, cost-efficient, environmentally-friendly operations, or in developing the skills and knowledge of employees, or in innovation, companies will find that their short-term savings come at the expense of their long-term success.
The choices that companies are making not only affect their own operations, but also have profound consequences for their customers, suppliers, and the societies in which they are embedded.
Failure to invest in the future will affect that future for everyone.
Not everything that is worthwhile has an immediate positive effect on financial bottom lines, or can be put neatly in a box.
If public and private investment decisions are driven only by the easily measured and easily defined, we will miss out on the breakthrough moments that characterize so much of human achievement and advancement.
In both the public and private sectors, we need to commit ourselves to long-term investment, whether in children and education, science and technology, and health and medicine, or in building strong institutions that can serve as the sustainable foundations of peaceful, democratic, and prosperous societies.
An investment in our future is never wasted.
Investing in beginnings is the only way we will live to see happy endings.
Inside the Training Revolution
BERKELEY – A highly trained workforce is a public good, crucial not only to the prosperity of workers themselves, but also to the strength of the entire economy.
And, as with most public goods, the United States has been underinvesting in it for decades, leaving many American workers without the skills they need to get well-paying jobs.
Fortunately, there are signs of improvement.
As the American labor market tightens and a growing chorus of companies complains that they cannot find skilled workers, innovative partnerships between governments, employers, and educational institutions are beginning to fill the void.
Governments bear the primary responsibility for funding workforce training.
But effective programs require more than just money; they need employers and educators who can identify the necessary skills, create the structures to teach them, and match trained workers with available jobs.
To be successful in achieving these goals, training programs must keep pace with rapid changes in technology and the consequent evolution in the labor market.
In short, workforce training requires both more investment and more innovation through new kinds of public-private partnerships, degree-granting institutions, and approaches to life-long learning and re-skilling.
Innovative approaches can pop up almost anywhere, and government has a critical role to play in promoting them: rigorously evaluating programs, scaling up those that work, and withdrawing funding from those that do not.
In the US, community colleges provide the first step toward a good job for millions of Americans.
These institutions are especially important for students from less-advantaged backgrounds and for displaced workers seeking new opportunities.
Around the country, community colleges are working with businesses and experimenting with ways to provide practical training for high-demand occupations and to fill specialized needs.
Recognizing their importance, President Barack Obama has proposed making two years of community college tuition-free.
The proposal would benefit the roughly nine million students attending community college at least half-time, making steady progress, and maintaining passing grades.
By one careful reckoning, community colleges are an extremely good investment.
For every dollar a student pays or gives up to attend school, his or her future income rises by about $4.80.
For taxpayers, the lifetime return on investment is better than six to one.
Community colleges are a classic example of how US states operate as “laboratories of democracy.”
Obama based his proposal in part on the free-tuition programs launched by Tennessee and the city of Chicago.
Drawing on the success of the Tennessee Tech Program, he has also proposed a $200-million federal fund to expand community college programs based on their effectiveness, which is to be measured by employer partnerships, work-based learning opportunities, and student graduation and job placement rates.
Similarly, California, which boasts a long tradition of excellence in public higher education, recently introduced a $50 million fund to foster innovative approaches in the sector, with an emphasis on public-private collaborations that have demonstrated their ability to deliver the skills that employers need.
Community colleges are just one part of the rapidly changing training landscape.
The purpose of higher education is evolving.
In addition to traditional tertiary education, training institutions are offering targeted modules, certified by professional industry groups.
The Obama administration, for example, cooperated with an arm of the National Association of Manufacturers to launch a manufacturing skills certification system based on standards established by industry groups.
That program is now operating at 163 colleges and institutes.
Numerous collaborations among the public sector, non-profit philanthropies, and businesses are offering innovations in worker education.
For example, Western Governors University, a nonprofit online institution, offers accredited college-degree programs in teaching, nursing, health-care informatics, and business.
It gets financial support from more than 20 corporations and philanthropies, including the Gates Foundation, along with $10 million from the US Department of Education.
Advancement is based not on how long students sit in a classroom, but on their competence in the topics they are studying.
The cost for six months, regardless of how many courses a person takes, is $2,890 (including books and a mentor) – a bargain, compared to most state universities.
The Nanodegree program at AT&amp;T (where I am a board member) is another example.
The program, a collaboration between AT&amp;T and Udacity, a for-profit provider of online courses, offers courses and mini-degrees in specialized fields such as front-end website development.
The program is a component of AT&amp;T’s in-house training program, but it is open to anyone with a broadband connection.
A typical course, the content of which is designed by AT&amp;T and other high-tech companies, costs about $200 a month and takes 6-12 months to complete.
AT&amp;T offers scholarships through partner non-profit institutions and provides paid internships for up to 100 graduates.
LearnUp, a San Francisco startup that has attracted funding from some of the biggest venture capital firms in Silicon Valley, establishes partnerships with employers to offer online training modules that connect job seekers to specific jobs, primarily entry-level positions that do not require college degrees.
Employers foot the bill, with the expectation that LearnUp will help them recruit higher-quality applicants.
And, indeed, once candidates have completed the training, LearnUp helps them to secure interviews with prospective employers, which already includes several large companies.
The California community college system is already working with LearnUp to give students access to the skills required to fill available local jobs.
As these examples illustrate, though workforce training is a public good, no single institution or arm of government has all of the answers concerning how best to provide it.
Collaboration among government agencies, companies and trade associations, educational institutions, and non-profits can give birth to effective strategies that can be scaled with public funding.
Only by working together will they be able to identify the best recipes for success.
Donald Trump and a World of Distrust
WASHINGTON, DC – A crisis of public confidence in civic institutions – including governments, legislatures, courts, and the media – is a central factor in the rise of Donald Trump and figures like him around the world.
And so long as the crisis persists, such leaders will continue to resonate with voters, regardless of electoral outcomes.
The crisis is not new.
A 2007 study, commissioned for a United Nations forum, showed a “pervasive” pattern: over the last four decades, nearly all of the so-called developed, industrialized democracies have been experiencing a decrease in the public trust in government.
In the 1990s, even countries long known for strong civic trust, such as Sweden and Norway, recorded a decline.
In the United States, Gallup’s latest survey of “confidence in institutions” shows double-digit percentage declines in trust since the 1970s (or the earliest available measurement) for 12 of 17 institutions, including banks, Congress, the presidency, schools, the press, and churches; of the remaining institutions, confidence increased modestly for four, and significantly for just one: the military.
As a social anthropologist who trained in Eastern Europe in the waning years of communism, I observed firsthand what happens to a society devoid of civic trust.
People viewed formal institutions with profound skepticism and retreated into social silos: informal, close-knit (and closed) circles of friends, family, and allies on which they relied for news, information, and much else.
Young people saw little reason to invest in their future, and their elders succumbed to suicide and substance abuse at alarming rates.
There are similarities to some alarming trends in the US, Europe, and elsewhere today.
According to a major study by the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton last year, the mortality rate for middle-aged, less-educated white men in the US has been surging, in what some observers have called a wave of “despair deaths.”
At the same time, American millennials (those born between 1982 and 2004) are postponing marriage and home or car purchases, with many telling pollsters that the postponement will be permanent.
They are residing with their parents at rates not seen since 1940, and many are eking out a living through a patchwork of “gigs” that provide neither benefits nor job security.
As a result, a growing cohort of people are identifying as outsiders.
In the US, as the 2016 presidential campaign got underway, many voters clearly believed – not without reason – that the system was “rigged.”