All are simply expected to execute orders scrupulously.
But it is individual training and the ability to make split-second decisions in a fluid situation that are required in anti-terrorist operations.
Incidentally, when one such anti-terrorist operation was suggested in the Pankisi Gorge in Georgia, Putin decided against it, understanding that instead of eliminating terrorists it would likely turn into a full blown traditional war.
From the outset, the Defense Ministry was skeptical of Putin's order to include anti-terrorism on the military agenda.
It suggested, instead, that the army should play a secondary role in anti-terrorist operations.
The Army's hostility to reform is deeply ingrained.
Today, Russia's army has no professional institution for training non-commissioned officers. The Defense Ministry simply names sergeants from senior conscripts, which means that sergeants are not very different from their subordinates in either age or training.
The internal conditions of the "power" ministries - the FSB and the MVD, which bear the main responsibility for antiterrorist operations - are equally grim.
Now the Kremlin wants to merge the FSB and MVD into one Ministry of State Security, thereby creating a single anti-terrorist center.
Putin has already decided to create an operational center of 13 groups in the Northern Caucasus region to coordinate the actions of the Defense and Emergencies Ministries.
But there is little reason to believe that this proposed bureaucratic monster will provide better security than the existing FSB and MVD forces.
The only positive result that may emerge from such a structural change could be that the number of anti-terrorist formations will grow.
Yet even that is uncertain: before Beslan, the response to terrorist attacks in Ingushetia and Chechnya consisted of efforts to form additional traditional military divisions.
It is now obvious that overwhelming numbers don't provide an advantage in fighting terrorism, because it is the terrorists who have the initiative.
They plan when and where to strike.
Confronting them effectively will require root-and-branch change in order to inspire Russian security officials to take the initiative.
For example, Russian security structures have no information about the underground work of the terrorist organizations, which are spread across the entire Russian Federation.
There is no credible intelligence penetration of these organizations.
This must change if Russia is to prevent future Beslans.
But fighting terrorists requires an entirely different kind of spying from "uncovering" traditional "spies," or neutralizing unpopular oligarchs such as Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
To meet today's threats, troops must be able to take individual responsibility and initiative, and need to be trained to react resourcefully and at a moment's notice.
These qualities simply don't exist in Russia's Sovietized military organizations, with their rigid hierarchies and culture of blind conformity.
The entire military philosophy in Russia must be changed.
But neither Russia's president nor its power ministries seem ready for this.
Instead of confronting today's new and very real enemy, they would rather confront the old, traditional one - the West.
After the Beslan tragedy, Putin offered an exotic explanation of terrorism: the terrorists, he claimed, are instruments in the hands of those who still fear Russia as a nuclear power.
This is nonsense on stilts, though it obviously sounds pleasing to generals in the power ministries, because the only war they know how to wage is with "world imperialism."
They are useless at fighting today's new terrorist enemy.
Without major reform of all security and military forces - reforms that provide incentives for individual officers to show initiative and take responsibility - Russia's war on terror will remain one-sided: the terrorists will be doing all the attacking.
Russia’s Lawless Legality
MOSCOW – Colonel Yuri Budanov is a convicted rapist and murderer.
After serving half his prison sentence for the rape and murder of an 18-year-old Chechen, Elsa Kungayeva, he was released last December.
Svetlana Bakhmina was a lawyer at Yukos, the oil company formerly run by Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
In 2004, she was arrested and, in 2006, sentenced to six and a half years on embezzlement and tax fraud charges.
Like Budanov, she applied for early release from prison in 2008.
Her request was refused, as was her earlier plea in 2006 to suspend her sentence until her two small sons reached the age of 14 – a request she was entitled to make under Russian law.
Vasily Aleksanyan was Executive Vice President of Yukos, and, as a lawyer, defended Khodorkovsky and his partner, Platon Lebedev, after their arrest in 2003.
He was subsequently disbarred and was himself arrested in April 2006.
By that time, Aleksanyan was critically ill with AIDS, for which treatment was withheld.
In December 2008, the Moscow City Court approved his release on bail of 50 million rubles (around $1,775,000 at the time).  
Finally, consider Khodorkovsky and Lebedev themselves.
Arrested in 2003, they were sentenced in 2005 to eight years in prison on charges of tax fraud.
They are serving their sentence in Chita on the Chinese border, although Russian law prescribes that, for the crimes with which they were charged, they were entitled to be imprisoned near their place of domicile, i.e., in Moscow.
When Dmitry Medvedev was elected as Russia’s president a little more than a year ago, he promised to do away with the “legal nihilism” in Russia.
Although he was a close confidante of Vladimir Putin and probably was able to assume presidential office exclusively for that reason, many dared to hope that he would stop the vendetta against Khodorkovsky and all those who had been close to him.
Disillusion fully set in only one year after Medvedev’s election, when a new case against Khodorkovsky and Lebedev was brought, this time for embezzlement of billions and money laundering.
A cynical observer remarked at the preliminary hearing that by the looks of it the Russian authorities couldn’t make up their mind: either the former Yukos bosses didn’t pay taxes or they embezzled money.
But since when does one pay taxes on embezzled funds?
The courtroom where the new trial against Khodorkovsky and Lebedev is taking place is slightly larger than a spacious classroom. And it is full of heavily armed guards.
Despite this, the two defendants are forced to sit inside a narrow cage whose glass front has only two small holes through which their lawyers can communicate with them.
Every day, they are brought into the courtroom handcuffed like dangerous felons.
One cannot help but contrast this with Budanov, the rapist and murderer who is now free to move about Russia at will.
The judge refused without comment requests by the defense to remove the cage and to replace one of the prosecutors, who had already been a prosecuting counsel during the first trial.
So the authorities’ aim seems clear: put Khodorkovsky and Lebedev away for a much longer time – more than 20 years if they are convicted.
Few doubt that they will be.
Still, this new trial of course is also a test case for Medvedev’s presidency.
So far, he has done nothing to counteract the legal nihilism against which he himself has spoken.
But maybe he will in the course of this trial, which resembles a personal vendetta even more than the first one did.
To be sure, Khodorkovsky is no saint.
Like many others in Russia who are allowed to enjoy their wealth in peace today (or maybe are lamenting its loss due to the financial crisis), he made his money in thoroughly obscure ways during the early post-Soviet years.
But, instead of buying villas, yachts, or soccer clubs abroad, he invested his fortune in Russia.
Of course, he did mainly fill his own pockets – and his social and political activities certainly were not entirely altruistic, either.
But what made him public enemy number one for Putin was his desire to move Russia in a political direction that he viewed as positive and desirable.
It was his ambition to subject the country to truly far-reaching social and political reforms that sealed his downfall and also brought about this new trial, which appears intended to silence him for good.
Medvedev’s presidency will inevitably be measured by this case.
Will he tolerate and endorse his prime minister’s personal aversions, or is he willing to put an end to the infamous spectacle of a judicial process that has been manipulated and abused from beginning to end?
Little speaks for the latter scenario, but Russia has always been a country where hope dies last.
Russia’s Moving Presidential Target
Recently, a small event caused a major stir in Russian politics.
An aide to President Vladimir Putin, Igor Shuvalov, said that it was realistic to expect the appearance of a new person whom Putin would consider his potential successor.
The statement hit like a bombshell, producing an explosion of comments.
There is nothing strange in this.
Russia’s somewhat archaic political culture overly personifies power.
Perceptions and assessments of the country’s future often depend heavily on the personality of its leader, his resoluteness, and his intellectual and moral qualities.
Furthermore, Putin himself is interested in preserving uncertainty with regard to his successor for as long as possible.
By doing so, he avoids the damage to his authority that would be caused by becoming a “lame duck,” particularly given Russia’s servile bureaucracy and its lack of reliable institutions and respected traditions to carry out a smooth transfer of power.
Finally, different clans around the president have long been trying to promote their own candidates for succession.
Statements similar to Shuvalov’s have already been made, and more can be expected.
This ongoing discussion of the various candidates’ merits and drawbacks recalls how airplanes protect themselves from missile attacks by launching a false target.
Public interest is the missile, and the target is the “ruling power,” which protects itself by providing a decoy in the form of aimless talk.
But a more fundamental question is why Russia’s politicians, journalists, and analysts (and even some in the West) happily engage in this ruse.
At the moment, who will succeed Putin is not important; what counts is the process that will result in the choice of Russia’s third president.
The real historical significance of the choice that Russia will face in 2008 will be determined not by the next president’s personal qualities, but by his loyalties – that is, to whom he owes his job.
Putin’s successor (whoever that will be) will come to power as a result of a deal within a narrow elite circle.
This means that he will be accountable to and dependent on those who raised him to power, not in a symbolic sense, but in the quite real sense of fulfilling promises and facing sanctions if he does not.
This narrow circle comprises not only very rich and resourceful people, but also members of informal but very effective organizations (which are often, perhaps not entirely correctly, called “mafia”).
Thus, the implementation of Operation Successor (which may include the extension of the current president’s term) has imitated the way Putin himself came to power, and leaves Russia on the same path that Yeltsin set in the last years of his presidency – a path that will either ruin the country or bring it to a dead end.
Politicians who come to power by winning a free and fair election are accountable primarily to voters.
This does not necessarily lead them to work solely for the public good.
Even winners of competitive elections have commitments to their campaign teams and sponsors.
However, the existence of real political opposition creates a different atmosphere, which spreads beyond elections.
Free elections do not determine politicians’ behavior, and do not necessarily ensure that moral, energetic, and intelligent people fill high offices.
But freedom and democracy do restrict arbitrariness and theft, and encourage politicians, regardless of their moral qualities, to take public interests into account.
If the next president comes to power by means of a free and fair election, Russia will have a real chance at a decent future.
However, if Putin’s successor ��� or Putin himself – is imposed on the country in an uncompetitive way, Russia will remain on its current path to nowhere.
This is a critical moment for Russia.
Unfortunately, what is most important to comprehend in this moment is barely recognized, much less discussed.
Russia\u0027s Naked Public Space
Those who lived in Moscow in the late 1990's frequently encountered odd - and mostly incomprehensible - billboards.
The first such billboard showed a young woman's face, but no bar of soap or bottle of perfume.
No brand name, either.
A short line said simply "I love you."
Who loved this woman and why did he want everyone to know of his passion?
Rumors had it that one of Russia's richest men wanted to impress his sweetheart.
Next came a billboard showing a man's face, with foreign coins flowing down upon it.
The line read, "Roma takes care of the Family, the Family takes care of Roma.
Congratulations!
Roma found a classy place for himself."
There was never any public explanation for this message, either, just rumors - that "Roma" was Roman Abramovich (this was long before the tycoon bought the Chelsea football team, becoming a world celebrity), and that he had close ties with then President Boris Yeltsin's inner circle, known as "the Family."
Even the few who claimed knowledge about Roma were unsure about who commissioned the billboard.
It was simply taken for granted that what is supposed to be public space - the streets of Moscow - was appropriated for a vaguely menacing private message.
Such "private" billboards kept appearing for about a year with varying themes.
The implications of this game, however, run deeper than the actual messages sent and received.
The billboards with their private messages were able to occupy public space so easily because in Russia public space is virtually empty: there's very little, if any, communication between state and society, and barely any public debate.
Under Communism, public debate was confined to private kitchens.
Everything beyond private space was state territory.
Those who encroached upon it were punished.
Perestroika turned the country into one big public space.
Streets and squares, newspapers and literary journals became the ground for free public expression.
Newspapers published in gigantic numbers.
Russia's people wanted to make a difference and amazingly they did: their energy and cohesion put an end to Communist rule.
Of course, what Russia had in the late 1980's and early 1990's wasn't institutionalized democracy, but revolutionary excitement.
It was expected that out of this sea of democratic emotion new political institutions would emerge.
Instead, political life here has been reduced to mere formality.
Although there's nothing like Soviet oppression, the alienation between state and society resembles that of Soviet days.
Unlike the Communist regime, the new Russian state doesn't treat its citizens like a flock of sheep.
On the contrary, the state generally ignores its citizens - it is in no way accountable to the public, nor does it bother to explain what actually goes on inside the Kremlin.
With political parties driven into irrelevance, parliament turned into a rubber stamp agency, and national television networks taken under government control, public discourse has all but disappeared.
Ideas may be voiced, but there's barely any audience, and these utterances don't resonate; they die away with no implications or consequences.
Russian society is atomized, with no sense of cohesion, solidarity, or collective drive in any interest group, professional or social, big or small.
Big business won't stand up for the oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky, singled out by the Kremlin as a political enemy and imprisoned since last year.
Instead, each businessman makes his own deals with the Kremlin to gain relative security.
The same lack of cohesion is found among journalists.
No professional solidarity was shown back in 2001, when Russia's private national television network NTV was taken over by the government.
A considerable degree of freedom remains, but a submissive society freely gives ground to the state.
Seven or eight liberal dailies publish critical opinion or even incriminating evidence against government officials.
But their print runs range between 20 and 100 thousand copies, and their circulation is mostly limited to Moscow.
With such small audiences, they are all but irrelevant.
Worse, the broad public isn't anxious to get a better idea of how important government decisions are made.
The old Soviet mindset persists: they up there will take their own decisions regardless of us down below.
In this atmosphere of public silence, the virtually vacant public space is filled with odd voices that are not intended for public consumption.
The billboards were "them" communicating in our common space, exchanging messages, as it were, over our heads .
In March, a high-quality Moscow business daily, Vedomosti, published a letter from Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
It was a mystery how the letter was smuggled out of jail.
Did Khodorkovsky write the letter, or had he merely signed it?
If he was the author, was it his political manifesto or an act of repentance?
In the murky atmosphere surrounding Khodorkovsky's case, it is impossible to discover which theory is true.
But the more relevant question is whom Khodorkovsky's letter aimed to address. Vedomosti readers may sympathize with Khodorkovsky's plight, but they account for only 60 thousand people.
The public at large was basically unaware of Khodorkovsky's letter, because the state television networks did not report it.
His missive was more likely an element in behind-the-scenes negotiations between Khodorkovsky and various Kremlin factions.
Khodorkovsky's letter may have appeared in the public space, but it was not intended for public consumption.
Rather, it was like the "I love you" billboard.
For the time being, Khodorkovsky's love remains unrequited.
Russia\u0027s Neurotic Invasion
PARIS – At the very moment China was getting a “gold medal” in diplomacy for the success of the opening ceremony in Beijing, Russia earned a “red card” for the extreme and disproportionate violence of its military intervention in Georgia.
Whereas China intends to seduce and impress the world by the number of its Olympic medals, Russia wants to impress the world by demonstrating its military superiority.
China’s soft power versus Russia’s hard power: the two countries’ choices reflect their very different levels of self-confidence.
China may play the victim versus the West, but its leaders know that their country is back on the world scene at a level that they deem appropriate and legitimate.
Of course, domestically, China’s leaders lack confidence and behave accordingly towards their citizens.
Yet, as China takes minuscule steps forward, Russia takes giant steps backward.
For many years now, Georgia and Russia have been playing with fire, and war in the Caucasus looked preordained.
Each side was waiting for a false move by the other to play its hand.
It is more than likely that the young and impulsive Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili fell into the trap that he had helped to create.
He wanted to demonstrate to his Western partners that Georgia needed NATO protection from Russia, and that accession was therefore urgent.
Regardless of whether some in the United States encouraged Saakashvili, he did not expect – but he should have – the “hyper-charged” reaction from Russia.
For it is clearer than ever that Vladimir Putin is still in charge.
The opportunity that Saakashvili presented to him to signal to the world Russia could no longer be humiliated was simply too tempting.
Well aware of Russia’s emergence as a growing energy super-power, of the relative weakening of US clout and determination, of Europe’s deep divisions between pro-Russians, such as Germany and even more so Italy, and anti-Russians (mostly from the EU’s newest members in eastern Europe), and of the United Nations’ paralysis owing to Russia’s veto power, the Kremlin is sending a strong message to the world: “the time for concessions is over.”
For the Kremlin, it is likely that South Ossetia and Abkhazia would remain under formal Georgian sovereignty only if the country did not join NATO.
Yet Russia, like Saakashvili, is playing with fire: its strategy of encouraging separatist forces in the two Georgian provinces may inflame separatist tendencies in other parts of the Russian Federation (remember Chechnya?).
Moreover, Russia is unnecessarily isolating itself from the world.
Above all, this crisis confirms the new hierarchy of powers that now exists in the world.
In this new world, China and Russia are back and America, though still on top, is declining.
As for Europe, while the European Union mediates, in doing so it is also demonstrating the limits of its influence.
The EU is truly “convincing” only when it can use the seductive power of a membership card.
But Russia is not interested in joining, at least not on Europe’s terms.
Russians are well aware that Americans want their help in the Middle East; on other issues, they listen to Europe and America with a stance oscillating between indifference and brutality.
In the Caucasus, everyone is losing, though some more than others – foremost the civilians who have lost their lives or homes.
Then comes the Georgian government, which has demonstrated its immaturity, if not irresponsibility.
A lamb, after all, does not provoke a bear.
But Russia, too, has unnecessarily damaged its international image.
The Kremlin did not need such a display of unrestrained force and brutality to prove its case.
China, in comparison, now looks like a respectable partner.
As for the West, it is confronted with a dilemma.
Can it reward Georgians for the leaders’ irresponsibility by rushing the country into NATO?
On the other hand, can it afford to grant Russia the de facto right to control, directly or indirectly, countries like Georgia today and Ukraine tomorrow?
The current crisis in the Caucasus does not mark the return of the Cold War, nor is it likely to mark the start of open warfare between Russia and the West; it is, more simply, the return of the traditional imperialism practiced by the Russian Empire more than a century ago.
China is, with the exception of Tibet, a satisfied and confident status-quo empire.
Russia by contrast is a revisionist imperialist power, whose lack of self-confidence is returning to haunt the world.
Russia’s “Oil-for-Knowledge” Scheme
Whenever you fill up your European compact car’s gas tank, or that of your American SUV, you pay as much as a Russian schoolteacher earns in a month.
And every time you pay, you subsidize a regime that relies on energy, not information, as its main product.
You finance the pre-modern and the inefficient, and perhaps worse: every time you pay, you may be collaborating with political evil.
Russia began 2006, the year of its chairmanship of the G-8, by launching a gas war with Ukraine.
Having a virtual monopoly on supply, Russia decided that it could dictate prices.
But Ukraine has a virtual monopoly on delivery, so Russia blinked in this standoff as soon as gas supplies to Western Europe dropped.
Modern economies rely not on monopolies, but on competition.
Contemporary Russians consume competitive products: Nestle cereals, Mercedes cars, Hollywood movies.
The problem is that they do not make them.
Russians pay for this consumption from the profits of gas and oil.
State-owned and private multinational companies drill fuel in Russia and sell it to Europe and North America.
The government partially redistributes profits by collecting taxes and paying salaries.
Gas prices are growing, and so are Russian salaries.
This causes inflation, because, other than fuel, Russians do not produce much else.
To avoid inflation, the government deposits a large part of its profits into a Stabilization Fund.
But, because the Kremlin does not trust its own stocks and bonds, the Stabilization Fund invests in Western securities.
Thus, the government loses its chance to modernize Russian cities, roads, hospitals, and universities.
But inflation still grows, as do real estate prices.
Mortgages are available at outrageously high interest rates.
No civil servant, military officer, or professor is able to buy even a modest apartment, unless they have an additional – often illegal – source of income.
Most don’t.
Russia exposes an ugly truth of our era: illiberal societies can grow just as fast – even faster – than open ones.
Oil-rich states need global networks to sell their oil, to export their capital, and to import technologies and technologists.
Among current United Nations members, countries with large natural resource endowments are also more likely to have a non-democratic regime.
So no surprise that other managers, with better relations with those in power, now run Khodorkovsky’s Yukos Oil, as well as another major firm, Sibneft.
Foreign managers don’t seem to mind.
On the contrary, some of these managers, such as former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, who now chairs a Gazprom subsidiary building a pipeline under the Baltic sea, are helping to expand Russia’s oil-based imperial designs over Europe.
In the strange new world of today, the modern and the pre-modern depend on each other.
Thus, Russians trade oil for the products of knowledge.
Imported technologies are cheap if you convert their prices into barrels of oil, so the country produces a shortage of its own geologists and chemists, not to mention economists and lawyers.
It needs only one gang of politicians.
In fact, for such a country, local experts are not just redundant, but dangerous.
In their moments of sincerity, Russian policymakers admit that Russia is, from their point of view, overeducated.
They recently discovered what their Arab colleagues have known for a long time: that for an oil-rich regime, it is cheaper and safer to buy knowledge than to produce it.
So hidebound conservatives run Russian universities.
Scientists go on trial for technical espionage, while ex-KGB spies sign multi-billion dollar contracts.
Non-governmental organizations are met with suspicion and harassment, with new legislation seemingly designed to vanquish them.
Political parties are created or banned by anonymous Kremlin clerks.
Elections are either canceled or faked.
Oil-poor neighbors like Ukraine are blackmailed.
An illiberal society can produce growth, but it cannot enjoy it.
Redistribution schemes benefit the population if, and only if, they are controlled by democratic feedback.
The Russian Stabilization Fund embodies an unstable combination of anxiety and greed that is typical for an undemocratic regime.
Dependent on gas, oil, and multinationals, the G-8 countries accept quite a lot of guff from their current chair, Vladimir Putin.
Still, the arrogance of Russia’s rulers may have breached the West’s tolerance.
Alternative sources to Russian energy are not the only means to decrease prices.
Global civil society has developed instruments to halt consumption that produces harm.
Elegant ladies, for example, no longer buy fur coats.
Many Westerners eagerly pay more for “Fair Trade” coffee.
Would a similar approach work for the gas in your oven?
A century ago, the idea of decolonization sounded just as absurd.
Public awareness is as crucial now as it was decisive then.
Russia’s Pipeline to Empire
Gerhard Schroeder, who less than a month ago was Germany’s Chancellor, has agreed to become chairman of the company that is building a gas pipeline from Russia, across the Baltic Sea to Germany, and on through Western Europe.
In many countries, Schroeder would now be charged with the crime of conflict of interest.
His apparent ethical lapse is magnified by the fact that, at this very moment, Russia is threatening to cut off Ukraine’s gas supplies if that country does not give in to the pricing demands of Kremlin’s state-owned gas behemoth, Gazprom.
Russia’s strategic task is obvious: cutting off Ukraine’s gas currently means cutting off much of Europe’s gas as well, because some of its biggest gas pipelines pass through Ukraine.
By circumventing Ukraine, Poland, and of course, the Baltic countries, the new pipeline promises greater leverage to the Kremlin as it seeks to reassert itself regionally.
President Vladimir Putin and his administration of ex-KGB clones will no longer have to worry about Western Europe when deciding how hard to squeeze Russia’s postcommunist neighbors.
Should Europe really be providing Putin with this new imperial weapon?
Worse, might Russia turn this weapon on an energy-addicted EU?
That a German ex-chancellor is going to lead the company that could provide Russia with a means to manipulate the EU economy is testimony to Europe’s dangerous complacency in the face of Putin’s neo-imperialist ambitions.
Certainly Russia’s media are aware of Europe’s growing dependence on Russian energy.
Indeed, they revel in it: after we integrate and increase our common gas business, Russian editorialists write, Europe will keep silent about human rights.
Putin expresses this stance in a more oblique way with his commitment to pursuing what he calls an “independent policy.”
What he means by that is that Russia is to be “independent” of the moral and human rights concerns of the Western democracies.
Perhaps some European leaders really do believe that maintaining the Union’s cozy prosperity justifies silencing ourselves on human rights and other issues that annoy the Kremlin.
Of course, we may speak up, briefly, about “commercial” matters like the expropriation of Yukos, but if the Kremlin puts a price on our values or criticism of Russian wrongdoing – as in, say, bloodstained Chechnya – Europeans seem willing to shut up rather than face the possibility of higher energy prices, or even a blockade like that now facing Ukraine.
As Putin shuffles his court, subordinating the Duma to his will, the EU’s hopes for a growing “Europeanization” of Russia should be abandoned.
The Russia that Putin is building has mutated from the post-Soviet hopes of freedom into an oil and gas bulwark for his new model ex-KGB elite.
Indeed, Matthias Warnig, the chief executive of the pipeline consortium that Schroeder will chair, is a longtime Putin friend.
The Wall Street Journal reported earlier this year that Warnig, who heads Dresdner Bank’s Russian arm, was an officer in the Stasi, the East German secret police, and met Putin in the late 1980’s when the Russian president was based in East Germany as a KGB spy.
That Russians tolerate a government of ex-KGB men, for whom lack of compassion and intolerance of dissent are the norm, reflects their exhaustion from the tumult of the last 20 years.
Now the Kremlin seems to think that what is good for ordinary Russians is good for independent nations as well: small and weak countries will be shown no mercy once Russia is given the tools to intimidate, isolate, and threaten them with the prospect of an energy blockade.
As a former Head of State of newly independent Lithuania, I frequently endured such threats.
The EU has signed numerous agreements with Russia including one for a “common space” for freedom and justice.
The Kremlin is very good at feigning such idealism.
Its control of Eastern Europe was always enforced on the basis of “friendship treaties,” and the Soviet invasions of Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 were “fraternal” missions.
But look how Putin abuses that “common” space: barbaric treatment of Chechens, the businessmen Mikhail Khodorkovsky imprisoned, foreign NGO’s hounded, a co-leader of last year’s Orange Revolution, Yuliya Tymoshenko, indicted by Russian military prosecutors on trumped-up charges.
If Europeans are serious about their common space for human rights and freedoms, they must recognize that those values are not shared by the calculating placemen of Putin’s Kremlin.
The same is true of viewing Russia as an ally in the fight against terrorism.
Is it really conceivable that the homeland of the “Red Terror” with countless unpunished crimes from the Soviet era, and which bears traces of blood from Lithuania to the Caucasus, will provide reliable help in stopping Iran and North Korea from threatening the world?
It seems more likely that the Kremlin’s cold minds will merely exploit each crisis as an opportunity to increase their destructive power and influence.
For decades, my region of Europe was left to the mercy of evil.
So I cannot sit back in silence as Europe stumbles blindly into a new appeasement.
We, the new democracies of Eastern Europe, have been taught by our legacy that behind Russia’s every diplomatic act lurks imperial ambition.
Western Europeans, who have been spared this legacy, should heed our warnings.
Dependence on Russia – even if its face is now that of the allegedly “charismatic” Gerhard Schroeder – will only lead to an abyss.
Russia’s Population Implosion
Years ago, Alexander Solzhenitsyn coined the phrase “preservation of the people,” by which he meant Russia’s cultural survival.
Today, it applies to Russia in a far more literal way.
Although I am a physicist, I began to study demography about15 years ago, in the belief that the key global problem was not so much the threat of nuclear annihilation as the dynamics of population growth.
It was a grim recognition that Russia faces the opposite problem: a rapid decline in population that threatens every aspect of Russian life.
Indeed, just in the last ten years, Russia’s population has dropped by 9.5 million, despite the many thousands of Russians returning from former Soviet republics.
The birthrate has increased somewhat beginning since 2000, and now stands near 1.5 million a year, but this is 700,000-800,000 below the replacement rate.
Many observers argue that Russians are not having enough children because life is so harsh.
But the problem is not so simple.
Solzhenitsyn himself recently suggested that Russia’s national idea should be based on Ivan Petrovich Shuvalov’s proposal to Empress Elizabeth 250 years ago.
“Every move, every law should be assessed in terms of whether it helps to preserve the people,” according to Solzhenitsyn.
“If not, down with the law.”
Solzhenitsyn’s suggestion is crude, but right in a fundamental sense.
Our public thought is fragmented, and the country’s intelligentsia, who are partly responsible for tending to society’s values and goals, are behaving in often-destructive ways.
The live-for-the-moment mentality of hedonism and greed that they have encouraged is embodied in Moscow’s casinos, of which there are more than in the rest of Europe – or, for that matter, Las Vegas.
These values – reflected in the way people dress, how they behave in public, and the language they speak – are not the values of human life.
A crime subculture is spreading in Russia, and it is attaining the status of official culture.
Where the intelligentsia is not directly complicit, its members have, simply by remaining silent, refused to accept the responsibility that accompanies freedom.
By contrast, Solzhenitsyn, Tolstoy, and other writers in Russia’s great literary tradition fully understood this responsibility.
The current Russian interpretation of freedom is instead characterized by a narrow, individualistic permissiveness that is incompatible with collective tasks.
In other words, Russia’s population crisis is one manifestation of a crisis of ideas.
This, of course, raises the broader question of whether declining birthrates, in Russia and elsewhere, imply a crisis of the liberal idea of freedom, with its focus on individual rights?
Clearly, liberalism may be a contributing factor, if and where it is primitively understood to entail for the individual no countervailing obligations before society.
Clearly, the belief that liberalism is at fault for declining birth rates and dysfunctional families has gained currency in the West, which now produces popular books like Pat Buchanan’s The Death of the West .
But I think the crisis is deeper, reflecting a lack of awareness of the paths and goals of human development – an ignorance that cannot be reduced to Western-style democracy or liberal ideas.
For Russia, the issue is simple because the crisis – which has led to more homeless children than after either the Civil War or World War II – is so stark.
“Preservation of the people” requires nothing less than that our men take care of themselves so that they can take proper care of our children.
Russia’s Renegade Puppet
MOSCOW – Ramzan Kadyrov, the president of Chechnya, recently proposed to Ahmed Zakaev, a leader of the nationalistic and comparatively moderate Chechen opposition, that he return to Chechnya. Kadyrov promised Zakaev amnesty and various positions ranging from director of the local theater to Minister of Culture.
Zakaev looked ready to accept the proposal. His position in the nationalist opposition was weak.
There seem to be few, if any, fighters in Chechnya who recognize him as commander; his recent attempt to send an emissary to create a fighting unit directly under his command was not successful.
At the same time, Zakaev maintained rather friendly relations with Kadyrov, whose achievements – making Chechnya practically independent – he implicitly acknowledged.
The Kremlin supposedly would not have opposed the deal.
But, although Zakaev was one of the most moderate members of the Chechen resistance, an amnesty for him needed the Kremlin’s approval, and he does not seem to have received it, which is probably why he refused Kadyrov’s offer.
But the reason the Kremlin balked at offering Zakaev an amnesty is unlikely to be related him personally, but rather to Kadyrov.
The return to Chechnya of an amnestied Zakaev would greatly increase Kadyrov’s prestige. But the Kremlin wants to avoid this, owing to Kadyrov’s growing power and its general unease with a Russian Muslim elite that, while formally acknowledging Russian suzerainty, increasingly demands a redistribution of power within the Russian Federation.
For most of the past two decades, jihadists in the Caucasus and Central Asia were a major source of concern for the Kremlin.
Fear of “Talibanization” of the Caucasus prompted the Kremlin’s recent announcement that Russian Muslims should be protected from extremist propaganda from abroad, and that Russian Muslim education and spiritual life should be controlled in order to direct them away from extremism.
It was fear of extremism, as well as a more general increase violence, that led to the rise of the Kadyrov clan in 2004, when the Kremlin decided to engage in  a “Chechenization” of the conflict.
The plan implied that the Kremlin would provide the Kadyrovs – first Akhmad Kadyrov, and then, after his death, his son, Ramzan – broad autonomy (independence in all but name) and huge sums of money.
The Kremlin closed its eyes to Kadryov’s amnesty of former guerrillas and their inclusion in his paramilitary units.
In exchange, Kadyrov was to wage war against the remaining Islamist resistance and thus relieve Moscow of the burden of shedding Russian blood, or at least minimize the cost in Russian casualties.
The plan initially worked.
Kadyrov was able to create a strong force that could fight the guerrillas, basically on its own.
Kadyrov’s efforts can also be credited with ending major terrorist attacks in Russia’s heartland, such as those that occurred in Moscow in 2002 and in Beslan in 2004.
Kadyrov seemed an effective antidote to the jihadists.
Still, the logical conclusion of the Kremlin’s Kadyrov policy appears to be precisely what it sought to prevent – Chechen independence – when it engaged in the first Chechen war almost a generation ago.
Receiving from the Kremlin virtual carte blanche to do what he wants in Chechnya, Kadyrov made genuine efforts to transform himself into a popular leader.
It is clear that he has not brought down the unemployment rate and has no intention of ending corruption.
Still, he can be credited for some tangible results in bringing Chechnya a modicum of normality.
The restoration of the capital, Grozny, was one of his clear achievements.
Grozny was totally destroyed during the first Chechen war; both Russian and foreign observers compared it with WWII Stalingrad and assumed that it would be impossible to restore the city.
It was suggested that a new Chechen capital be built. Yet, having enjoyed a huge subsidy from Moscow, Kadyrov has rebuilt Grozny and provided it with some security.
Kadyrov also catered to the spiritual aspirations of the Chechen majority.
He rejected Wahhabism – the ideological framework of the jihadists. But he maintained that Islam is an essential part of the Chechen tradition and presented himself as a leader who fully understood this.
So he encouraged an Islamic dress code and built a huge mosque – one of the biggest, if not the biggest, in Europe.
All of this brought Kadyrov wide support among the Chechen population.
Even those who dislike him sometimes conclude that he is the best all the possible options, and he has improved his position by persistently weeding out Chechen military forces that are not directly under his command.
His most recent effort was the liquidation of the “Vostok” battalion, despite its being an integral part of the Russian army.
It was probably inevitable that Kadyrov’s increasing power would worry the Kremlin, especially after the Kremlin itself created a precedent for secession by recognizing the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia of the war with Georgia of 2008.
Allowing Zakaev’s return would have worsened matters by increasing Kadyrov’s prestige at home, as well as his international visibility and legitimacy.
That would have pushed Kadyrov even further away from Russian control at a time when the Kremlin has become increasingly unable, and possibly reluctant, to purchase his loyalty.
Russia’s Self-Defeating “But”
MOSCOW – Prime Minister Vladimir Putin insists that “Without normal democratic development Russia will have no future.”
We Russians are pleased to hear these enlightened words, yet Putin adds a “but” to his argument, which weakens it considerably. In fact, Putin’s “but” renders his points senseless.
We have hated this “but,” this coordinating conjunction, ever since the dawn of the Soviet era.
Then we were told that freedom is good, but that one can’t live in an individualist society without common concern for the communist state.
Democracy is great, but only in the interests of the working class.
Now Russia’s prime minister tells us that democracy is indeed great, but that public protests cannot take place in public places, say, around hospitals and the like.
Never mind that the Russian constitution does not list hospitals among places forbidden for public assembly, or that sick people need democracy, too.
Russian President Dmitri Medvedev does understand – with no “buts” – that “freedom is better than not freedom,” that “legal nihilism” is bad and democracy is good.
He understands that Stalin was a criminal, that his order to murder Polish officers in Katyn was an act of depravity that has no excuse or explanation.
The president understands this; unfortunately, we don’t understand the role our president plays in our society.
He says all the right things, yet they don’t seem to be reflected in reality.
The Dissenters Marches, which take place on the 31st of every month (article 31 of the Russian constitution guarantees freedom of assembly), could be (and are) easily dismissed as a marginal protest of a few hundred people with no common goals or ideas.
Putin’s and Medvedev’s poll numbers are so high, many argue, that they don’t need to care about a few dissenters.
Besides, most Russians support the government with no dissent at all, they say.
This doesn't say much, however, because the Russian majority always supports the government, regardless of the policies it implements.
Today’s dissenters are indeed a minority and of course can be disregarded, but only up to a point.
After all, this minority is one of thinkers – musicians, artists, and writers, and those who move forward Russian science, technology, and economic innovation.
Such people cannot be dismissed as useless, since we need the innovation that they deliver, even if we think Russia doesn’t need democracy.
True, not all members of the thinking minority attend the dissenters’ marches, yet many more of them silently oppose the regime.
Our leaders talk obsessively of Russia’s industrial modernization, of their support for innovations such as nanotechnology, so that Russia can catch up with the developed counties.
In line with Soviet traditions, a nanotechnology project was given a piece of land, with plans to set up various scientific facilities. The best brains in Russia –engineers, scientists, and inventors – will gather in one place, and from there begin moving the country forward.
The hope is that not only those living in Russia but also emigrants will be overcome with patriotic feelings.
They will come back to Russia (also drawn by high salaries) to make themselves famous and their motherland proud.
A wonderful plan. But I fear that it won’t work.
For example, imagine a genius who left Russia years back. He has achieved prominence in a foreign country, inventing something outstanding.
Now he is asked to come home: your motherland is waiting for you, it values your contribution, it forgives your betrayal, and it will pay you more than what you are getting elsewhere.
But this brilliant scientist is still a human being.
He is of course nostalgic for the birch trees, his old friends, ex-wife, and children from the first marriage.
He wants to come back, to revisit all that he has left behind, in the meantime helping his nation to become economically strong, technically advanced, and prosperous.
Yet, before making the final decision, he turns on the radio, watches a bit of TV, browses the Internet, and finds out what Russia is like.
Journalists are killed, scientists are accused of espionage, and Mikhail Khodorkovsky remains unjustly imprisoned.
Various blogs tell him that Russia’s parliament is just a place for rubber-stamping decisions already taken at the top.
He reads the confused and confusing speeches our leaders: freedom is good, but…
This brilliant scientist learns that Vasily Aleksanyan, the terminally ill Yukos lawyer, was held in prison in inhuman conditions.
Another lawyer, Sergei Magnitsky, died in prison after being refused medical treatment.
And yet another one, Stanislav Markelov, was gunned down on a Moscow street.
Then this scientist will be surprised (or not) to discover that the Russian majority views Joseph Stalin as the third most popular person in a contest to be known as the “Face of Russia.”
In the meantime, his junior colleague in Russia, who still has his whole future in front of him, does not attend the Dissenters’ March, but simply emigrates, which is also a form of protest.
In Soviet times, communist leaders tried to lure people into the kolkhozes (collective farms) with promises of great crops and spectacular meat production.
Nothing worked, because the kolkhoz system was incompatible with high achievement in the long run.
Similarly, in a country where the concepts of democracy and freedom are balanced by “but,” achievements in science, technology, and economy are not possible.
The thinking minority needs a system of laws and institutions, real presidential elections, a working parliament, and justice that is independent, rather than merely following orders from above.
Russia’s Skeptical G8 Partners
Poor oil-rich Russia.
It is trying so hard to have its turn as chair of the elite Group of Eight countries taken seriously.
President Vladimir Putin, perhaps hoping to elevate the presidential summit talks in St. Petersburg in July, has laid out an ambitious agenda.
He plans to lead his colleagues in erudite conversations about education, infectious diseases, and – to make sure that no one dozes off – “energy security.”
And what has Putin gotten for his efforts?
Not much.
The Bush administration, led by Vice President Dick Cheney (but with his boss’s explicit approval), recently accused Russia of backsliding into its old “evil empire” ways.
Putin shot back, portraying the United States as “Comrade Wolf,” ready to pounce on any nation that leaves itself vulnerable.
Suspense seems to be building around how Bush and Putin will greet each other when they meet in St. Petersburg.
Europeans, for their part, are still hysterical about getting caught up in the Russia-Ukraine gas dispute that left their pipelines dry for a few days at the beginning of this year.
They see discussing “energy security” with Russia as akin to chatting about water safety with Comrade Crocodile.
Of course, people who really want to be unkind will point out the absurdity of Russia’s membership in a club that includes the giant economies of US, Germany, Japan, England, France, Italy, and (less so) Canada.
Why wasn’t Chinese president Hu Jintao, whose country’s economy is the world’s second largest (when measured at world prices), given a seat at the table instead of Putin?
After all, even with all its energy resources, and even with today’s sky-high oil and gas prices, Russia’s national income is only about the size of Greater Los Angeles.
Perhaps what Putin needs to do is stop suffering all the criticisms and go on the offensive.
He could start by pointing out to his smugly democratic counterparts that he is probably more popular in Russia today than any of them are in their own countries.
He might actually win a fair election tomorrow (not that he would ever risk finding out).
Few of the others could make the same claim with a straight face.
Of course, Putin’s success over the past few years in killing off any semblance of a free press – and when an ex-KGB man “kills off” a free press, it is not just a figure of speech – has helped mute open opposition.
Even so, Putin does seem genuinely popular among a public longing for a leader who can anchor their country without sinking it.
Putin might also argue that Russia’s fiscal position is far stronger that of the other G8 members.
Yes, it helps that Siberia turned out to be a giant oil well, with the government sucking up much of the money.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez is balancing his country’s books, too, for now.
But, to be fair, oil is not the whole story.
Most economists advocate rich countries’ replacing their complex and antiquated tax codes with a simple low flat tax, and they bemoan the fact that so few countries have tried it.
Putin, however, implemented such a policy a few years ago, and the results have been nothing short of miraculous.
Of course, the other G8 leaders might be less enamored of some of Russia’s other approaches to addressing budget problems.
Most G8 countries seem incapable of achieving the political consensus required to take necessary steps such as raising the retirement age or significantly cutting the indexation of benefits to inflation.
Russia, by contrast, has essentially abandoned its pensioners by inflating away the value of their incomes.
Indeed, many of the elderly in rural Russia are forced to sustain themselves by growing potatoes on the tiny plots of land that the government allows them to till.
That is, assuming they survive at all: since the fall of the Berlin Wall, Russian male life expectancy has plummeted from 65 years to around 60 years.
There is growing evidence that the stress of transition is the leading cause of death, even above big killers in postcommunist Russia such as alcohol, murder, and AIDS.
Should Putin tell his colleagues that they, too, could balance their countries’ intergenerational accounts by starving the elderly?
So perhaps Putin had better not try to push his country’s accomplishments too far.
Maybe the best plan is simply to let the vodka flow and hope for a round of smiles in the photo ops.
In any case, when Putin tells his guests how they can pay Russia more to improve their own “energy security,” he may finally get the respect that he craves.
Russia’s Ukrainian Path to the Future
MOSCOW – Russia and the West are losing each other yet again.
The magnetic attraction and repulsion between the two has been going on for centuries.
Indeed, historians have counted as many as 25 such cycles since the reign of Tsar Ivan III.
In the past, however, Russia’s sharp anti-Western turns were reversed – usually out of simple necessity – after relations reached rock bottom. Not this time.
On the contrary, the deterioration of the relationship nowadays has developed a momentum of its own.
There are four reasons for this.
First, the “loss” of the Cold War, and with it imperial and superpower status, has created a deep and so far unresolved crisis in the collective mentality of Russia’s political class.
Russian leaders continue to perceive the West as a phantom enemy in opposition to which all the traditional mythologies of Russian foreign policy are being resurrected.
Second, by the end of Vladimir Putin’s second presidential term, Russia’s modernizing dreams had been shattered.
Modernization, indeed, simply turned out to be yet another redistribution of property to those on top, particularly those who came out of the St. Petersburg mayoral office and the Federal Security Bureau (FSB).
The image of the West as an enemy has become the only ideological excuse for Putin’s model of the corporate state.
Third, the soaring price of oil has made the Kremlin’s inhabitants believe that they are all-powerful.
Today’s Russia, which thinks of itself as a “great energy state,” laughs at its previous meager desire to catch up with little Portugal in terms of living standards.
Finally, a series of Western mistakes and misfortunes, a crisis in transatlantic relations, lack of leadership, and the growing threat of Islamic fundamentalism (in both the Middle East and Europe) have led Russian leaders to believe that the West is a sinking ship, to be abandoned as soon as possible.
While this belief unfortunately does have some validity, it requires one very important caveat: Russia is part of that ship.
Russia can make advances to Hamas, Hezbollah, and Iran, and it can remind the Arab world that the Soviet Union helped it develop and offered it protection in the United Nations Security Council.
But in the eyes of Islamic extremists, Russia is part of the “Satanic” West – indeed, its most vulnerable part.
Thus, it is Russia, with a soaring birth rate among its Muslim citizens that is the most attractive for expansion and take-over.
But Russia’s self-destructive confrontation with the West can be halted, and its centuries-old debate between Westernizers and the Slavophiles put to rest once and for all.
This, however, will depend on Ukraine’s success on the path of European development it chose in the Orange Revolution of 2004-2005.
Ukraine does, indeed, present a threat, but not to Russia’s security, as Kremlin propagandists claim.
The real threat is to the Putin model of a corporate, authoritarian state, unfriendly to the West.
For the Kremlin’s occupants, it is a matter of life and death that countries that were once part of the Soviet Union but chose a different model of development – Ukraine being the chief example – should never become attractive to ordinary Russians.
The example posed by the Baltic nations does not threaten the Kremlin much, because they are perceived as foreign to the Russian psyche.
Indeed, in Soviet films, Baltic actors were usually cast in the roles of Nazi generals and American spies.
Ukrainians, on the other hand, are close to us in their culture and mentality.
If they made a different choice, why can’t we do the same?
Ukraine’s success will mark the political death of Putinism, that squalid philosophy of “KGB Capitalists.”
If Ukraine succeeds in its European choice, if it is able to make it work, it can settle the question that has bedeviled Russian culture for centuries – Russia or the West?
So the best way to help Russia today is to support Ukraine’s claim that it belongs to Europe and its institutions.
This will influence Russia's political mentality more than anything else.
For if Russia’s anti-Western paranoia continues and the Kremlin’s Eurasian fantasy of allying with China lasts another 10-15 years, Russia will end up seeing China swallowing its Far East and Siberia.
Indeed, the weakened Russia that will be Putin’s legacy will then also lose the Northern Caucasus and the Volga region to their growing Muslim populations.
The remaining Russian lands would then have no other choice but to attach themselves to Ukraine, which should by then have become a successful member of the European Union.
After 1,000 years, Russia will have come full circle, returning to Kievan Rus after wandering on the roads of the Mongol hordes, empire, communism, and farcical Putinism.
So Russia now has a choice: Ukrainian plan A or Ukrainian plan B.
Russia’s Middle East Success
MADRID – After years on the sidelines, Russia is back at the center of the Middle East geostrategic game.
Against the background of an equivocal United States policy, Russia’s calculated intervention in the Syrian civil war is a rare case in which a limited use of power in the region resulted in a major diplomatic shakeup.
In a recent interview with Jeffrey Goldberg, US President Barack Obama revealed his thinking in a number of key foreign-policy areas, particularly the Middle East.
Cynically dismissive of both his European allies and his security advisers, including former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who supported military intervention in Syria, Obama minces no words in his fatalistic depiction of the troubled region.
According to Obama, there is little, if anything, America can do to stabilize the Middle East.
He even claimed to be proud of not enforcing the “red line” he had drawn in 2012 regarding Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s use of chemical weapons, as neither international law nor the US Congress would have sanctioned intervention.
That decision, Obama emphasized, enabled an agreement to remove, with Russian cooperation, most of Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile.
But, as Goldberg points out, the decision not to enforce the red line with air strikes may also have caused the Middle East to “slip from America’s grasp.”
And, indeed, important strategic assets in the Middle East have been lost to unfriendly powers, from Russia to the Islamic State (ISIS).
Add to that the alienation of close allies, many of which doubt the ability and willingness of an Asia-fixated US to stand by them, and Obama’s suggestion that the US should not be focused on the Middle East is shocking.
Of course, a key motive for Obama’s reticence about engaging in the Middle East is fear of repeating the mistakes that left the US enmeshed in Afghanistan and Iraq – the result of what Obama called the US government’s unthinking “drift toward war in Muslim countries.”
But Putin has just proved that a military intervention in the Middle East does not have to lead to a quagmire.
In fact, far from fulfilling Obama’s pessimistic predictions, Russia’s Syrian operation may help drive forward a political settlement.
By refusing to be drawn into a long and costly war that would allow Assad to recover most of Syria’s territory, Putin has effectively created a deadlock, which forces both the regime and the opposition to engage seriously in the Geneva peace talks.
In this sense, says Monzer Makhous, a spokesman for the Syrian opposition, Russia’s decision to pull out “changes the entire situation.”
What would a political settlement look like?
One option, which Russia has championed, would be a federal system; indeed, the territorial divisions left behind by the Russians could form the basis of one.
Assad’s Alawites could control territory in the West, running from Latakia in the north to Damascus in the south, and an autonomous Syrian-Kurdish region could be established in the northeast, with the rest of the country being left to the Sunni opposition.
Peace is not yet around the corner, though.
Iran and Saudi Arabia, with their proxies on the ground, remain at loggerheads over how to resolve the conflict; Turkey is engaged in its own war against the Kurds; and the Sunni opposition remains unwilling to compromise.
Should Assad be tempted to recover Aleppo, the Sunni rebels would certainly break the ceasefire and blow up the entire political process.
Even without a political settlement, Putin’s strategic achievements are notable.
Russia’s military operation saved its imperiled ally, Assad, from defeat and secured its airbase in Latakia and its naval presence there and in Tartus. These strongholds will allow him to challenge US and NATO control in the eastern Mediterranean.
The bottom line is that Russia has consolidated its position as a power to be reckoned with in the Middle East.
With the US having largely followed Russia’s lead in the Syrian conflict since the crisis over Assad’s chemical weapons, Middle Eastern leaders now head to Moscow, not Washington, to advance their interests.
King Salman of Saudi Arabia will visit the Kremlin this month to discuss economic cooperation worth billions of dollars.
To be sure, Putin is nowhere near securing a return to the Soviet Union’s imperial days in the Middle East – not least because Russia’s capacity to sustain a military operation beyond its borders remains severely limited.
But his smart use of hard power to achieve specific, achievable objectives in Syria has made Russia a focal point for the major actors in the Middle East – creating a serious geopolitical challenge for the US.
The next American president, it is clear, will have to rethink US regional strategy.
Darkness on the Edge of Europe
KYIV – In 2014, Vladimir Putin discovered his inner Trotsky.
For what Russia’s president is now offering Ukraine is a perverse twist on the formula Trotsky proclaimed during the peace negotiations at Brest-Litovsk in 1918: “No war, no peace.”
In doing so, Putin has not only moved to trap my country in a frozen conflict that will prevent both democracy and the economy from flourishing; he has shredded the rules and norms that have kept the peace in Europe for three generations.
No one should believe that the Minsk Protocol – agreed in September by representatives of Ukraine, Russia, and the Kremlin-backed armed militants in the eastern cities of Donetsk and Luhansk – marked the beginning of a return to normalcy in either Ukraine or Europe.
Under that agreement, Ukraine’s government ceded de facto control of the Donbas region, supposedly for only three years, to Russia’s hired secessionists.
But this imported hybrid war – and Russia’s bid to carve up Ukraine – is far from over.
On the contrary, the Minsk Protocol marked only the end of the beginning of Putin’s program to turn Ukraine into a vassal state, and to restore a Russian veto over its neighbors’ international relations.
His efforts to thwart Ukraine’s European future will continue, as will his efforts to hollow out our democracy and replace it with a Kremlin echo chamber, unless the world imposes such a high price for his imperial ambitions that the Russian people refuse to bear it.
So, in 2015, the resolve that Europe and the United States have shown in opposing Putin’s designs must not only be maintained; it must be hardened.
Yet, sadly, there have been signs of slackening Western commitment.
The European Commission’s agreement in September to postpone full implementation of Ukraine’s association agreement with the European Union – the agreement that Ukrainians fought and died for in Kyiv last winter – signaled to Putin that cunning, force, and intimidation can win Western acquiescence in his subjugation of Ukraine and theft of Crimea.
The delay, intended to show the EU’s determination to make the association agreement work, has instead only whetted Putin’s appetite.