Instead, the coup, coming just one year after the formation of an elected government – and just a few months after then-US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Morsi to mark the end of hostilities between Israel and Hamas in the Gaza Strip – could give rise to great frustration among Islamists across the region.
Indeed, the region’s geostrategic situation has changed again since the Clinton-Morsi meeting, and the response of both the United States and the European Union (for which the Mediterranean is crucial) has been late and erratic.
It is not clear who are allies and who are not.
The EU, in particular, should engage the region with clearer, more coordinated, and more effective policies.
Aside from the domestic situation, Egypt has another urgent problem.
Egyptians depend on the Nile River, and Ethiopia has begun construction upstream of what will be Africa’s largest hydroelectric dam.
The project is being pursued in the face of strong Egyptian objections – military intervention has been threatened – yet it continues apace.
If the dam is built as planned, the volume of water flowing northward could be reduced by 20%, jeopardizing Egyptian agriculture and the livelihood of millions of people.
The coup in Egypt may have serious regional consequences as well.
Syria remains mired in a bloody civil war that has already caused more than 100,000 deaths.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime has celebrated the fall of the Muslim Brotherhood’s government, and is seeking to use Morsi’s failures and removal as justification for repression at home, making it even more difficult to find a political solution that would end the fighting.
The Syrian opposition, a crucible of widely different groups and currents – including Al Qaeda – will most likely become even more radical following Morsi’s ouster.
For Hamas, strongly linked to the Muslim Brotherhood, the coup means losing Egypt’s support, which also implies that Israel is one of the countries that stand to benefit the most from the coup.
Qatar, which had been Morsi’s main protector (by offering a large credit line) and is in the midst of its own political transition, has remained detached from Egypt’s turmoil.
The rift between the Gulf monarchies is becoming ever clearer, with Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates quick to finance the post-coup government.
Turkey, which had often proclaimed its Islamist democratic model as a goal for other Muslim-majority countries seeking democratic change, has also lost out as a result of the coup in Egypt.
Turkish foreign policy had sought to create a regional order, with the participation of other Sunni Islamic regimes, in accordance with the country’s interests.
Egypt was clearly the most important part of this strategy, and its political instability has raised questions not only about Turkey’s political model, but also about the security of its economic interests.
The future of Iran is another matter of great regional importance that remains unresolved, postponed until the new president, Hassan Rowhani, takes office.
It is hardly encouraging that there has not been any serious gesture toward the country from the US or the EU since Rowhani’s election victory in June.
In short, the Middle East is sinking into deeper turmoil, and we are farther away from finding a solution in Syria, Egypt, and other key sources of regional instability.
There is much handwringing, but too little serious thought about how to strengthen the region’s security, economy, and social model.
The Egyptian Crucible
MADRID – As Egyptians tensely awaited the results of their country’s presidential elections, a thread of pessimism ran through the discourse of the young people and secular liberals who had brought down Hosni Mubarak in January 2011.
The “anything is possible” sensation of the Tahrir Square rebellion had faded, and now two candidates whom the protesters deeply opposed, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi, and Ahmed Shafiq, a factotum of the old regime (and of the current military government), prepared to face off in the second round.
The triad of fundamental forces driving Egypt since the beginning of the Arab Spring – the military, the mosque, and the masses in Tahrir Square, each with different types of power and interests – was thus broken.
Those who filled Tahrir Square 16 months ago were silenced, and the expected transfer of power from the military to a civilian, democratic government was thrown into doubt.
Since assuming power after Mubarak’s fall, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), led by Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, a defense minister for two decades under Mubarak, has consistently undermined the delicate work of democratic transition.
The week before the presidential elections, the SCAF-allied Constitutional Court dissolved the recently elected parliament, alleging illegality in the voting process.
And, foreseeing Morsi’s victory, SCAF assumed all legislative powers; severely limited the president’s powers; seized the authority to appoint the committee tasked with drafting the new Constitution; took control of the country’s budget; and claimed sole power over domestic and foreign security.
As a result, Egypt’s power struggle will continue, with the junta no longer battling those in Tahrir Square, but political Islam.
After a decades-long clandestine (although tolerated) existence within Egyptian society, Islamist forces were able to take advantage of the Tahrir protests, despite playing no integral part in them.
Others do not believe that the Muslim Brotherhood will go so far, but nonetheless doubt that the Brothers will defend a secular, truly democratic regime in the ongoing negotiations with SCAF on a transition to civilian rule.
In either scenario, Morsi has little room to maneuver in a country that, for the time being, is in political limbo – with neither a constitution nor a parliament – and whose people want tangible results in terms of good governance, institutional consolidation, and improvements to a tottering economy.
Indeed, living standards have been under severe pressure since Mubarak’s downfall.
In 2011 alone, net capital inflows fell nearly 90% year on year, tourism was down 30%, the trade deficit soared to $28 billion, and GDP growth slowed from 3.8% to 1%.
The success or failure of Morsi’s government will rest largely on the economy.
For the Muslim Brotherhood, this scenario constitutes a serious challenge, one that can be overcome only by finding an adequate balance between SCAF, with its overweening power, and Egypt’s liberal political forces – which won a combined 11 million votes, five million more than Morsi, in the presidential election’s first round.
Only this will give a Morsi administration the necessary legitimacy and capacity to carry out a joint transition with the military for a true change of regime.
The liberals, for their part, did not support Morsi in the run-off with Shafiq.
But it was their efforts that made the presidential election possible in the first place, and many now believe that close collaboration with the Brothers is the only available option that can restore some of the spirit of an endangered revolution in which they were the protagonists.
This presupposes that the Brothers reorganize themselves internally and find ways to distance themselves from more radical factions, and that they promote inclusive policies toward vulnerable groups and social minorities.
For now, the Brothers have announced that they will name a Christian and a woman as Vice Presidents.
Obviously, that represents an encouraging first step in bridging Egypt’s divides.
But, just as obviously, it is only a first step.
Menjamin Masa Depan yang Berkelanjutan
LONDON – Saat Karl Marx dan Friedrich Engels menulis bahwa “Segala yang padat hilang larut dalam udara,” pernyataan ini dimaksudkan sebagai sebuah metafora perubahan akibat revolusi industri yang merusak norma-norma sosial yang sudah terbentuk.
Saat ini, pernyataan mereka dapat diartikan secara harafiah: Emisi karbon dioksida dan polutan-polutan industri lainnya yang dikeluarkan ke atmosfer telah merubah planet ini – dengan dampak yang besar bagi lingkungan hidup, kesehatan, perpindahan penduduk, dan keadilan sosial.
Dunia kini berada pada sebuah persimpangan, dan banyak kemajuan yang telah kita buat dalam bidang-bidang tersebut dapat hilang seketika.
Pada tahun 2007, Nelson Mandela mendirikan The Elders untuk menghadapi resiko-resiko tersebut, meminta kelompok independen yang terdiri dari mantan pemimpin formal untuk menyampaikan kebenaran pada pemegang kekuasaan saat ini atau ���speak truth unto power.”
Inilah yang akan kita lakukan pada peluncuran Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) atau Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan yang baru dalam Sidang Umum PBB pada bulan ini.
SDG akan melanjutkan Millennium Development Goals (MDG) atau Tujuan Pembangunan Milenium yang memandu upaya-upaya pembangunan internasional tahun 2000-2015.
MDG telah menolong berjuta-juta orang keluar dari buta aksara, penyakit, kelaparan, dan menempatkan pembangunan sebagai inti agenda politik global.
Namun demikian, dampak keseluruhannya sering dinilai tidak cukup, khususnya di negara-negara yang rentan atau sedang mengalami konflik – dan MDG telah gagal memasukkan keberlanjutan di dalam targetnya.
SDG mewakili sebuah kemajuan yang besar karena melihat kesamaan hubungan yang penting diantara tantangan-tantangan tersebut – termasuk kemiskinan dengan segala bentuknya, ketidaksetaraan gender, perubahan iklim, dan tata kelola yang buruk – yang harus diselesaikan secara bersamaan.
Tujuh belas tujuan yang berbeda mungkin terlihat sulit diwujudkan, namun dampak kumulatifnya berarti tidak ada topik atau wilayah dari hal tersebut yang luput dari perhatian.
Pada akhirnya, keberlanjutan diintegrasikan ke dalam pembangunan global, sejalan dengan apa yang telah dikampanyekan selama beberapa dekade.
Sebagai mantan pemimpin dari bagian dunia Utara dan Selatan, kami senang bahwa SDG akan diberlakukan bagi semua negara anggota PBB dan bukan hanya negara berkembang.
Dengan cara ini, kami berharap bahwa SDG akan bersifat “universal” seperti Deklarasi Universal mengenai Hak Asasi Manusia – sebuah elemen penting sebagai senjata masyarakat dalam perjuangan menuju keadilan.
Implementasi dan akuntabilitas adalah kuncinya.
Kata-kata indah saja tidak cukup; para pemimpin harus berkomitmen dan membuatnya menjadi kenyataan melalui tindakan, dan masyarakat harus rajin memantau perkembangan dan membunyikan peluit saat upaya yang dilakukan tidak cukup.
Sering deklarasi-deklarasi dalam pertemuan puncak menguap saat para delegasi kembali ke negaranya dan kepentingan politik jangka pendek lebih diutamakan.
Saat ini, taruhannya besar.
Keputusan-keputusan yang diambil pada tahun ini, pada pertemuan puncak SDG dan konferensi iklim di Paris pada bulan Desember, akan memiliki dampak yang besar bagi masa depan planet kita.
Iklim yang stabil menjamin kesejahteraan, penurunan kemiskinan, dan supremasi hukum.
Jika para pemimpin dunia di Paris tidak menyetujui langkah-langkah yang diperlukan untuk menjaga kenaikan suhu agar tidak sampai dua derajat Celsius, maka SDG tidak dapat diwujudkan.
Kita tidak sedang menghadapi pilihan antara pengentasan kemiskinan dan penanggulangan perubahan iklim, seperti yang dikatakan oleh berbagai perusahaan bahan bakar fosil.
Memang benar, dampak-dampak berbahaya akibat perubahan iklim mengancam hasil-hasil pembangunan yang sudah kita dapatkan melalui dukungan MDG.
Kita memiliki resiko bumi yang makin sesak karena gelombang panas, kekeringan yang merajalela, banjir yang merusak, dan kebakaran hutan yang mematikan.
Seluruh daerah dapat mengalami penurunan produksi makanan besar-besaran.
Permukaan air laut akan naik, kota-kota besar dan negara-negara pulau kecil akan tenggelam.
Sebagian besar populasi akan kehilangan lahan dan memperburuk kesulitan ekonomi dan tekanan sosial.
Pada saat yang sama, muncul kesepakatan – antara berbagai organisasi akar rumput dan bank sentral – bahwa ketidaksetaraan menyebabkan ancaman serius pada penghidupan dan kesejahteraan masyarakat di seluruh dunia.
Globalisasi telah menyebabkan lemahnya kontrak sosial di dalam negara-bangsa dan bahkan antar benua.
Jawaban dari ketidaksetaraan bukanlah dengan membangun dinding, menumpuk kekayaan, dan memberi stigma pada orang miskin dan lemah.
Kesejahteraan yang berkelanjutan mensyaratkan semua kelompok di dalam masyarakat membagikan secara adil keuntungan dari pertumbuhan ekonomi – khususnya saat masyarakat kita menjadi makin saling bergantung.
Untuk alasan ini, kami khususnya terdorong oleh Tujuan 10 di SDG dengan komitmennya untuk mengurangi ketimpangan antar negara, juga berfokus pada kesetaraan gender dalam implementasi seluruh tujuannya.
Kita mengetahui bahwa kerangka maupun proses apapun memiliki keterbatasan.
Berbagai pertemuan puncak internasional sering dilakukan dengan cara yang asing bagi orang-orang di luar ruang konferensi.
Pada tahun 1980an, PBB menghasilkan apa yang dikenal dengan nama Laporan Brundtland untuk menjawab keresahan global mengenai tren rusaknya lingkungan hidup, sosial, dan ekonomi.
Laporan tersebut mendefinisikan konsep “pembangunan berkelanjutan” dan menyerukan perubahan radikal.
Laporan tersebut memperingatkan bahwa, “Jika kita tidak mengejawantahkan kata-kata kita menjadi bahasa yang dapat menyentuh hati dan pikiran berbagai orang muda dan tua, kita tidak akan dapat melakukan perubahan sosial yang besar yang diperlukan untuk memperbaiki arah pembangunan”.
Berbagai kebijakan pembangunan dan pertumbuhan yang berkelanjutan tidak dapat dilakukan dengan membuat dekrit saja; dekrit harus dirumuskan dan dilaksanakan dengan memperhatikan pandangan dan pengalaman masyarakat biasa.
Untuk menerapkan SDG dan mengurangi perubahan iklim, perubahan besar diperlukan untuk beranjak dari model ekonomi kita yang bergantung pada bahan bakar fosil.
Pemahaman dan persetujuan publik penting dalam hal ini.
Para pemimpin dunia harus memiliki keberanian untuk mengambil keputusan yang tegas, menjelaskan kebutuhan mereka, dan mengimplementasikannya dengan cara yang adil dan efektif.
Mereka tidak punya hak untuk meniadakan masa depan yang baik bagi cucu kita.
Ini bukan lagi pertanyaan mengenai pilihan, melainkan kewajiban untuk menghindari bencana.
Inilah waktunya untuk mengambil tindakan.
Kita tidak boleh membiarkan kesempatan ini hilang begitu saja.
The Electronic Money Revolution
Most journalistic accounts of the new forms of electronic money misleadingly spin the story as the emergence of yet another convenience for the technologically pampered.
So what if we can pull out a "smart card" rather than carry coins?
Big deal.
These new forms of money sound like power windows on cars, or remote control for TV sets.
Maybe we'd be better off without these gadgets.
But media coverage has failed to look far enough into the future, and to comprehend the full extent of the changes that will be wrought by new forms of electronic money, as people and businesses invent new ways of doing business.
Electronic money is not a channel changer: as it develops, it will help transform the world economy.
Two benefits of electronic money stand out, and will likely contribute to its growth.
Most important, it will have profound intellectual benefits by creating incentives for the active pursuit of ideas.
Second, electronic money will advance globalization , expanding the scope and versatility of the Internet and making it easier for people to interact constructively with others around the world.
Taken together, these two benefits will enable millions of minds to work together far more effectively than ever before.
To understand electronic money's potential significance, consider the invention of coins, the first form of true money, in Lydia (now Turkey) in the seventh century BC and, independently, in China.
This was an important advance, and thus one that spread quickly.
The reason is straightforward.
Before the invention of coins, commerce depended on precious metals.
But the amounts had to be cut to the size of the transaction and weighed out with balance scales.
People had to carry the scales, accompanying weights, and sometimes even tools to cut the metal, just to be able to transact.
Archeologists still find elaborate (and probably expensive in those days) two-pan balance scales and weights on sunken bronze-age merchant ships.
Most people didn't have them.
Another difficulty with using undifferentiated precious metals for exchange was that some trust or expertise was required to assure people that the metal was pure.
The same problem occurred with other commodities that people tried to use for exchange, such as gems or shells; their value was too uncertain.
As a result of these obstacles, it was hard to carry out small transactions before the invention of standardized and identical coins, and trade must have been largely confined to big deals between major parties.
With the introduction of coins, it became possible to develop many new kinds of business.
One could easily establish and operate a business selling food by the serving or providing small household items to anyone who happened to pass by.
But, most importantly, the invention of coins greatly enhanced the spread of knowledge.
After the invention of coins, it became easy to sell books, lessons, and instructions.
The development of coins is part of the reason that both the classical world around ancient Lydia and China in the Han Dynasty were so advanced compared to other parts of the world.
The lesson is that the magnitude of transaction costs and contracting costs ultimately determine much of an economy's structure.
As new forms of money reduce these costs, the richness and complexity of our economy will be increased.
Lower transaction costs mean that exchange can be dramatically more fine-grained.
With the latest forms of electronic money we can sell millions of little things, to millions of different people all over the world. Nowhere is this more important than in the realm of ideas.
Credit card companies now routinely charge the firms accepting credit card payments US$0.25 plus between two and three percent of the amount transferred per payment.
This fee structure makes it difficult to run a business selling items for less than ten dollars, and impossible to run a business selling items for less than one dollar: transaction costs eat up the profits.
Through superior payments software, micropayments companies like Paypal (founded in 1998), Yaga (founded in 2000), Peppercoin (founded in 2001) and BitPass (founded in 2002) are able to offer much lower transaction costs than credit card companies, greatly expanding the number of transactions.
A company can now charge people less than a dollar for a service (such as viewing a web page), and get significant returns by high volume.
There are skeptics who say that the public is resistant to buying digital content, because people are accustomed to getting it for free.
That is what people used to say years ago about cable TV.
Excellent TV programming is not given away for free. Neither are other substantial intellectual creations.
These skeptics overlook the profound changes that new technologies gradually make in our habits as we discover their possibilities.
Already, we have seen the success of Apple's iTunes, which sells music for US$0.99 per song.
Created in 2003, the iTunes Music Store recently surpassed its 100 millionth sale.
That is certainly high volume.
What iTunes sells is one form of intellectual content. Other forms will follow.
It will be exciting to see what new forms of intellectual content are invented in coming years and decades.
The economic revolution - both online and offline - that will be triggered as we learn how to use electronic money may be as profound as that wrought by our ancient ancestors' invention of coins.
The Elephant’s Choices
New Delhi – A month after they first queued to vote in India’s mammoth general election, the country’s voters will learn the outcome on May 16.
The election, staggered over five phases – involving five polling days over four weeks, rather than one “election day” – will determine who rules the world’s largest democracy.
Only one thing is certain: no single party will win a majority on its own. India is set for more coalition rule.
That may not be a bad thing.
India’s last two governments each served a full term and presided over significant economic growth, even though they comprised 23 and 20 parties, respectively.
Coalition politics gives representation to the myriad interests that make up a diverse and complex society, and ensures that the country as a whole accepts the policies ultimately adopted.
But coalition rule can also often mean governance of the lowest common denominator, as resistance by any of the government’s significant members to a policy can delay or even thwart it.
In India’s parliamentary system, if a coalition loses its majority, the government falls, and keeping allies together can sometimes prove a greater priority than getting things done.
India’s national elections are really an aggregate of thirty different state elections, each influenced by its own local considerations, regional political currents, and different patterns of political incumbency.
Soon after May 16, the largest single party that emerges will seek to construct a coalition out of a diverse array of victors from the various states.
Several outcomes are possible.
The most likely is that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s Indian National Congress, currently leading the government, emerges once again as the largest single party and assembles a new ruling coalition.
The main alternative would be majority alliance put together by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by the 82-year-old Lal Krishna Advani.
But there is a third possibility: a motley collection of regional parties, together with the Communists, gets enough seats to prevent either of the two big parties from forming a government.
In that case, a “hung parliament” could see a “third front” coming to power as a minority government, supported tactically by one of the big parties.
This has happened before – and each time, the government that resulted fell within a year.
Each alternative could have serious implications for India.
Though the big parties are broadly committed to continuing an economic policy of liberalization and growth, the BJP is mostly focused on the well-being of India’s merchant class, whereas Congress wishes to redistribute enhanced government revenues to the poor through generous social programs.
The left, which would strongly influence any “third front” government, are staunchly opposed to economic liberalization and wish to strengthen, rather than dilute, India’s large public sector.
In foreign policy, India’s growing closeness with the United States under both the BJP and the Congress has proved controversial at home, with leftist parties threatening to scrap the Indo-US nuclear deal and break defense ties with Israel if they come to power.
Should the regional parties dominate the government, domestic politics would strongly impact India’s foreign policy: the anger of Tamil voters over events in Sri Lanka, or of Muslims over Gaza, would be reflected in the government and therefore constrain policy options.
The BJP has promised a more hawkish security posture than Congress in the wake of the Mumbai terrorist attacks, but when it was in power it conducted itself remarkably similarly to its rival, initiating a peace process with Pakistan.
The biggest differences among the various groupings consist in the tone and tenor of their respective visions of India.
Congress remains a “big tent” party, committed to preserving India’s pluralism and conscious of the multiple identities and interests of India’s many peoples.
The BJP, which accuses Congress of “appeasing” India’s minorities, hews to a staunchly Hindu-chauvinist line, and has received support from some of the most bigoted and intolerant sections of Indian society.
The “third front” involves assorted petty particularisms – parties representing the sectarian interests of specific castes, sub-regions, or linguistic groups.
The danger is that such groups could accentuate the divisions of a fractious society, rather than pull everyone together in the collective national interest.
That would be a startling change from five years ago.
The 2004 elections were won by the Congress party, led by a woman political leader of Roman Catholic faith and Italian descent (Sonia Gandhi), who made way for a Sikh prime minister (Manmohan Singh) to be sworn by a Muslim (President Abdul Kalam) in a country that is 81% Hindu.
That single moment captured much of what elections have meant for this diverse democracy.
But the ultimate reality will remain that of a coalition government trying to make progress in a contentious polity.
In India, policy changes require political consensus within the ruling coalition, labor laws are strongly defended by unions and political parties, and controversial decisions can be challenged on the streets, in the courts, and ultimately at the polls.
Necessary policy reforms advocated by a ruling party are often held hostage to the prejudices of its allies.
So change comes slowly. But it does come, and once a policy consensus has been established, it tends to be durable.
Indian democracy has often been likened to the stately progress of the elephant – ponderous in its gait and reluctant to change course, but not easily swayed from its new path when it does.
The elephant of Indian democracy will acquire a new set of mahouts before the month’s end.
Who they are will have a major impact on the fortunes and prospects of one-sixth of humanity. That alone makes the election results due on May 16 worth the world’s attention.
The Elixir of Education?
Many people see education as a cure-all.
They believe that societies can be transformed by pouring money into raising educational standards.
But, while it is right to believe in the power of education – indeed, many scholars are convinced that it creates healthier, more prosperous citizens – such enthusiasm doesn’t tell us how to get more children to stay in school longer, or how to ensure that they learn useful skills while they are there.
Today, virtually every Latin American and Caribbean child enrolls in primary school, and most complete several years of secondary education – remarkable progress compared to a half-century ago.
Yet Latin American and Caribbean children gain fewer skills in each year of school than students do in high-income countries – and even in some other developing countries.
Indigenous children have a significantly lower chance of educational success.
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Paraguay lag behind even other Latin American countries.
Despite the widespread enthusiasm for lifting educational performance in Latin America and the Caribbean, little effort has been devoted to working out how to maximize investments in education.
Which policies work best?
There are myriad options.
The World Bank recommends decentralizing school administration and decision-making so that schools are more responsive to local needs.
But no reliable studies have established this strategy’s effectiveness.
Bilingual education is another suggestion that requires further research if we are to establish the benefits.
Research in Africa suggests that giving de-worming medicine to primary school pupils reduces the prevalence of health problems that lower children’s concentration and attendance.
A program to provide teachers with monetary incentives and professional training was recently established in Mexico, but research conducted to date has found no significant impact on educational outcomes.
Clearly, there is a deficit of useful information and serious scientific research in this field.
However, three options should be promoted.
First, there is credible evidence that children who are better nourished in their first years of life stay in school longer and learn more each year that they remain there.
This was first demonstrated in the 1960’s, when Guatemalan researchers gave children in two randomly selected villages a nutritious porridge each day, and a much less nutritious fruit drink to children in two other villages.
More recently, Bolivia launched the Proyecto Integral de Desarrollo Infantil (PIDI), which gave low-income urban children food and extra educational activities.
This policy can be very affordable: providing porridge in Guatemala cost just $23.25 per child per year, while the monetary value of the increase in the children’s future wages is between two and four times higher.
A second option is Conditional Cash Transfer Programs, which provide cash payments to poor households whose children attend school regularly.
These programs have been shown to increase enrollment and attendance.
Families in some rural communities of Honduras, Nicaragua, and Mexico get monthly cash payments if their children’s school attendance rates are 85% or higher.
In Nicaragua, these programs have increased school enrollment rates by about 13 percentage points.
However, such incentives do not address the problem of low-quality education, and research shows that the benefits do not always outweigh the costs.
Policymakers may choose instead to follow the example of Chile and Colombia, which give students government money to pay for private education.
In Colombia, scholarships were provided to 125,000 students from poor, urban communities in the early 1990’s.
Where demand exceeded supply, private education “voucher” recipients were selected by lottery.
Each voucher cost the Colombian government $24 a year more than its previous education spending per student, but the vouchers increased attendance rates and test scores.
It is estimated that children in the program increased their future incomes by $300 per year.
With the benefits exceeding the costs by between 10 and 25 times, this seems to be a sound option.
Yet an analysis of Chile’s voucher program found no positive effect on students’ test scores or years in school.
Instead, the program’s main effect seems to have been to encourage the best students in public schools to switch to private schools.
Investing in education is vital for Latin America and the Caribbean.
But much remains unknown.
Many policy options unravel when examined closely; others show promise but require more study.
The most expensive programs aren’t necessarily the most successful.
Merely waxing lyrical about the benefits of education will do nothing to help Latin American and Caribbean countries catch up with developed countries.
Instead, governments and international organizations should support education policies that have been shown to be effective, encourage research and evaluation of other types of education policies and programs, and back non-education policies and programs that improve the quality of life in developing countries.
Emerging World Rising
LONDON – Now that the leadership issues in the United States and China have been settled, we can finally frame the economic outlook for 2013 with the knowledge of who will be pulling the policy levers in the world’s two biggest economies.
So, what will they do – and, perhaps more important, what will economic forces do to them?
For starters, the US will face recurring challenges with the “fiscal cliff” until financial markets pressure policymakers into more radical deficit reduction.
But, despite this and associated growth disappointments, 2013 will be a stronger year for the global economy than many people expect.
In 2011, China contributed $1.3 trillion in additional GDP to the world, the equivalent of creating another Greece every 12.5 weeks, or close to another Spain every year.
Together, the four BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) contributed around $2.2 trillion in 2012, equivalent to another Italy every year.
(Despite its problems, Italy is still the world’s eighth-largest economy, and will be for at least the next couple of years, until Russia and India possibly overtake it).
The eight growth market economies – the BRICs plus South Korea, Indonesia, Mexico, and Turkey – created close to $3 trillion in 2011, more than the United Kingdom in one year.
These economies’ combined size is now approximately that of the US economy, with total annual output reaching $15-16 trillion, or roughly 25% of global GDP.
Unless their growth rates slow sharply, their contribution to world output will rise dramatically, and global growth will be stronger than worried Western analysts might appreciate.
If the “Growth Eight” economies expanded by 10% on average in US dollar terms, they would add $1.5 trillion to global GDP next year.
For the decade that began in 2011, we at Goldman Sachs Asset Management have assumed that China, which accounts for about half of total Growth Eight output (probably $8.3 trillion by the end of 2012), will grow at a 7-8% annual rate in real terms, with inflation around 3%.
Unless the renminbi falls in value, this translates into an average nominal increase of at least 10-11% in dollar terms.
China will grow by 7-8% partly because that is what policymakers have decided they want.
In late 2009, within a year of their massive policy stimulus in response to the global credit crisis, the Chinese leadership, I believe, decided that 10% annual real growth had outlived its usefulness.
Income inequality was rising dramatically, environmental damage was worsening rapidly, and inflation was leading to weak real-income growth for poor households.
Indeed, a key reason for China’s slowdown in 2011-2012 is that officials wanted it.
While the real GDP growth rate stated in the 12th Five-Year Plan should not be viewed as a fait accompli, the fact that the Plan’s growth rate was lowered to 7% is a powerful signal of official intent.
Looking ahead, while China’s leadership change is important, the country’s leaders cannot decide things with the freedom that one might think.
They become leaders partly through commitment to the agreed plan.
A potential leader who deviates too much does not stay in the leadership, as we saw in 2012 with the purge of Bo Xilai.
China’s 7% growth target, while subject to a number of challenges, is based on maintaining private consumption growth of around 8% (while recognizing that exports and investment will not grow as strongly as before), thereby allowing the consumption share of GDP to rise.
More focus on innovation and creativity will be accompanied by strong real wage growth, provision of greater rights for urban migrants, and expansion of health care and pensions.
If China grows by 7-8% again in 2013, it will be more balanced growth than in 2012.
Beyond China, the other BRICs – Brazil, Russia, and India – all face challenges that their policymakers need to meet to spur stronger growth.
But there are plenty of exciting developments elsewhere, including Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh, Nigeria, and Mexico – all part of what I call the “Next 11.”
South Korea and Turkey, which continue to grow reasonably well, albeit not with the others’ momentum, are two of this group’s other big members.
The 15 countries that comprise the BRICs and the Next 11 contain more than four billion people, close to two-thirds of the world’s population.
As they continue to grow, their share of the world economy will continue to rise, boosting global growth beyond what it otherwise would be.
But the global economy could be weaker in 2013 than it was in 2012 if the worst continues to prevail in Europe and the US, particularly if the new US Congress cannot work with a re-elected President Barack Obama to find a budget deal that improves the medium-term credibility of the US fiscal position while avoiding excessive deficit cutting.
This is a difficult balance to achieve, and, without pressure from the markets, I am unsure how it will play out.
I should add, however, that if the US government does not cause problems, two private-sector developments seem likely to be helpful.
One is growing evidence of a housing recovery; the other is the prospect of steadily declining energy-import costs as domestic production, particularly of natural gas, continues to rise.
As for Europe, many investors still assume that a moment will arrive when we can definitively conclude that European Monetary Union is finished or saved.
Unfortunately, it is much more likely that, at least ahead of Germany’s autumn 2013 elections, key decisions will be postponed or avoided.
This means that Europe probably faces another challenging year.
But, again, the BRICs’ output growth amounts to creating the equivalent of another Italy every 12 months.
Unless the European environment deteriorates sharply, Europe’s travails will not be the main story for the global economy in 2013.
The Emerging-Market Growth Engine
NEW DELHI – The key role of emerging and developing countries – including India, China, and Brazil – in sustaining world economic growth was brought into sharp focus during the recent global crisis, and has been well documented.
This trend is likely to continue in 2011 and beyond.
Indeed, the IMF expects that emerging and developing economies will grow by 6% in 2010 and 6.3% in 2011.
Emerging-market economies have not only cushioned the global impact of the recent crisis, but have also helped industrialized countries reverse the recessionary trend of 2008-2009.
But recovery remains fragile in the developed world, with unemployment remaining at crisis levels.
But, while emerging economies are proving to be drivers of global demand, the right mix of government initiatives and policies is still required to ensure that they continue to provide the impetus for faster world economic recovery in the short term and be the engines of sustainable growth in the medium and long term.
There is also a strong need for supporting long-term capital flows to emerging economies to stimulate investment further, particularly in their infrastructure sectors, thereby injecting much-needed additional demand into the global economy.
In this regard, another important development is the increasing number of emerging-market middle-class consumers, their growing purchasing power, and thus their potential impact on global demand.
According to one estimate, middle-class consumers in a dozen emerging economies today wield annual purchasing power totaling approximately $6.9 trillion.
Indeed, projections from McKinsey &amp; Company suggest that the purchasing power of this rising middle class in emerging markets may rise to $20 trillion over the next decade – twice the current level of consumption in the United States.
The four biggest emerging economies – Brazil, Russia, India, and China (the BRICs) – are large producers and consumers of goods and services, and will also be important in shaping the pace, direction, and sustainability of global economic growth.
Let me turn to India specifically. In the five years preceding the 2008-2009 crisis, the Indian economy grew at an average rate of nearly 9% annually.
During the crisis, annual growth slowed, but only to 6.7%, reflecting the economy’s inherent resilience.
The growth rate subsequently recovered to 7.4% in 2009-2010, and we expect 9% growth by 2011-12.
The strength of the Indian economy is underpinned by a high saving rate and robust investment.
The government’s prompt action to counter the crisis – fiscal stimulus, growth packages, and monetary easing – proved effective.
A sound financial and banking system with limited exposure to global markets, together with the importance of domestic consumption in sustaining demand, has also helped.
But what distinguishes India from other emerging economies, in particular China and the Southeast Asian countries, is that domestic demand, rather than exports, is the primary driver of growth.
A return to high growth rates globally will require a broader revival of demand.
Needless to say, this will occur only gradually, particularly in the developed countries.
Thus, India’s high growth rates will have to remain dependent on strong domestic demand.
In order to meet this challenge, we are focusing on investments in infrastructure sectors such as power, telecommunications, roads, ports, and airports.
While the public sector will continue to play an important role, given the massive investment required, substantial private investment – including foreign investment – would be needed to address India’s huge “infrastructure deficit” and the financing gap that accompanies it.
A strategy of private-public partnership has been adopted to address the infrastructure challenge.
At the same time, we need to invest in our human capital, supporting the development and upgrading of the workforce’s skills and capacity for innovation.
At its summit in Seoul in November, the G-20 firmly placed development at the core of its agenda.
Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, underlining the importance of infrastructure investment, made the following proposal, which several leaders endorsed: “Recycling surplus savings into investment in developing countries will not only address the immediate demand imbalance, it will also help to address developmental imbalances.
In other words, we should leverage imbalances of one kind to redress imbalances of the other kind.”
As we head into the second decade of the century, innovative ideas like using global savings or surpluses to finance infrastructure in emerging and developing countries should be pursued seriously.
Doing so would not only sustain the growth momentum of these economies, but would contribute to global recovery by generating much-needed additional demand in the developed countries.
While the emerging economies’ global role will inevitably grow in the coming years, this shift will need to be anchored in a cooperative partnership with the developed world.
As for India, our resilient democratic values, ability to manage diversity, and strong economic fundamentals underpin our country’s current global posture.
The Emerging “New Middle East”
President George W. Bush’s Middle East policy undeniably managed to achieve one thing: it has thoroughly destabilized the region.
Otherwise, the results are not at all what the United States had hoped to accomplish.
A democratic, pro-Western Middle East is not in the cards.
But, while things are not developing as American neo-conservatives had intended, they are nevertheless developing.
The historical failure named Iraq war, the demise of secular Arab nationalism and the soaring oil and gas prices have wrought profound changes in the region.
From Damascus to Dubai, from Tel Aviv to Teheran, a new Middle East is now emerging.
The old Middle East arose from the borders and political identities created by the European powers after the fall of the Ottoman Empire in 1918.
Its driving ideological force was a European-inspired secular nationalism, which strove for political and social modernization through top-down government action.
This type of nationalism, or “Arab socialism,” reached its apex during the Cold War, when it could lean on Soviet military, political, and economic support.
Its end came with that of the Soviet Union, as it petrified into authoritarian, corrupt, and inefficient military regimes and dictatorships.
The end of the Soviet Union also triggered a profound military crisis in many Arab states: without Soviet support as an external guarantor of their military capabilities, the nationalist regimes were no longer able to keep pace with military modernization.
The nationalist regimes thus gradually lost domestic popular legitimacy, creating a vacuum that non-state actors have now largely filled.
The ideological forces and the currency of power have also changed, with political Islam replacing secularism while skillfully integrating social issues and revolutionary, anti-Western nationalism.
Today, the old Middle East can still be found in Syria, Egypt, Yemen, Tunisia, Algeria, and Fatah-controlled Palestine.
The new Middle East includes Dubai, the Gulf emirates, and Israel, as well as Hezbollah, Hamas, and jihadi terrorism – and, partly, Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Jordan and Morocco are also trying to associate themselves with the new Middle East.
Obviously, as these examples suggest, “new” does not necessarily mean better, but simply different and more modern.
Indeed, modernization by no means implies a solution to the conflicts that continue to fester in the region.
Instead, these conflicts are themselves “modernized,” which could make them even more dangerous than in the past.
An aspect of such modernization could be seen in the 2006 Lebanon war between Israel and Hezbollah, where tank warfare was rendered obsolete by missiles and Katyushas.
At the same time, non-state actors, such as Hezbollah, Hamas, and al-Qaeda, have taken the place of traditional armies, and suicide bombers equipped with road-side and car bombs or explosive belts have replaced guerrilla fighters with their Kalashnikovs.
Perhaps the most important change is the shift in the region’s political and military center of gravity.
While Israel, Palestine, and Lebanon defined the most important hot spots in the old Middle East, regional power and politics in the wake of the Iraq war is now centered in the Persian Gulf.
The dominant conflict is no longer the Israeli-Palestinian struggle, but the threat of a confrontation between Iran and Saudi Arabia for sub-regional supremacy, and between Iran and the US for regional hegemony.
Indeed, it is by now virtually impossible to implement any solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict without Iran and its local allies – Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Palestine.
In a way, then, the war in Iraq forms the strategic and military bridge between the old and the new Middle East.
The US intervention has brought about four far-reaching changes in the region:
·    Iran’s hegemonic ambitions have been unleashed, and the country has been helped to a strategic position that it could never have reached on its own.
·    The democratization of Iraq has empowered the Shi’a majority, which in turn greatly strengthened Iran’s influence.
Indeed, the war in Iraq has transformed the centuries-old Shi’a-Sunni conflict by infusing it with modern geopolitical significance and extending it to the entire region.
·    The rise of Iran poses an existential threat to Saudi Arabia, because the country’s oil-rich northeast is populated by a Shi’a majority.
A Shi’a government in Baghdad, dominated by Iran, would, in the medium term, threaten Saudi Arabia’s territorial integrity – a scenario that the Saudis cannot, and will not, accept.
·    Should Iran manage to become a nuclear power, the Saudis’ existential fears would dramatically escalate.
More generally, the currency of conventional military power in the Middle East would largely lose its value, inevitably resulting in a regional nuclear arms race.
Emanating from this new situation is the threat of disintegration of the whole Anglo-French system of states in the Middle East.
The first candidate is, of course, Iraq.
Whether Iraq can be held together despite the ethnic and religious confrontations that pit Kurds against Arabs and Sunnis against the Shi’a is one of the most pregnant questions for the new Middle East.
For Iraq’s disintegration would be hard to contain; indeed, it could bring about a thorough balkanization of the region.
Another important question is whether political Islam will move toward democracy and acceptance of modernity or remain trapped in radicalism and invocation of the past?
The forefront of this battle is, at the moment, not in the Middle East, but in Turkey; nevertheless, the result is bound to have more general significance.
The emergence of the new Middle East may present an opportunity to establish a regional order that reflects the legitimate interests of all the actors involved, provides secure borders, and replaces hegemonic aspirations with transparency and cooperation.
If not, or if such an opportunity is not seized, the new Middle East will be much more dangerous than the old one.
The Emotional Clash of Civilizations
Throughout the so-called “war on terror,” the notion of a “clash of civilization” between Islam and the West has usually been dismissed as politically incorrect and intellectually wrongheaded.
Instead, the most common interpretation has been that the world has entered a new era characterized by conflict “within” a particular civilization, namely Islam, with fundamentalist Muslims as much at war against moderates as against the West.
The strategic conclusion derived from such an analysis was clear, ambitious, and easily summarized: democratization.
If the absence of democracy in the Islamic world was the problem, bringing democracy to the “Greater Middle-East would be the solution, and it was the historical duty of the United States, as the most powerful and moral nation, to bring about that necessary change.
The status quo was untenable.
Implementing democracy, with or without regime change, was the only alternative to chaos and the rise of fundamentalism.
Today, Iraq may be on the verge of civil war between Shiites and Sunnis.
Iran under a new and more radical president is moving irresistibly towards possessing a nuclear capacity.
A free electoral process brought Hamas to power in Palestine, and the unfortunate episode of the Danish newspaper cartoons illustrated the almost combustible nature of relations between Islam and the West.
All of these developments are paving the way to new interpretations.
Rather than a “clash of civilizations,” we might instead be faced by multiple layers of conflict, which interact with each other in ways that increase global instability.
Indeed, it appears that the world is witnessing a triple conflict.
There is a clash within Islam, which, if the violence in Iraq spreads to neighboring countries, risks causing regional destabilization.
There is also a clash that is best described not as being between Islam and the West, but between the secularized world and a growing religious one.
At an even deeper and atavistic level, there is an emotional clash between a culture of fear and a culture of humiliation.
It would be a gross oversimplification to speak, as some are doing, of a clash between civilization and barbarism.
In reality, we are confronted with a widening divide over the role of religion, which runs between the West (with the US being a complicated exception) and much of the rest of the world (the most notable exception being China), but particularly the Islamic world.
The divide reflects how religion defines an individual’s identity within a society.
At a time when religion is becoming increasingly important elsewhere, we Europeans have largely forgotten our (violent and intolerant) religious past, and we have difficulty understanding the role that religion can play in other peoples’ daily lives.
In some ways, “they” are our own buried past and, with a combination of ignorance, prejudice, and, above all, fear, “we” are afraid that “they” could define our future.
We live in a secular world, where free speech can easily turn into insensitive and irresponsible mockery, while others see religion as their supreme goal, if not their last hope.
They have tried everything, from nationalism to regionalism, from communism to capitalism.
Since everything has failed, why not give God a chance?
Globalization may not have created these layers of conflicts, but it has accelerated them by making the differences more visible and palpable.
In our globalized age, we have lost the privilege – and, paradoxically, the virtue – of ignorance.
We all see how others feel and react, but without the minimal historical and cultural tools necessary to decipher those reactions.
Globalization has paved the way to a world dominated by the dictatorship of emotions – and of ignorance.
This clash of emotions is exacerbated in the case of Islam.
In the Arab world, in particular, Islam is dominated by a culture of humiliation felt by the people and nations that consider themselves the main losers, the worst victims, of a new and unjust international system.
From that standpoint, the Israel-Palestine conflict is exemplary.
It has become an obsession.
It is not so much that Arabs and Muslims really care about the Palestinians.
On the contrary, the Islamic world left the Palestinians without real support for decades.
In reality, for them the conflict has come to symbolize the anachronistic perpetuation of an unfair colonial order, to represent their political malaise, and to embody the perceived impossibility of their being masters of their destiny.
In the eyes of the Arabs (and some other Muslims), Israel’s strength and resilience is a direct consequence of their own weakness, divisions, and corruption.
The majority of Arabs may not support al-Qaeda, but they do not oppose it with all their heart.
Instead, there is the temptation to regard Osama bin Laden as a type of violent Robin Hood, whose actions, while impossible to condone officially, have helped them to recover a sense of Arab pride and dignity.
Here, perhaps, is the real clash of civilizations: the emotional conflict between the European culture of fear and the Muslim, particularly Arab, culture of humiliation.
It would be dangerous to underestimate the depth of so wide an emotional divide, and to recognize its existence is the first step to overcoming it.
But that will be difficult, for transcending the emotional clash of civilizations presupposes an opening to the “other” that neither side may yet be ready to undertake.
The Empire of Human Rights
NEW YORK – Why are French, British, and American warships, but not Chinese or Malaysian warships, sitting near the Burmese coast loaded with food and other necessities for the victims of Cyclone Nargis?
Why has the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) been so slow and weak in its response to a natural calamity that ravaged one of its own members?
The French junior Human Rights Minister, Rama Yade, declared that the United Nations’ principle of the “responsibility to protect” should be applied to Burma, forcibly if necessary.
And the Malaysian opposition leader Lim Kit Siang has said that Asian countries’ inaction “reflects dismally on all ASEAN leaders and governments.
They can definitely do more.”
So, are Europeans and Americans simply more compassionate than Asians?
Given the West’s record of horrendous warfare and often brutal imperialism, this seems unlikely.
Moreover, the way ordinary Chinese rallied to help victims of the earthquake in Sichuan has been quite remarkable, as have been the spontaneous efforts of people in Burma to assist their fellow citizens, even as the military did very little.
Buddhism stresses compassion and mercy as much as Christianity does.
Indifference to suffering is not inherent to any Asian culture.
Indeed, none of the Asian members disagreed when the UN General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948.
The declaration held that “recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice, and peace in the world.”
Nevertheless, there may be cultural differences in understanding how compassion should be applied.
The ideal of universal equality and rights does owe something to the history of Western civilization, from Socrates’ “natural justice” to Christianity and France’s Declaration of the Rights of Man.
Western peoples have not always lived up to their universalist ideals, but they have in modern times built institutions designed to implement them, in Europe and beyond.
There is, so far, no Asia-wide institution to protect the human rights of Asians, let alone mankind.
In fact, Chinese and other Asians frequently criticize the West for using human rights as an excuse to impose “Western values” on former colonial subjects.
To be sure, such accusations are especially common in autocracies whose rulers, and their apologists, view the idea of universal human rights as a threat to their monopoly on power.
But distrust of universalism in Asia is not confined to autocrats.
In many Asian countries, favors invariably create obligations, which is perhaps why people are sometimes disinclined to interfere in the problems of others.
You are obliged to take care of your family, your friends, or even your fellow countrymen.
But the idea of universal charity is too abstract, and smacks of the kind of unwelcome interference that Western imperialists – and the Christian missionaries who followed them – practiced in the East for too long.
The notion of “Asian values,” promoted mostly by Singaporean official scribes, was partly a critique of universalist Western claims.
Asians, according to this theory, have their own values, which include thrift, deference to authority, the sacrifice of individual to collective interests, and the belief that countries should not stick their noses into others’ affairs.
Hence, the hesitant response of Southeast Asian governments – and public opinion – to the Burmese disaster.
One possible line of criticism of this kind of thinking is simply to claim the superiority of Western values.
But another, more sympathetic response would be to show that individual rights and notions of freedom are by no means alien to non-Western civilizations.
Amartya Sen, the Nobel Prize-winning economist, has pointed out that great Indian rulers, such as Ashoka (third century BC) and Akbar (sixteenth century), advocated pluralism, tolerance, and reason long before the European Enlightenment.
He has also observed that famines don’t occur in democracies, because freedom of information helps to prevent them.
Sen, not surprisingly, is a trenchant critic of the “Asian values” school.
It has, nonetheless, become a commonly held opinion that democracy, like universal human rights, is a typically Western idea, and that Asian autocracy, as practiced in China, for example, is not only more suited to Asians, but also more efficient.
Democratic governments are hampered by lobby groups, special interests, public opinion, party politics, and so forth, while Asian autocrats can make unpopular but necessary decisions.
The two recent natural disasters in Burma and China have put this idea to a severe test.
China has not fared too badly, largely because its government was forced by the Burmese example, bad publicity surrounding the Tibetan demonstrations, and the impending Olympic Games to allow far more freedom of information than it normally does.
One can only hope that this crack of freedom will widen in time.
Burma failed miserably, and, despite belated efforts to make the best of terrible circumstances, so has ASEAN.
In the end, of course, it doesn’t matter much whether or not we ascribe the failures of autocracy and non-intervention to anything specifically “Asian.”
Whatever the cause, the consequences remain deplorable.
The Endgames in Iraq and Afghanistan
NEW YORK – For nearly a decade, American foreign policy has been dominated by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
As 2011 begins, with 50,000 US soldiers still in Iraq and another 100,000 in Afghanistan, it may not look like that era is coming to an end. But it is.
Iraq, the second most expensive “war of choice” (after Vietnam) in American history, is for the United States reaching a level of effort that will no longer absorb substantial military and economic resources or garner significant domestic political attention.
All US troops are due to leave Iraq by the end of 2011.&#160;
Even if, as seems likely, several thousand soldiers remain, the number will be small and their role limited to advising and training Iraqi military and police forces and conducting missions against terrorists.
Eight years, 4,300 lost American lives, and more than a trillion dollars later, it will be, for better or worse, mostly Iraqis who determine their country’s future.
The initial performance of an Iraq run by Iraqis is less than encouraging.
To be sure, there have been a number of relatively fair elections, political life is active, and the economy is growing.
But Iraqi leaders’ difficulty in forming a government following last spring’s elections bodes poorly.
Indeed, a political culture of compromise has not taken root, and the country continues to be divided by geography, ethnicity, religion, and politics.
There is no consensus on how to share the potential wealth from Iraq’s vast energy resources.
The Kurdish north is largely autonomous; where its writ ends and the central government’s begins is unsettled.
Iranian influence is pervasive in the south and extensive in the center.
Moreover, the country still experiences regular bombings, and millions of Iraqis are either internally displaced or refugees.
In short, conditions in Iraq, while significantly better than five years ago, are more likely to deteriorate than improve.
Afghanistan is moving at a much slower pace when it comes to US troop reductions.
The Obama administration is likely to remove a small number of US soldiers in July, the date selected by the president for the beginning of the American military drawdown.
But it will be only the beginning of an extended, gradual process of American military reduction, one that looks like it will take four years – and quite possibly longer.
What the US will have to show then for more than a decade of sacrifice and investment in Afghanistan is anybody’s guess.
The sum total of the US effort in terms of American money and lives will likely be less than in Iraq, but still substantial.
And it is difficult to be optimistic about Afghanistan, given the Taliban’s resilience, the weakness and corruption that plague the government, and the reality that Pakistan will continue to be a sanctuary for the Taliban and other armed groups seeking to gain a foothold (or more) in Afghanistan. An Afghanistan that resembles a normal country is virtually impossible to foresee.
Nevertheless, the decisions to scale back American involvement decisively in Iraq, and gradually in Afghanistan, will ultimately have significant consequences for the US – many of them welcome. One is financial.
Current US policy toward Iraq and Afghanistan costs roughly $150 billion per year, which is more than 20% of total US defense spending.
Cutting this sum will free up much-needed money for other defense needs and for deficit reduction, arguably the principal national security challenge facing the US.
Troop reductions in Iraq and Afghanistan will also allow the US military to begin to recover from these two conflicts.
Neither soldiers nor equipment can sustain the performance that has been demanded of them.
Recruitment and retention of highly skilled individuals in the US armed forces will increase as the level of effort in the two conflicts winds down, and a great deal of deferred military modernization will occur.&#160;&#160;
More fundamentally, reducing US involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan will permit a rebalancing of US foreign and defense policy.
The two conflicts have absorbed a disproportionate share of the country’s resources – military and economic to be sure, but also the time and attention of policymakers and diplomats.
In the short run, doing less in Iraq and Afghanistan will allow the US to concentrate on the two most immediate external threats to US interests: Iran and North Korea.
In the long run, the US needs to generate domestic and international support for regional and global arrangements designed to manage the defining problems of this era, from the spread of nuclear materials and terrorism to maintaining an open world economy and slowing climate change.
This will require a foreign policy that focuses on the emerging powers of the twenty-first century, many of which are in Asia.&#160;&#160;&#160;
The US largely squandered the opportunity to shape the international system in the first decade of the new century.
Iraq and Afghanistan proved to be strategic distractions, and, &#160;particularly in Afghanistan, the US should resist pressures to prolong a substantial military presence.
There is now an opportunity to reorient American foreign policy to concentrate on what matters most.
It is in the interest of the US and the world that this opportunity not be missed.
The Endless Iranian Nuclear Crisis
Iran will continue to enrich uranium regardless of whether a Republican or a Democrat is America’s president.
At the same time, the United States will oppose any Iranian nuclear program – even a civilian program – because this will contribute to the stability of the regime in Tehran.
As a result, nuclear tensions are likely to bedevil US-Iranian relations for years to come.
Iran, it is often claimed, has no need for nuclear power, given its abundant oil and natural gas reserves.
But the Iranian government is under economic and political pressure to supply increasing amounts of electricity to its growing population and fragile economy.
Using oil or natural gas for domestic electricity threatens oil and gas exports, which are the principle source of government revenues.
Indeed, with domestic oil consumption growing at a higher rate than production, government revenues from oil exports are already in decline.
Thus, nuclear power will halt the decline in government revenues by freeing more oil and natural gas for export.
Iran’s natural gas resources, if developed, would not be a substitute for cheap nuclear power, because gas is more profitable in other uses than in power generation.
The Iranian government fears that electricity shortages, slow economic growth, and high unemployment will turn the populace against it.
As social tensions increase, political turmoil will follow.
Nuclear power offers the possibility of cheap, plentiful electricity, which will contribute to social and political stability.
Iranian experts argue that, in considering the trade-off between internal unrest and external sanctions, the Iranian government must choose between domestic security and international security.
Domestic pressure could very well bring down the regime, but international pressure will not.
History is on the side of the Iranian government.
The Islamic Revolution has survived a brutal war with Iraq, economic sanctions, and decades of international pressure and isolation from the US.
Moreover, Iran’s leaders remember that the Shah was forced to flee the country in 1979, despite having strong international support.
While there may be security reasons for any future US administration to oppose even a civilian nuclear program, American policymakers also recognize the strategic impact that nuclear energy will have in stabilizing the Iranian regime.
The US and Iran have been fighting proxy wars since 1979, and their ongoing conflict means that proxy wars will continue in Lebanon, Iraq, Afghanistan, and the Caspian Sea region, as will trade and investment wars.
Indeed, as long as China and Russia have money to invest and arms to sell, most UN sanctions will be toothless.
Iran will continue to threaten the world community that it will use its oil weapon, but this is highly unlikely.
It is not in Iran’s interest, under any scenario, to decrease oil exports, let alone halt them.
However, domestic pressure, a sense of nationalism, and the need to improve its bargaining position with Western countries might force the Iranian government to respond to harsh UN sanctions or an air attack on its nuclear facilities.
But even under these extreme circumstances, Iran will still need its oil revenue.
A symbolic cut or embargo, while possible, would have little impact on world oil markets.
Iran’s government has more effective options to respond to attacks from the US and its allies.
Its supporters in Iraq might cripple Iraqi oil exports from Basra, which would damage US plans in Iraq while boosting Iran’s oil revenues, or limit the availability of fuel to the US Army by attacking roads and bridges, especially the Kuwait City-Baghdad highway.
The world community will continue to pay a high price for the nuclear standoff, which will cast a shadow over world oil markets for years to come.
Some experts argue that it has already raised oil prices by about $15 per barrel.
Ironically, an Iranian civilian nuclear program would enhance US and world energy security by making more oil and gas available in the global market.
But America’s determination to destabilize Iran and the Iranian government’s determination to retain power reduce the likelihood of this scenario.
The End of Banks?
BARCELONA ­– Are banks doomed as a result of the current financial crisis?
The securitization of mortgages originally was seen as a triumph, because it shifted risk to financial markets, while taking deposits and making and monitoring loans – the purview of traditional banks – was regarded as narrow and old-fashioned.
By contrast, modern banks would seek finance mainly in the interbank market and securitize their loan portfolios.
In theory, such banks should be immune to runs, because the interbank market is supposed to be extremely efficient, and risk would be shifted to investors willing to bear it.
Deposits would be replaced by mutual funds, which, as we know, are also immune to runs, and the risk of structured investment vehicles (SIV’s) would be assessed accurately by rating agencies.
All this financial engineering would avoid the obsolete capital requirements that burden banks’ operation.
The current crisis killed off  this optimistic scenario.
The interbank market has almost collapsed, because banks do not trust each other in the same way that we tend not to trust an eager seller of a second-hand car.
This is a textbook market failure.
The origin of the problem is uncertainty about banks’ exposure to sub-prime mortgages, the risks of which have been carelessly assessed by rating agencies due to conflicts of interest.
Northern Rock in the United Kingdom has been a victim of this modern banking strategy, as has Bear Stearns in the United States.
Others may follow soon.
Moreover, institutions that thought they had transferred risk to the market realized that the demise of sponsored SIV’s would damage their reputations irreversibly.
This implied that they had to rescue these SIV’s.
Alas, they failed to set aside enough capital for this unforeseen contingency, and external investors such as the sovereign wealth funds of China, Singapore, and the Middle East have had to come to the rescue.
Finally, mutual funds are at risk as well, because their supposedly safe investments may sour and the insurance that backs them now appears shaky.
The sub-prime contamination of money market funds would prove disastrous, with consequences far beyond what we have seen up to now.
The supposed transfer of risk would turn out to have been a mirage.
Are banks, markets, or regulators to blame?
The answer may indicate what future awaits banks.