Reassuring Iraq’s Sunnis that they have a place in the new Iraq will also reassure neighboring Sunni governments, which have mostly turned a blind eye to the support for the insurgency that has come from their lands.
Of course, should the US see failure ahead, it could seek to broaden the war beyond Iraq’s borders by attacking Iran, a policy reminiscent of “Operation Sideshow,” when US failure in Vietnam in the late 1960’s enticed President Nixon into attacking Cambodia and Laos.
But Iran has resources that Cambodia and Laos could never muster; indeed, its ability to retaliate could set the entire region ablaze.
Whereas America’s war in Indochina was a tragic mistake, the cost of a wider war precipitated by the crisis in Iraq would be incomparably greater – for both the patient and the doctor.
An Agenda for Growth in Europe
A recent OECD study reminds us, once again, that per capita income levels are roughly 30% lower in the euro area, as well as in the three largest Continental countries – France, Germany, and Italy – that dominate its performance, than in the United States.
That gap is likely to widen as Europe’s demographic profile darkens, and if productivity continues to grow more slowly than elsewhere in the industrial economies.
Why have the large European economies failed to catch up with US income levels?
The bulk of the shortfall is due to less intensive use of labor: employment rates for women and for the oldest and youngest age groups are lower in the euro area than in the US, working hours are far fewer, and, least significantly, unemployment rates are higher.
Some take consolation from this, viewing it as positive that Europeans prefer leisure to work.
But low levels of labor utilization are largely due to heavier income taxes and social security contributions, as well as high social benefit levels introduced at a time when the labor force was growing rapidly and the need to replace involuntary with voluntary unemployment seemed more urgent than today.
These measures will need to be revisited both to increase the supply of labor and to make public finances more sustainable.
This process is already underway, particularly in Italy and France, through cuts in social security contributions for lower-paid workers, tighter conditions for drawing unemployment benefits, and tax credits for “the working poor.”
Since the mid-1990’s, the relative decline in employment in these countries has, indeed, been slightly reversed.
But factors beyond taxes and benefits also contribute to low employment rates in all the three major euro-zone economies: high minimum wages and some features of employment protection legislation slow down the flow of workers through the job market.
Although a long agenda of reforms is beginning to be tackled, first in Germany and, more recently and cautiously, in France, the results are slow in coming and public understanding of the need for change remains limited.
Much can be learned from each country’s experience and from that of smaller EU member states, but labor market reforms inevitably have a strong national flavor.
Employment objectives have been formulated for all EU member states since 1997 in the so-called European Employment Strategy (EES), now part of the “Lisbon Agenda,” the set of goals established to boost EU productivity.
But, with the policy instruments for achieving these goals largely national and the arguments for applying them simultaneously in several member states weak, the EES has created unrealistic public expectations and triggered only limited action by governments.
Nor is the employment gap with the US the only problem for Europe.
Beginning in the mid-1990’s, the rate of growth in output per hour worked – a key factor behind the rise in per capita income – slowed in most European countries while it rose in the US, reversing a decades-long pattern.
Between 2000 and 2004, hourly labor productivity rose more than twice as fast in the US than in the large euro zone economies – 2.8% per year versus little more than 1%.
So why have the Europeans been unable to sustain improvements in both foundations of growth – employment and productivity – at the same time?
This proved possible not only in the US, but also in other advanced economies outside Europe – Australia, Canada, and New Zealand – and, unsurprisingly, in the new EU member states.
The explanation is not capital spending, which is normally linked to productivity growth.
There have been no major differences between the US and the large euro zone economies here.
This leaves the “explanation” to what economists call Total Factor Productivity (TFP), a mix of several important elements, including innovation activity, a well-functioning financial system ready and willing to take risks, and organizational flexibility that facilitates rapid diffusion of new technologies.
The main lapse in TFP growth in Europe over the past decade has been in services (excluding information and communications technologies).
So deregulation and integration of services will be essential if the Euro area’s TFP is to improve, as more than two-thirds of total income in most EU economies is generated in this sector.
While product markets have held center stage in the creation of the single European market, services continue to be fragmented by national regulatory, anti-competitive practices.
Much of the explanation lies in the very heterogeneity of services and the greater difficulties that mutual recognition, or the “country-of-origin principle” – essential in the integration of product markets – implies for services.
Unfortunately, reform was derailed in 2005.
During the referendum campaign in France preceding the vote on the draft EU Constitutional Treaty, the proposed directive was vilified as undermining the rights of labor, symbolized by that dreaded bogeyman, the “Polish plumber.”
These attacks overlooked the fact that the directive makes employment conditions of workers from other EU-member states subject in most respects to host-country rules.
A revised version of the directive that reduces its sectoral scope and makes a number of compromises with the country-of-origin principle is now before the European Parliament.
Even this limited version would constitute progress; most of the gains arise from removing the red tape that complicates cross-border establishment of small and medium-size service enterprises and limits competition in broad sectors of the economy.
It is a sad reflection on the state of the EU that it seems unable to agree on the one clear productivity-advancing piece of legislation when improving productivity is held out as a shared goal.
The failure to mobilize consumer interests in favor of European integration is particularly disappointing for the new member states, which had expected to reap some of the benefits.
An Alliance of Civilizations?
MADRID – The first International Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations, conceived as an antidote to the idea that the world is doomed to a “clash of civilizations,” recently met in Madrid and revealed that there is more than a grain of truth in Robert Kagan’s idea that Americans are from Mars and Europeans from Venus.
Ever since September 11, 2001, the United States has been engaged in a crusade against the forces of evil in the Muslim world.
By contrast, the March 11, 2004, terrorist attack on Spain, which left 200 dead, triggered an “anti-crusade” that seeks to disarm extremism by building bridges of understanding and reconciliation with Islam.
Co-sponsored by Spain and Turkey, the Alliance of Civilizations initiative is not devoid of political calculation.
To the Spaniards, it helps to justify their abrupt withdrawal from Iraq in 2004; for the Turks, it is yet another vehicle in their struggle, as the vital bridge between Islam and the West, for admission into the European Union.
A loose and somewhat confused project, the Alliance of Civilizations aims to heal the wounds of conflict between Islam and the West through education, viable integration policies, and a better-informed dialogue with the media.
But it suffers from the major global players’ profound skepticism, with the US, Russia, and, for that matter, the EU shown no real enthusiasm for it.
However vague, the alliance of civilizations idea certainly cannot do more harm than war against Islamic extremism.
After all, none of the Muslim world’s problems and conflicts with the West are susceptible to a military solution.
Moreover, the Alliance is not an entirely incoherent proposal if the objective is that the West disengage from the politics of hubris and establish a genuine sphere of cooperation with the Muslim world in economics, culture, and science.
Of course, the idea is held back by the inner workings of both parts of the proposed alliance.
Many in the West question whether Islam is compatible with human rights and Western concepts of liberty.
Many Muslims who have been fighting for years for  their countries’ modernization have so far failed to find a lucid response to the progressive wave of radical Islam.
To claim that Islam is incompatible with human rights is to consider it a civilization too hidebound to change.
This is a historic fallacy.
Nor is the claim that Islam is intrinsically inimical to innovation viable, because Muslim civilization has contributed mightily to science and art throughout history.
Today, Western universities are replete with distinguished Arab scholars in almost every field – the result of a brain drain that itself reflects the Islamic world’s centuries of decline.
In 2005, the 17 countries of the Arab world together produced 13,444 scientific publications, fewer than the 15,455 achieved by Harvard University alone.
Enemies of reason, however, are also to be found in the West.
We live in an age in which many people are disillusioned with secular politics, and are turning to religion instead, not only throughout the Muslim world, but in the core of Western civilization, Christian Europe and Evangelist America.
Nor is the Jewish state of Israel, where Messianic fanatics and religious nationalists have embraced a political theology that questions the very legitimacy of the democratic institutions, immune from this phenomenon.
The current crisis of Islam might not be congenital, but Islam’s predicament is acute.
The question is this: are Muslims ready to accept that Khomeini’s dictum that “Islam is politics or it is nothing” is wrong, that Islam is a religion and not a form of government, and that, as in the Christian world, there is a sphere for Caesar and a sphere for God?
Those in the Muslim world who want to embrace reform must be driven by the conviction that theocracy has never served as a vehicle for human progress.
Of course, the Alliance of Civilizations should not attempt to bridge differences by defending moral relativism.
If it is driven by a Western guilt complex that assumes that the solution simply lies in greater empathy for the Muslim predicament, then the skeptics are bound to be vindicated.
For the Alliance of Civilizations to have any chance of success, the emphasis must be on reciprocity.
Tolerance and religious freedom must be mutual.
Islam’s part in the deal must include a guarantee of human rights and civil liberties, improvement in women’s status, and realistic policies to stem the Islamic world’s demographic explosion.
Some, as usual, will claim that the Arab-Israeli conflict lies at the root of the problems that exist between Islam and the West, and that resolving the Palestinians’ plight will contribute immensely to smoother relations.
But Arabs and Muslims must stop deluding themselves that the Israel-Palestine dispute is what is holding them back.
Ending the American occupation in Iraq and imposing an Arab-Israeli peace would help, but they are no panacea.
The fight to eradicate misery, illiteracy, and corruption, and Islam’s embrace of science, do not depend on the results of the Middle East peace process.
An Alliance of Equals
PARIS – During NATO’s recent 60th anniversary ceremony in Strasbourg, the Alliance welcomed two new members, Albania and Croatia, bringing its total membership to 28.
This expansion is a good thing, for history has tormented these two countries.
Being welcomed within the great international family of the West will reassure them, stabilize them, and contribute to their political, cultural, and economic development.
But the good news was limited, because NATO addressed only a routine agenda.
No core problem was really tackled.
The controversy that arose in France over the country’s return to NATO’s unified military command makes this abundantly clear.
Was France losing its autonomy, perhaps even its sovereignty?
Was it capitulating to American hegemony?
These are real questions, yet at the NATO summit people spoke of them more in terms of symbols than as realities.
But what is the reality here?
NATO is a military alliance composed of 28 countries.
One of them, the United States, has a military budget that is more than three times that of all the other members combined.
Hence, the US runs most NATO civilian and military commands with the consent of the others.
Of course, there is a collective consultation and deliberative process that enables any member to be heard.
But in reality a member’s actual power is what affects common decisions.
This structure harks back to the conditions of NATO’s birth, when it was forged to thwart the Soviet threat to Western civilization.
At the time, no one ever doubted that American power – already endowed with nuclear weapons – was the only counterpart.
For this reason, the US came to preside over the alliance.
During the 41 years of the Cold War, 14 of NATO’s 16 members strictly obeyed and complied with American decisions and policies.
French President Charles de Gaulle was the only one to question whether an American president would actually ever be ready to launch a nuclear attack on the USSR in order to protect one or several Alliance members if vital US interests were not directly at stake.
Based on that doubt, France – a nuclear power since 1960 – withdrew in 1966 from the Alliance’s permanent centralized military command in order to assert its own deterrent capability.
This decision was mainly grounded on the American doctrine, adopted in 1962, of “flexible response,” which said to the Soviets: “As long as you do not use nuclear weapons, we will not use them, either.”
This very doctrine left Europe exposed.
Indeed, while it is a much disputed question, de Gaulle was probably right about America’s lack of commitment to the nuclear defense of Europe.
Both Henry Kissinger and Robert McNamara left office admitting that de Gaulle had been correct.
Nevertheless, de Gaulle’s insights left a legacy that still causes some mistrust and dissent within NATO.
France was right on this key strategic point, but it was never able to explain its position to its allies.
This inability to discuss, clearly and forthrightly, this strategic doctrine continues to hamper the Alliance.
At the Strasbourg summit, confidence in the future could have been strengthened if a couple of troubling issues had been discussed.
Instead, once again, there was an extended focus on the past.
The key questions are whether NATO’s doctrine of common defense is currently directed at one country in particular, and whether nuclear force remains the Alliance’s major defensive tool.
In the current global situation, no predictable conflict will require the use of a nuclear weapon.
At the moment, there is no global threat and the Alliance only intervenes in regional conflicts, so why not have NATO admit this?
But the most important matter that went unmentioned in Strasbourg is the relationship with Russia.
NATO was founded to confront the threat that the USSR represented 60 years ago.
But the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union’s “anti-NATO” alliance of socialist countries, was dissolved in 1991; communism imploded the same year, with Russia caught ever since in a struggle to build a market economy and define a new global position for itself.
At a time when Russia was taking a more pacific course, NATO – unlike the Warsaw Pact – was not dismantled.
The only way to resolve this problem is for NATO to assert its pacific intentions before the world.
The most convincing way to do that is to moderate America’s excessive taste for power, which it demonstrated in Iraq.
NATO needs to shift its focus from organizing and administering a unified military command to building real confidence that every member’s voice will be heard.
To that end, all members must stand on an equal footing.
France’s decision to return to full and equal Alliance membership was a good one, and France must now work from within to advance the principles in which it believes.
Avoiding a New American Recession
CAMBRIDGE – The United States may be headed for a recession in 2013.
Even if the country avoids going over the “fiscal cliff,” a poorly designed political compromise that cuts the deficit too quickly could push an already weak economy into recession.
But a gradual phase-in of an overall cap on tax deductions and exclusions (so-called tax expenditures), combined with reform of entitlement spending, could achieve the long-run fiscal consolidation that America needs without risking a new recession.
The US economy has been limping along with a growth rate of less than 2% during the past year, with similarly dim prospects in 2013, even without the shock of the fiscal cliff.&#160; That is much too weak a pace of expansion to tolerate the fiscal cliff’s increase in tax rates and spending cuts, which would reduce demand by a total of $600 billion – about 4% of GDP – next year, and by larger sums in subsequent years.
President Barack Obama’s proposed alternative to the fiscal cliff would substantially increase tax rates and limit tax deductions for the top 2% of earners, who now pay more than 45% of total federal personal-income taxes.
His budget would also increase taxes on corporations, and would end the current payroll-tax “holiday,” imposing an additional 2% tax on all wage earners.
Together, these changes could lower total demand by nearly 2% of GDP.
And the higher marginal tax rates would reduce incentives to work and to invest, further impeding economic activity.
All of that could be fateful for an economy that is still struggling to sustain a growth rate of less than 2%.
The Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve predict that going over the fiscal cliff would cause a recession in 2013, with Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke recently saying that the Fed would be unable to offset the adverse effect on the economy.
He could have said the same thing about the fiscal drag that would be created by Obama’s budget proposal.
Although Congressional Republicans rightly object to raising tax rates, they appear willing to raise revenue through tax reform if that is part of a deal that also includes reductions in the long-run cost of the major entitlement programs, Medicare and Social Security.
Although some Republicans would like to see revenue increased only by stimulating faster economic growth, that cannot be achieved without the reductions in marginal tax rates and improvements in corporate taxation that the Democrats are unlikely to accept.
Raising revenue through tax reform will have to mean reducing the special deductions and exclusions that now lower tax receipts.
The potential recession risk of a budget deal can be avoided by phasing in the base-broadening that is used to raise revenue.
A desirable way to broaden the tax base would be to put an overall cap on the amount of tax reduction that each taxpayer can achieve through deductions and exclusions.
Such an overall cap would allow each taxpayer to retain all of his existing deductions and exclusions but would limit the amount by which he could reduce his tax liability in this way.
An overall cap would also cause many individuals who now itemize deductions to shift to the standard deduction – implying significant simplification in record-keeping and thus an improvement in incentives.
A cap on the tax reductions derived from tax expenditures that is equal to 2% of each individual’s adjusted gross income would raise more than $200 billion in 2013 if applied to all of the current deductions and to the exclusions for municipal-bond interest and employer-paid health insurance.
Even if the full deduction for charitable gifts is preserved and only high-value health insurance is regarded as a tax expenditure, the extra revenue in 2013 would be about $150 billion.
Over a decade, that implies nearly $2 trillion in additional revenue without any increase in tax rates from today’s levels.
Extra revenue of $150 billion in 2013 would be 1% of GDP, and could be too much for the economy to swallow, particularly if combined with reductions in government spending and a rise in the payroll tax.
But the same basic framework could be used by starting with a higher cap and gradually reducing it over several years.
A 5% cap on the tax-expenditure benefits would raise only $75 billion in 2013, about 0.5% of GDP; but the cap could be reduced from 5% to 2% over the next few years, raising substantially more revenue when the economy is stronger.
Slowing the growth of government spending for Medicare and Social Security is necessary to prevent a long-term explosion of the national debt or dramatic increases in personal tax rates.
Those changes should also be phased in gradually to protect beneficiaries and avoid an economic downturn.
America’s national debt has more than doubled in the past five years, and is set to rise to more than 100% of GDP over the next decade unless changes in spending and taxes are implemented.
A well-designed combination of caps to limit tax expenditures and a gradual slowing of growth in outlays for entitlement programs could reverse the rise in the debt and strengthen the US economy.
America’s current budget negotiations should focus on achieving a credible long-term decline in the national debt, while protecting economic expansion in the near term.
An Arab “Third Way”
AMMAN – Throughout the post-colonial period, Arab countries have consistently failed to produce an efficient – let alone democratic – system of government.
Now, after a half-century of competition between military or royal dictatorships and militant Islamist regimes, many Arabs are again seeking a “third way” – a path toward a credible form of representative democracy.
But will their efforts prove as futile now as they have in the past?
The Middle East – named for its geographic position between Europe and East Asia – was under Ottoman rule for 400 years before the Allied powers, after defeating the Ottomans in World War I, partitioned the region into distinct political units that, under the Sykes-Picot Agreement, fell within spheres of influence carved out by the United Kingdom and France.
But, in response to these new divisions, an Arab awakening – shaped by pan-Arabism and support for Palestine – was occurring.
Charismatic young military rulers-turned-dictators like Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, Yemen’s Ali Abdullah Saleh, and Syria’s Hafez al-Assad used these popular causes to win public support.
But their failure to deliver better lives to their citizens, together with the discrediting of left-wing ideologies following the Soviet Union’s collapse, fueled the rise of a rival movement: political Islam.
The Muslim Brotherhood – established in the Egyptian town of Ismailia in 1928 and political Islam’s oldest, best organized, and most widespread proponent – was (and is) despised by both secular Arabs and Arab monarchies.
Indeed, secular dictators have worked to suppress the Brothers at every turn – often violently, as when Assad ruthlessly crushed a Brotherhood-led uprising in Hama in 1982.
Forced to operate clandestinely, the Brotherhood built its support base with a social agenda that targeted the needs of the poor, while consistently reinforcing its Islamic ties, even using the compulsory zakat (annual financial contribution to religious causes) to build up its social network.
The Brothers, with the help of a conservative society and the mosques, were prepared to seize power whenever the opportunity arose.
Another Islamist movement, Algeria’s Islamic Salvation Front, almost had such an opportunity in 1991, when it won the first round of a general election.
But the military prevented its victory by canceling the second round, triggering a brutal eight-year civil war in which an estimated 200,000 people died.
Palestine’s Hamas, an offshoot of the Brotherhood, succeeded at the ballot box in 2006, but has since failed to deliver credible governance.
Then the Arab Spring erupted in 2011, creating new opportunities for political renewal.
Within months, Islamist parties shaped by the Brotherhood’s ideology had replaced secular dictators in Tunisia and Egypt, and seemed poised to take over Yemen and Syria, largely because they were the only well-organized political movements on the scene.
Moreover, the Muslim Brotherhood gained control of Egypt, the largest and most influential of the Arab Spring countries.
But their exclusive, rigid ideology was poorly suited to governing such a large and diverse country.
As a result, after only a year in power, the military – backed by the same secular, liberal young people who had opposed it in 2011 – drove President Mohamed Morsi out of power.
Unable to mount a political alternative, however, the protesters’ rejection of the Islamist government served only to put the army back in charge.
Some argue that the absence of a secular liberal option in Arab politics stems from fear of political Islam.
For decades, Western powers backed military regimes in the Arab world, willingly ignoring their systematic repression of democratic movements and rights, in order to ensure that Islamists did not gain power.
Now that both the military- and Islamist-led systems have been discredited, an ideological vacuum has appeared in Arab politics.
But Arabs today – most of whom are under the age of 30 – are less interested in an overarching political ideology than they are in an efficient representative government that implements sound policies aimed at creating jobs and bolstering economic growth.
In short, they want a government that is focused on improving citizens’ lives.
In fact, the absence of a specific ideology was essential to the Arab Spring’s initial success in Egypt and Tunisia, for it allowed a large number of young activists to forge loose alliances.
But mass movements can take a country only so far; establishing a credible representative government requires political parties organized around clearly defined principles.
While the Muslim Brotherhood has such an organizing principle, its internal rigidity – at least with Morsi at its helm – made it unfit to govern.
Meanwhile, infighting among Egypt’s liberals prevented them from establishing a disciplined, reliable alternative to the Brotherhood based on principles like diversity, plurality, respect for women, and freedom of expression.
So when the Islamist government’s credibility collapsed, the military was Egypt’s only remaining option.
In order to make progress, the youth-led movements that drove the Arab Spring must translate their shared principles into effective political structures, and choose leaders who are capable of placing the search for consensus ahead of personal ambition.
If they succeed, the Arab world may finally have an alternative to rule by generals or mullahs.
Even if they fail to gain power, the emergence of such an alternative would surely influence the Arab world’s agenda for years to come.
An American Oil Spill
At hearings before a US Senate subcommittee, BP CEO Tony Hayward’s evasive maneuvering and failure to answer point-blank questions infuriated Congressmen and the American public alike.
His expression of “contrition” may provide some relief that the key culprit has been fingered, but it brought the sealing of the well no closer.
Furthermore, the situation in the Gulf of Mexico is worsening.  Oil is not leaking at the rate of 1,000 barrels per day, as BP originally estimated, nor up to 19,000 bpd, as calculated by the Flow Rate Technical Group.
As a newly released BP internal document revealed, the actual flow is up to 100,000 bpd.
While there is no denying that the accident will create a long list of victims – the residents of the Gulf states being among the worst affected – the American public also is to blame.
An historical addiction to cheap gasoline, and opposition to energy reform as “un-American,” has fueled an obsession with drilling, damming, and digging the country’s way out of problems.
This emphasis on the supply side (increasing access to energy fuel) has obscured cheaper and possibly more beneficial actions on the demand side (cutting energy consumption by changing people’s behavior).
For example, while Americans could have supported more aggressive fuel-economy standards or increased federal taxes on energy, they didn’t.
Under the illusion that lifestyles revolving around cheap oil and big cars were America’s perennial right, fuel-economy standards languished for decades, and politicians avoided the t-word like the plague.
All the while, Americans have been enjoying the cheapest gasoline in the developed world.
The country failed to anticipate the rise of China and India, whose exponential demand growth would have obvious implications for global energy prices.
Instead, the supply-demand gap has been partly bridged by increasingly sophisticated engineering techniques.
Technical feats like three-dimensional seismic imaging and tube-rotary drilling are no doubt impressive, but they are problematic when unaccompanied by adequate emergency-response plans or the regulatory oversight needed to ensure that accidents are prevented and mitigated.
This is plain to see today, and it resulted in Obama’s knee-jerk imposition of a moratorium on deepwater drilling permits and suspension of existing projects in the Gulf of Mexico.
While a regulatory overhaul of offshore drilling procedures and policies is clearly necessary, it will be insufficient to reduce the risk of spills and accidents if it is not accompanied by other demand-side measures.
For example, now is the time to begin reducing US oil demand through improved fuel-economy standards and/or progressive increases in fuel taxes.
Both may be necessary, because, while average fuel economy has made slight gains in recent years, the longer distances that people are traveling have offset any improvement.
The government also could start aggressively pushing a shift to electric vehicles.
In terms of total lifecycle costs, these vehicles are three to six times more energy-efficient than their petroleum counterparts.
People could make even simpler changes to their lifestyles by properly inflating their tires, driving more slowly on the highway – a car is most fuel efficient at about 55 miles (90 kilometers) per hour – and abandoning their SUVs.
The mantra of “opportunity found in crisis” has been uttered endlessly over the course of the Deepwater Horizon disaster. But seizing that opportunity requires moving past blame, learning from mistakes, and identifying how best to achieve a sensible, long-term national energy policy.
If Americans want a future without other Deepwater Horizon-style accidents and oil-tarred wildlife, they must reduce oil demand, in addition to ensuring that oil production is carried out responsibly and safely.
An Answer to the Russian Challenge
BERLIN – For 19 years, the West (America and Europe) has been putting off answering a critical strategic question: what role should post-Soviet Russia actually play globally and in the European order?
Should it be treated as a difficult partner or a strategic adversary?
Even when this choice became critically acute during the crisis of Russia’s short war against Georgia last summer, the West didn’t provide a conclusive answer to this question.
If you follow most East Europeans, the United Kingdom and the Bush administration, the answer is “strategic adversary.”
But most West Europeans prefer “difficult partner.”
These seemingly mutually exclusive alternatives have one thing in common: neither of them has been thought through to the end.
If you see Russia as a strategic adversary – and the restoration of Great Russian power politics under Vladimir Putin, to the detriment of the rule of law in domestic and foreign policy, does indeed speak for it – then the West should fundamentally change its agenda.
While Russia is no longer the superpower it was in the Soviet era, militarily it is still a great power, at least in Europe and Asia.
To address the numerous regional conflicts (Iran, Middle East, Afghanistan/Pakistan, Central Asia, North Korea) and global challenges (climate protection, disarmament, arms control, nuclear anti-proliferation, energy security) that have high priority on the Western agenda, cooperation with Russia is necessary.
A strategic confrontation with Moscow, i.e., a new kind of “mini-Cold War,” would undermine this agenda, or at least complicate its implementation significantly.
So the question is simply whether the threat emanating from Russia is so grave that this kind of strategic reorientation on the part of the West is required?
I believe it is not.
Putin’s claim to great-power status and his great-power policies are structurally very vulnerable.
Due to its geopolitical position and its potential, however, Russia will remain a permanent strategic factor in Europe and Asia that cannot be ignored.
To integrate the country into a strategic partnership is therefore in the West’s interest.
But this would require a Western policy based on long-term thinking and a self-confident and strong power position, because the Kremlin will perceive any sign of division and weakness as encouragement to return to Great Russian power politics.
A few months ago, the Russian government came up with a proposal to negotiate a new European order within the framework of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Russia considers the agreements from the 1990’s unjust, based as they were on its weakness at the time, and it wants to revise them.
Moscow’s main strategic objective is the weakening or even roll-back of NATO as an Ant-Russian military alliance and the re-establishment of its East European and Central Asian zones of influence.
But Putin is making a big mistake here, because all these aims are unacceptable for the West, and the Kremlin still doesn’t seem to understand that the best and most effective guarantee of NATO’s existence was, is, and will continue to be an aggressive Russian foreign policy.
In the former mother country of Marxism-Leninism, the leaders still don’t seem to understand dialectics.
After all, if Russia’s government really wanted to achieve a change in the post-Soviet status quo, it should, first and foremost, pursue a policy vis-à-vis its neighbors that reduces rather than increases fears.
But this applies similarly, if in reverse, to the West: on the one hand, the principles of a new Europe as defined by the OSCE after 1989/1990 don’t allow decisions about alliances to be subject to the veto of a large neighbor.
The same is true for free and secret elections and the inviolability of borders.
On the other hand, the missile defense systems in Poland and the Czech Republic, and the prospect of NATO accession for Georgia and Ukraine, assume confrontation where this was not at all necessary.
The West should not reject Russia’s wish for new negotiations on a European security system.
Instead, it should be viewed as an opportunity finally to answer the key question of Russia’s place within Europe.
NATO must play the central role here, because it is indispensable for the vast majority of Europeans and for America.
The possible trade-off could be that the existing principles and institutions of the post-Soviet European order, including NATO, remain unchanged and are accepted and implemented by Russia, which would get a significantly enhanced role within NATO, including the perspective of full membership.
The peripheral nature of the NATO-Russia Council was clearly not enough and did not work.
But why not think about transforming NATO into a real European security system, including Russia?
The rules of the game would be changed and a whole variety of strategic goals could be achieved – European security, neighborhood conflicts, energy security, arms reduction, anti-proliferation, etc.
Yes, such a bold step would transform NATO.
But it would transform Russia even more.
If the West approaches these discussions with Russia without illusions, with a clear understanding of its own strategic interests, and with new ideas for partnership and cooperation, the worst to be feared is failure.
Of course, this approach presupposes two things that don’t exist at the moment: a common transatlantic approach to dealing with Russia, and a European Union that acts in much greater unison and is therefore stronger.
Nonetheless, the challenge posed by Russia does not allow any further procrastination.
There is simply too much at stake.
Insecure Europe
MADRID – For the last five years, Europe has been shaken by financial and economic convulsions that have wreaked havoc on many of its citizens’ livelihoods.
The good news is that progress is finally being made in redeveloping the European Union’s economic and monetary architecture, which should help to bring about a return to growth.
But EU leaders’ focus on internal problems has caused them largely to neglect external policies, particularly in the area of security.
As 2014 begins, economic insecurity is giving way to worries about the EU’s strategic position.
There were expectations that the European Council’s December meeting would signal a return to a more outward-looking approach, especially on security matters.
Unfortunately, these hopes were quickly dashed.
Indeed, the disparate assortment of initiatives that were agreed at the meeting, though interesting, lack the needed breadth and scope, and will have to be integrated within a weak and outdated strategic framework.
The flawed nature of the current European Security Strategy – drafted in 2003, with a token revision in 2008 – reflects the circumstances surrounding its conception.
The ESS was developed in the aftermath of the Iraq war, amid heated debate over a proposed European constitution, in a hasty and reactive process hijacked by those who sought to position Europe as a counterweight – or even a rival power – to the United States.
Making matters worse, the geopolitical environment has changed fundamentally in the decade since the ESS was ratified, owing to economic rebalancing toward Asia, the upheavals in the Arab world, the revival of Russian assertiveness, and the rise of isolationist tendencies in the US.
As a result, the ESS does not capture the reality of today’s world – a fact that is obvious from its opening declaration that “Europe has never been so prosperous.”
To be sure, the ESS’s three basic tenets – development assistance, soft power, and effective multilateralism – remain important.
But Europe’s leaders must reconceive these concepts in light of today’s challenges.
In terms of development, Europe must move away from the idea that aid should be used to bolster trade linkages and acknowledge the importance of foreign investment.
In fact, net private capital flows to developing countries now outweigh official development assistance by nearly ten to one worldwide.
As the world’s second-largest source of foreign direct investment, the EU wields considerable influence, with European investors bringing credibility to projects and regions, thereby serving to attract further investment.
For example, Morocco’s Ouarzazate Solar Power Plant and its Drinking Water Efficiency Program were launched with €37 million ($50.6 million) from the EU’s Neighborhood Investment Facility; these projects subsequently gained additional funding totaling more than €600 million.
The ESS’s emphasis on soft power is also in urgent need of reassessment.
The upsurge of protest across the Arab world raised expectations among Europeans that these countries would, to some extent, emulate Western institutions, values, and norms.
But, while that did not occur, European principles certainly have not lost their allure, as recent protests in Ukraine, triggered by President Viktor Yanukovych’s decision to shun closer ties with Europe, have shown.
Nonetheless, the ESS’s soft-power vision should not be allowed to obscure the security challenges that Europe faces.
With the rise of non-traditional threats, Europeans are increasingly overlooking classical security risks like inter-state warfare, believing that they are no longer relevant – a notion that is reflected in the ESS.
But, as China’s increasingly assertive stance in the South and East China Seas starkly demonstrates, this idea is not only wrong; it can be very dangerous.
This brings us to the ESS’s third tenet: advancing “the development of a stronger international society, well-functioning international institutions, and a rule-based international order.”
In this case, the problem comes down to a lack of commitment, with the EU choosing the convenience of informal and ad hoc groupings over the challenge of reforming key institutions like the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank, which are essential for effective multilateralism.
Indeed, the EU is among the leading actors in the current “G” fad, which has culminated most recently in the G-20.
And, despite being an embodiment of international law, the EU indulges in soft-law approaches, whether at the recent COP-19 climate-change meeting in Warsaw, or by supporting the “Geneva agreement” on Iran’s nuclear program, which, it is now clear, is nothing more than two aspirational declarations linked by a press release.
In developing its new security strategy, Europe must consider America’s role as an essential component of the geopolitical environment, viewing the US not as a foil, but as a nuanced partner.
Beyond NATO, which remains important even at a low ebb, the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership offers a potent opportunity to shape a rule-based international order.
The shine may have come off the EU, but the gripping scenes from Kyiv’s Maidan Square are a powerful reminder of the enduring appeal of Europe’s core values.
What the EU needs now is an updated external strategy that capitalizes on this allure to bolster its influence, security, and prosperity, thereby halting its slide toward irrelevance.
The Messages of May 25
KYIV – Europe recently experienced two watershed elections, with very different outcomes.
Whereas Ukraine’s presidential election has been widely hailed as the end of the beginning of Ukraine’s political transition, the European Parliament election has been lamented as the beginning of the end of the idea of an ever-closer union.
The polls, both held on May 25, not only provide insight into the mindset of the respective electorates; the behavior of each electorate also offers important lessons for the other.
Ukraine’s election was shaped by an acute awareness of the risks facing the country.
Following the “Euromaidan” revolution – which brought about the demise of President Viktor Yanukovych’s government – and a four-month interim administration, this election centered on change.
Yet Ukrainians’ chosen president, Petro Poroshenko, is the very embodiment of the establishment, having served as Economics Minister under Yanukovych and Foreign Minister under his predecessor, Viktor Yushchenko, not to mention his position within the country's traditional economic elite.
This is not as surprising as it might seem.
Ukrainians were making a sober decision, voting with their heads, not their hearts.
Indeed, polls indicate that Poroshenko’s appeal lay largely in his focus on immediate internal challenges.
By contrast, his rivals, most notably Yulia Tymoshenko, emphasized a rapid shift toward NATO and the European Union.
Ukrainians also eschewed the temptations of populism and extreme nationalism.
The poor performance of the right-wing Svoboda and Right Sector candidates – which together won less than 2% of the vote – should finally quash Russian assertions of a fascistic regime in Kyiv.
Ukrainians hope that Poroshenko, with his moderate approach and willingness to negotiate, will be better equipped to resolve the country’s perilous security situation than his more ardent rivals.
While Russian President Vladimir Putin has recently toned down his rhetoric, violence persists – a clear indication of the challenge that lies ahead.
Indeed, Ukraine remains on the verge of becoming a failed state.
Security may be the most pressing issue, but it is certainly not the only one.
Poroshenko’s government must also reinvigorate and strengthen Ukraine’s economy.
Doing so requires, first and foremost, measures to halt the decline in foreign direct investment, which fell by 30% from 2012 to 2013.
Improved governance is also critical – no small challenge for a country that ranks 144th on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, alongside Iran and Nigeria.
Ukraine’s election became a focal point for reconstruction.
The outcome was driven by voters’ recognition of their country’s fundamental problems – starkly apparent in the tents that remain on Maidan Square, the loss of Crimea, and the separatist violence in Donbas – and their desire for an effective government to address those problems.
The next step in this process – a parliamentary election – should occur as soon as possible.
The European Parliament election, by contrast, was an exercise in disruption.
Support for far-right and far-left parties was based on citizens’ frustrations with Europe’s flaws, rather than on any realistic, thoughtful agenda.
Populists and Euroskeptics fed on the discontent of those who have felt neglected by EU institutions, and now believe that the benefits of the European project, such as freedom of movement, no longer outweigh the burdens, like immigration and austerity. There is growing reticence among Europeans about further integration, owing largely to fears that ever-closer union will diminish national identity.
Of course, the notion of returning to the pre-EU world is fundamentally flawed, owing to the simple fact that individual European countries cannot compete in the modern global economy.
Nonetheless, a sense of nostalgia drove many voters’ decisions. Simply put, Europeans voted from the heart.
What Europe needs is serious debate, not emotional reactions. The problem is that the European Commission and the European Parliament have consistently failed to generate a compelling narrative, leaving ordinary Europeans unconvinced of the EU’s value.
Making matters worse, national and European leaders have allowed – even encouraged – citizens to believe that integration is inevitable, lowering the stakes for European elections.
This is where the Ukrainian election can offer a critical lesson to the EU, despite the vast differences between the challenges that they face.
The European project is a complicated and ambitious endeavor, the viability of which depends on constant care and adjustment.
Unless Europeans recognize that the Union is not a given, and acknowledge the value of the prosperity and security that it provides, the recent election may come to be seen not as a wake-up call, but as a swan song for the integration project.
The European election’s outcome also has a powerful message for Ukraine: there are limits to its European prospects.
To be sure, Ukraine has a strong partner in the EU – particularly if its government responds effectively to voters’ call for improved governance.
But, whatever Ukraine achieves, it cannot overcome Europeans’ fears of further integration, much less enlargement. That is up to Europe.
In the immediate future, Ukraine and the European Union must focus on building a functioning relationship.
For Ukraine to push for more, such as by requesting membership in the EU, would be a tactical mistake.
In this sense, the lesson of the May 25 elections is the same for both Ukraine and the EU: it is time for each to put its own house in order.
Read more from "Europe's Ever-Closer Disunion"
America’s Strategic Blindness
For more than 40 years, the Cold War policy of containment of Soviet influence provided America its strategic framework.
Though US tactics were debated and shifted from administration to administration, the overarching approach remained consistent, because it was broadly supported by Republicans and Democrats alike.
Of course, an overarching national-security strategy provided no guarantee against problems or even major disasters in countries like Vietnam and Nicaragua.
Nonetheless, in hindsight, containment infused an order and organization on US foreign policy that is absent today.
After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the necessity that had been driving containment disappeared.
The US, inebriated by victory, saw in the triumph over the Soviet bloc another sign of its exceptionalism, and found itself taken in by the mirage that its Cold War success was itself a strategy.
What followed was a decade of scattershot foreign policy marked by notable cases of inaction, together with individual initiatives taken largely without reference to a broader doctrine.
Unchallenged in the world’s unipolar moment, the US had the luxury of not knowing its strategic goals.
Shocked by the attacks of September 11, the US forced a new framework onto its still-unquestioned belief in the inexorable movement of history toward freedom.
Unfortunately, what emerged was a deeply flawed approach, not least because in declaring a “war on terror,” America positioned itself against a tactic, not an entity or an ideology.
Under Obama, the US has begun to depart from this approach.
The problem is that it remains a departure without any meaningful destination.
As in the 1990’s, the US has no organizing imperative, and the result is the same: a combination of inactivity and incoherent initiatives.
And, at a time of domestic political polarization, the lack of a global strategy denies a potential rallying point around which Democrats and Republicans can unite.
Two decades ago, geopolitical conditions limited blowback from America’s foreign-policy vacuum.
Today, the US remains the world’s essential power, but it is no longer the exclusive power.
It cannot solve problems that directly affect it by acting on its own, though its leadership remains indispensable.
That is all the more true given that the nature of such problems has also changed.
America, like the rest of us, is vulnerable to climate change, pandemics, and terrorism – challenges that require coordinated global solutions.
For the US, however, the utility of multilateralism is purely situational.
Above all, multilateralism is never preferable to a “good” bilateral solution – a view that has reinforced behavior that undermines, rather than strengthens, the capacity for effective international action.
Indeed, always ready to negotiate treaties but rarely prepared to sign – and even less likely to ratify – them, the US remains absent from such key global agreements as the Kyoto Protocol, the Mine Ban Treaty, and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Its inspired creativity and support in building formal institutions like the United Nations and World Bank has given way to a predilection for weak, informal, and ad hoc groupings, such as the various G-somethings and “coalitions of the willing.”
Establishing effective multilateralism requires an emphasis on rules and institutions that facilitate coordination.
The recent decision by the US to sign the Arms Trade Treaty could be a good start – if only Congress could marshal the bipartisan support needed to ratify it.
But scattered moves in the right direction will not suffice.
What is really needed is a change in vision and mentality – a shift from viewing multilateralism as a tactic to embracing it as a strategic imperative.
The current spying scandal is the product of a rudderless US foreign policy focused on narrowly drawn tactical objectives that exist outside the conceptual funnel of a comprehensive vision.
The result in this case has been damage to the transatlantic relationship, with some in Europe even calling for a halt to the talks on the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
Suspending the trade talks would be folly, not just in terms of the regional impact, but also because the TTIP should be an exercise in rule-making that echoes globally.
The current diplomatic crisis, too, is an opportunity to ensure that transatlantic discussions about privacy and surveillance reverberate in a multilateral setting; seizing it would represent a small but significant contribution to the strategic vision that has been sorely lacking for the last quarter-century.
Europe’s Juncker Revolution
MADRID – Before his appointment as EU Commission President, Jean-Claude Juncker was pilloried as an old-school federalist who would do little to alter the status quo.
But the new structure that he has imposed on the Commission implies a radical overhaul of how things are done in Brussels.
Up to now, a focus on who has been appointed to what post – in particular, the appointment of the relatively inexperienced Federica Mogherini as EU High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy – has overshadowed the Commission’s structural transformation.
But individual commissioners are far less important than the trends that have caused the Commission to shift its priorities from enlargement and the internal market toward energy and monetary union.
One such trend is Europeans’ growing skepticism toward integration, exemplified in May’s European Parliament election.
With newer European Union members backsliding – Romania on the rule of law, Bulgaria in corruption, and Hungary on democratic norms under Viktor Orbán’s government – now is the time, or so it seems, to focus on existing members.
Reinforcing this shift is Turkey’s drift toward authoritarianism, which is undermining the viability of its candidacy for EU membership.
As for Ukraine, recent gestures of solidarity, such as the signing of an association agreement, are unlikely to develop into anything substantial in the foreseeable future.
In downgrading EU enlargement as a formal policy priority, the Commission is preparing itself to take other important steps.
The upheaval among Europe’s southern and eastern neighbors may well bring about a long-overdue revamping of the EU’s Neighborhood Policy.
And, in pursuit of other avenues for expanding the EU’s reach, European leaders might reinvigorate the European Economic Area.
Another policy area that has lost its centrality is the internal market – a notable decision, given that it has been the centerpiece of the European project since the Commission was created in 1958.
The internal market’s four pillars – the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people – have underpinned broader EU measures, in areas like foreign policy and justice and home affairs, and will now be subsumed under new policy labels, from economy and financial affairs to the digital agenda.
This move away from the internal market can be explained partly by member governments’ aversion to more EU-level legislation.
Though complaints about the “bloated” acquis communitaire (the body of EU law) are often unfounded, the EU legislative process is not without its shortcomings, as recent attempts at harmonization clearly demonstrate.
For example, for the EU-wide statutory audit that was completed in April, the European Parliament agreed to a revised directive and new regulation that should have been directly applicable in all 28 member countries.
But, in more than 20 cases, member states were given discretion over its implementation and interpretation.
The new Commission will attempt to change this by focusing on rule implementation and oversight, rather than creation.
This effort will be coordinated by representatives in seven newly established vice-presidential positions, and spearheaded by the first vice president to have a portfolio focused on “better regulation.”
To be sure, easing regulatory burdens is a longstanding leitmotif of the EU.
Though the last two Commissions, led by José Manuel Barroso, espoused a commitment to rationalizing, clarifying, and compiling rules, little concrete action has been taken.
Juncker’s changes, however, may portend genuine progress on this front, as well as toward monetary and energy union.
Indeed, the new Commission’s structure suggests that Juncker hopes to enhance its role in guiding the European Monetary Union and related policies, control over which largely rested with the European Council and EU member governments (especially Germany) during the crisis.
Similarly, a new vice president has been introduced for energy, which has been reframed as “energy union.”
The lack of progress on this front during the last two Commissions was rooted mainly in Germany’s Russian modernization project, which has shaped its approach to energy security.
For its part, France has been reluctant to build an interconnected European grid, owing to its heavy reliance on nuclear energy.
Given Russian behavior in Ukraine, however, EU leaders have been rethinking their approach.
In this context, the Commission’s new structure – not to mention the fact that the new European Council president, former Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk, has long sought an energy union – may well push the policy forward.
Though it is impossible to understand fully the implications of the Commission’s new structure at this early stage, some of its institutional ramifications are already emerging.
Beyond inciting a kind of tug-of-war with the European Council, the Commission’s shift away from lawmaking will alter the European Parliament’s role, which it has forged over the last five years on the back of the Commission’s active legislative agenda.
With little authority to initiate legislation, the Parliament, too, will have no choice but to pivot toward oversight.
Precisely how all of this all plays out in the coming months and years will determine whether the European project progresses or stagnates.
Perhaps observers should be paying a little less attention to the “who” and a bit more to the “what.”
Africa Beyond Ebola
MADRID – Among this summer’s grave global worries, the spread of the Ebola virus has monopolized the discussion of Sub-Saharan Africa and reinvigorated hoary notions of disorder and despair – at a time when a new image of a dynamic Africa was emerging.
In fact, there is still strong reason for optimism about the region’s prospects.
The Ebola outbreak overshadowed three key events affecting the region.
On July 1, a major organizational restructuring at the World Bank Group was implemented.
Two weeks later, the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced the establishment of the New Development Bank.
And, in early August, African government and business leaders gathered in Washington, DC, for a summit that could portend transformative private investment in Africa.
Such investment is essential in a world in which net private capital flows to developing countries outstrip official development assistance by a margin of ten to one.
If this is to be a turning point for Africa, rather than another false dawn, this summer must be the start of a prolonged effort to stimulate private-sector engagement.
The reorganization of the World Bank is a central part of a larger effort under its president, Jim Yong Kim, to reposition the Bank as a facilitator vis-a-vis the private sector, rather than a primary provider.
From 2009 to 2013, new investment commitments by the International Finance Corporation, the World Bank’s private-sector lending arm, have risen 73%.
Meanwhile, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, the Bank’s provider of political risk insurance covering investments in developing countries, has moved to expand its activities, both by broadening the types of projects that it supports and widening existing definitions to allow greater coverage.
July’s restructuring occurs within the context of these broader moves.
In reorganizing the World Bank Group’s central component, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Kim has adopted a management-consulting model that unites expertise with regional coverage.
Seeking to eliminate the bureaucratic “silos” that have isolated regional experts from one another, 14 global practice groups in areas such as energy, water, and education have been established to bring to bear the full force of the World Bank’s considerable knowledge on projects and partnerships.
Just as the World Bank was repositioning itself, the BRICS agreed to establish their own bank.
There are significant outstanding issues about how the New Development Bank will operate, but early indications suggest that infrastructure will be central to its activities, with an emphasis on Africa.
The World Bank estimates that insufficient infrastructure reduces productivity in Africa by approximately 40%.
The entrance of a new player with initial authorized capital of $100 billion – along with the United States’ Power Africa program, which has garnered $26 billion in commitments since its launch last year, and the World Bank’s new Global Infrastructure Facility – promises to help ease infrastructure financing significantly.
But, as of now, the New Development Bank is little more than a statement of political solidarity, and whether it comes into existence remains to be seen.
Even if it does begin to function, the BRICS lack what gives development banks, and the World Bank in particular, legitimacy and weight: a staff composed mostly of dedicated experts who are among the world’s best.
Finally, the high profile of the US-Africa Leaders Summit, with more than 40 heads of state in attendance, as well as President Barack Obama’s direct involvement, generated buzz about Africa.
US businesses and investors certainly gained more awareness about Africa’s potential and a deeper understanding of the variety of investment climates throughout the continent.
But, though the summit may be called a success, its long-term implications are unclear, particularly given the uncertainty about what will follow.
At the moment, there does not seem to be a plan to institutionalize the summit.
Moreover, the participation of so many heads of state overshadowed that of African business leaders.
The practical connections that US companies will need when deciding whether to invest could have been cultivated on the summit’s margins, or in its aftermath, but were not.
Laying a foundation for future engagement requires ongoing commitment and effort that goes beyond mere publicity.
The same could be said about the World Bank.
There is much work to be done in integrating the new organizational model with existing Bank structures and practice areas.
Even if this transition occurs seamlessly, the Bank faces a serious internal struggle against entrenched bureaucratic interests and a pervasive institutional mindset that is overly risk-averse and fixates on processes rather than outcomes.
In recent years, Africa, once a land of pity, has emerged as a land of opportunity.
If it is to become a land of performance, the goal must be to facilitate investment, both domestic and foreign.
That will demand effort and commitment; given that a stable international order increasingly depends on a prosperous and growing Africa, it is a goal that the world cannot afford to miss.
Europe’s Iranian Imperative
MADRID – Last month, with the world’s attention fixed on the crisis in Crimea and the search for Malaysian Airlines Flight 370, the latest round of negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 (the United States, China, France, Russia, and the United Kingdom, plus Germany) passed quietly in Vienna.
Even with discussions set to continue next week, the talks’ outcome remains far from certain – and world leaders cannot afford to become distracted.
This is especially true for Europe, whose unified approach to Iran has been invaluable up to this point.
Indeed, it was the bite of European sanctions that ultimately brought Iran to the negotiating table, and the force of unified European diplomacy facilitated the “joint plan of action,” which set out the terms for reaching a comprehensive long-term agreement within six months.
But now, at the plan’s halfway point, there has been little concrete progress, with last month’s negotiations producing no headway on two key issues being discussed: the acceptable level for uranium enrichment in Iran and the future of the heavy-water reactor at Arak.
The sharp contrast between this lack of achievement and Iran’s recent declarations about reaching a final deal by July raises important questions about Iran’s strategy and goals – questions that negotiators must consider carefully when determining the best approach.
The key to success is the background against which the process plays out.
Iran is a land of contrasts.
On a recent visit organized by the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR), the coexistence of entrenched tradition and rapid transformation was starkly apparent.
Central Tehran – ebullient with young people and high-heeled women donning testimonial headscarves and mid-thigh jackets over pants – embodies a thirst for openness.
More than 60% of Iranians were born after the 1979 Islamic Revolution, and more than 40% were born after the Iran-Iraq War of the 1980’s.
For them, the revolution is a part of history, not the main source of their personal values.
The toll taken by years of tough economic sanctions is also apparent.
Despite Iranian officials’ best efforts to downplay the sanctions’ impact, it is difficult to spin inflation in excess of 30% and projected GDP growth of just 1% this year.
The combination of a young population and a crumbling economy is a combustible mix, one that amounts to an existential threat to the regime – and the regime knows it.
In this sense, the imperative to reach a prosperity-enhancing agreement with the international community is greater than ever for Iran’s leadership.
Furthermore, Iran’s negotiating style, like its capital city, can be both fatiguing and confusing.
Just moments after elaborating at length on the Koran’s prohibition of nuclear weapons, an interlocutor would declare that the underground Fordow nuclear facility’s impregnability to airstrikes must be central to any deal.
The reality is that Iran does not envisage giving up its nuclear breakout capacity.
The negotiations are aimed not at eradication, but at lengthening lead-time – specifically, limiting uranium-enrichment levels to 3.5%, establishing a strong inspections regime, and reaching an agreement on the Arak nuclear facility.
But even this may not happen.
After all, Iranian officials have thus far not demonstrated their commitment to accepting stringent and verifiable checks.
Moreover, Iran has managed to separate the nuclear negotiations from broader, related issues like its ballistic-missile program, its support for groups like Hezbollah, and its domestic human-rights record.
With the US loath to introduce potential spoilers into the mix, there is no chance that any of these issues will be up for discussion.
In this context, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton’s meeting with dissidents during her most recent trip to Tehran was merely a symbolic gesture.
This leaves Iran the opening it needs to place a strategic bet that the Syrian conflict will generate increasing friction between the West and Iran’s regional archrival, Saudi Arabia.
For Iran, a staunch supporter of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, a weaker US-Saudi relationship is key to shifting the regional balance of power – especially if it is accompanied by the easing of Western economic sanctions.
To some degree, this hope is reinforced by Iran’s perception of US President Barack Obama as a motivated partner in the nuclear talks.
After all, a long-term agreement would be both a singular foreign-policy achievement for Obama and a boon to his efforts to disentangle the US from the Middle East.
But Iran also recognizes that the clock is ticking.
Obama’s presidency is coming to an end, the Republicans are poised to regain control of the Senate in November’s mid-term election, and Democrats are increasingly reticent to be viewed as “soft on Iran.”
As a result, the US Congress appears to be growing more hostile toward a deal; indeed, the longer it takes to conclude a final agreement, the more likely Congress is to scupper it.
In this context, Europe has a key role to play.
While Europe’s reputation for foreign-policy “softness” continues to shape Iranian perceptions, the EU’s role in compelling Iran to negotiate underpins the current talks.
Likewise, it was France’s insistence on more stringent controls that initially blocked the agreement in Geneva last November.
A decade ago, Europe disappointed Iran by withdrawing from negotiations, under pressure from the US – a move that some have suggested aided former Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s rise to power.
Today, Europe will be critical to driving progress, particularly in the event that the US Congress torpedoes a sensible agreement.
Indeed, on Iran, Europe’s unified approach has enabled it to have a greater impact than on any other significant foreign-policy issue.
This should be regarded as a model for the future and a lesson for the present.
By preserving its unity of purpose and maintaining the pressure and negotiating momentum that it has generated, Europe can demonstrate to Iran, the US, and itself that it has what it takes to be a major global actor.
Forsaken Syria
MADRID – In this year of ubiquitous commemorations, the centennial of Jan Karski’s birth has been largely overlooked.
And yet Karski’s legacy is more important than ever – nowhere more so than in Syria.
As the Geneva II peace process slogs along – leaving cadavers and atrocities to pile up – Karski’s dedication to bringing the plight of Poland’s Jews to the world’s attention during World War II, despite the inertia of governments and publics, embodies exactly what Syria desperately needs.
In 1942, Karski, a Polish-born diplomat, traveled to the United Kingdom to report on what came to be called the Holocaust.
The next year, he embarked on a mission to the United States to brief President Franklin D. Roosevelt and other dignitaries on the horrors that he had witnessed.
In both cases, he was met with skepticism and apathy.
Indeed, it was only toward the end of the war that action was taken to stop the slaughter.
Although the Holocaust is a category of persecution sui generis, one cannot avoid thinking of Karski in light of the international community’s approach to Syria today.
Expectations for the Geneva talks are so low that trivial matters – such as the fact that President Bashar al-Assad’s negotiators and the opposition are sitting together in the same room (though not at the same table) – are being hailed as successes.
Even the agreement to allow women and children to leave blockaded areas of the city of Homs – an anti-Assad stronghold – fell far short of international mediators’ vision (and even this achievement seems to be in doubt).
Instead of allowing a United Nations aid convoy to bring humanitarian aid to the area, the government agreed to release women and children on an as-yet-uncertain timeline, while men can leave only after their names had been cleared, raising fears of arrest.
Meanwhile, amid plodding deliberations of incremental steps that are clearly inadequate, Syrians are being displaced, wounded, tortured, and killed in droves.
By any measure, the level of suffering in Syria is shocking.
Although figures do not convey the cruelty by all sides, it has become de rigueur to cite the numbers: more than 100,000 dead, 2.3 million refugees, and four million people internally displaced.
But a year ago, the figures were already dire: 60,000 dead, 700,000 international refugees, and two million internally displaced.
If there were a threshold of misery that would cause the world to say, “Enough is enough,” it surely would have been crossed by now.
The ugly truth is that the world’s response to this crisis has been shaped by geopolitical interests, not the need to put an end to appalling human suffering.
Indeed, it is no secret that the conflict serves as a proxy for larger struggles – between Saudi Arabia and Iran, Saudi Arabia and Qatar, the US and Iran, Russia and the US, Shia and Sunni Muslims, and moderates and extremists – and that resolving it will require significant effort on all of these fronts.
From an American perspective, Syria is not strategically critical.
President Barack Obama’s administration has maintained an intensely inward-looking focus, reinforced by a public wary of foreign engagements.
Nothing short of a drastic change in the conflict’s nature that threatened America’s core interests would lead to direct US involvement.
Guilt, after all, is a poor motivator for international action.
Even the UK and France – the only two countries that were not shy about threatening military action against Assad’s regime – got cold feet when confronted with the possibility of going it alone.
Instead, the world is responding to graphic images of unspeakable brutality – torture by the regime or executions carried out by the opposition – with sterile shows of outrage.
The stream of statements, half-measures, and clumsy initiatives has done little to improve the situation – and, in some instances, has made things worse.
Consider Obama’s call, backed by no action, for Assad to “step aside,” and his repeated promises, dating to early 2012, to provide non-lethal aid to the Syrian opposition – promises that were finally fulfilled late last year, and then only temporarily.
This gap between rhetoric and action left a vacuum; Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and private donors subsequently filled it by channeling support to extremist elements of the opposition, strengthening their hand at the expense of those being called moderates.
But the most infamous example of this policy paralysis was Obama’s 2012 declaration that the use of chemical weapons was the “red line” beyond which the US would be forced to intervene.
His ultimate failure to follow through on his proclamation emboldened and, in a way, re-legitimized Assad.
It remains to be seen whether Geneva II will follow this pattern.
The price of the talks has already been high, with all sides having ramped up violence to strengthen their respective positions ahead of the negotiations.
This is to say nothing of the fiasco surrounding the withdrawn invitation to Iran, whose buy-in will be essential for any resolution.
In any case, the incremental nature of the talks belies the situation’s urgency.
Amid the current focus on regime change, a transitional government, and negotiating delegations, there is a real danger that the desperate humanitarian situation will be overlooked.
Here, citizens have a critical role to play.
But, like their leaders, publics everywhere have been reticent to act.
Indeed, opinion polls show that, despite near-universal awareness of the situation in Syria, there is very little public support for intervention.
But handwringing will not help; we – individuals – must accept real responsibility for ending the tragedy and press our leaders to act.
It has been more than 70 years since Karski presented his report to the world.
In that time, we have created the United Nations, adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and discussed endlessly governments’ “responsibility to protect” their citizens.
Yet, watching the Syrian tragedy develop, one might conclude that nothing has changed. How many times must we say, “Never again”?
A Nation of Vidiots
NEW YORK – The past half-century has been the age of electronic mass media.
Television has reshaped society in every corner of the world.
Now an explosion of new media devices is joining the TV set: DVDs, computers, game boxes, smart phones, and more.