At the same time, China’s labor-intensive production will increasingly move to countries with lower labor costs – including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, and neighboring Vietnam (where Chinese firms have already established about 1,000 affiliates), as well as various African countries.
This process has already begun, and has been supported since the beginning of the last decade by the government’s “Going Global” policy, through which it encourages outward FDI from China.
The data bear this out: FDI outflows more than doubled in 2008, to $52 billion, from $23 billion in 2007, and rose even further in 2009 (when world FDI flows collapsed by about 50%, owing to the Western financial and economic crisis), before reaching $68 billion in 2010.&nbsp; Not counting Hong Kong, this made China the world’s fifth largest outward investor that year.
This development creates new opportunities for other developing countries to reap the trade benefits of inserting themselves into the international division of labor.
These countries’ investment-promotion agencies – indeed, those of all countries, including developed ones – should increasingly target firms in China to lure them to their shores.
In so doing, they should aim not only for big state-owned companies, but also for the rising number of vibrant, private small and medium-size enterprises in China that can be found in all sectors of the economy.
But an important caveat is in order: China has a vast interior that is far less developed than the coastal provinces.
The government is making special efforts to develop these areas in the framework of its “Great Western Development Strategy,” including by building modern infrastructure, promoting high-quality education, supporting science and technology (all key determinants of the location of production), and encouraging investment there.
As a result, firms based in the coastal provinces that have to move their production (and see no need to diversify away from China) can choose to relocate to China’s interior, rather than going abroad.
The pattern is clear: this sort of transition away from labor-intensive manufacturing happened before in today’s developed countries, when firms headquartered in Europe, Japan, and the United States moved production to developing countries.
In Asia, Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan were (and have been) among the beneficiaries.
When costs for labor-intensive goods and services became too high in these countries, production was shifted elsewhere.
This relocation of manufacturing has since been accompanied by the off-shoring of services whose information-intensive components have become tradable.
China itself has benefited from today’s open international trade and investment regime, which allows firms to locate production where it is most beneficial for their international competitiveness – and is now beginning to shed labor-intensive industries itself.
Governments need policies to adapt to this global shift in production.
They should help their countries’ firms to adapt to the departure of some producers by establishing training programs, stimulating innovation, and maintaining or creating a competitive environment that encourages “creative destruction” while providing for a social safety net.
Likewise, governments that attract the production that was shed elsewhere need to have policies in place that enable them to benefit as much as possible from this global shift, thereby furthering their own economic development.
China’s Incomplete Contracts
HONG KONG – This year’s Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences went to Harvard’s Oliver Hart and MIT’s Bengt Holmström for their pioneering work on the economics of property rights and contracts.
At a time when China is attempting the difficult transition from a system of incomplete contracts to a strong property-rights regime, the real-world importance of these contributions could not be clearer.
No contract can specify every eventuality.
So contracts must, instead, spell out the allocation of “control” rights – who can make decisions in which circumstances.
For a centrally planned economy attempting to allocate more authority to the market, such contracts are invaluable – at least at first.
This has not been lost on Chinese reformers.
From the mid-1980s to the early 1990s, they introduced both the “rural household responsibility system” and the “enterprise contract responsibility system” for state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
Those systems essentially delegated more decision-making rights, as well as certain profits, to farmers and workers, so that they had a stronger incentive to work more efficiently within state-owned communes and firms.
A similar approach was adopted in China’s 1994 fiscal reform to handle tax-sharing between the central and local governments, with control rights relating to land and local economic development delegated to local officials, particularly at the municipal and county levels.
This helped to advance development, though it also created space for local officials to take advantage of fringe benefits – a practice that later morphed into outright corruption.
More recently, the incomplete contract approach has also been used in the area of shadow banking.
Regulators allowed innovations in incomplete contract-based financial intermediations, such as trust companies and Internet-based platforms, while maintaining tight control over the formal banking sector.
By defining partial rights to both decision-making and benefits, China’s leaders gave stakeholders incentives to compete efficiently with their peers, without giving up full authority.
In that sense, these incomplete contracts laid the foundation for market-oriented competition in China, before it was possible – owing to institutional and ideological barriers – to achieve clearly defined private property rights.
But while the incomplete-contract approach was necessary during the transition to a market economy, it is not a long-term solution.
More clearly defined and securely protected property rights, underpinned by an effective legal and judicial framework, are still needed.
In fact, the loopholes in the incomplete contracts are undermining progress.
One of the lingering issues of the rural household responsibility system, for example, was unclear property rights relating to farm land, which is still legally owned collectively by local farmers, even though land-use rights were contracted to the individual households for 30 years.
Without privatization, the farmers could not sell their land at market value for urban development, creating space for abuse and corruption, as well as social instability, particularly because urban and rural land values widened substantially during China’s high-growth period.
Likewise, the enterprise contract system failed to move the SOEs to sustained profitability.
Unlike farmers, who did not borrow at all, SOEs borrowed heavily from state-owned banks.
When they generated profits, the proceeds were shared with managers and employees.
But when they generated losses – for example, in the 1990s – the banks were left with huge amounts of non-performing loans.
China’s government under Premier Zhu Rongji attempted to resolve the debt problem by putting the SOEs’ bad loans into four state-owned asset-management companies, and most of the small and medium-size loss-making SOEs were privatized.
The remaining large state-owned banks and enterprises then became profitable, thanks largely to their monopolistic positions, which allowed them to be listed on the Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Shenzhen stock exchanges. In the ensuing years, they made critical contributions to China’s massive public infrastructure.
But the SOEs have also been the source of serious problems.
They use both financial and human capital far less efficiently than their private-sector counterparts, and they have become key sources of both corruption and distortions in energy and natural-resource prices.
Moreover, their stock-market dominance has hindered the healthy development of China’s capital market; they not only crowd out scarce resources for equity capital, but also complicate the normal operation of the market for mergers and acquisitions.
Nowadays, it is very difficult to undertake market-oriented changes in corporate ownership and control for the listed SOEs.
Yet such changes are critical to improve governance and competitiveness, especially in the service, knowledge, and innovation-driven sectors that will underpin future economic growth.
To be sure, President Xi Jinping has taken some steps to rein in the state sector. Since 2012, his government has engaged in a massive anti-corruption drive, aimed at controlling the inefficiencies and abuses that have arisen from a lack of appropriate checks on delegated authority.
But it has not been enough to root out corruption fully, and problems with pollution, overcapacity, and debt remain, which can be addressed only through a major supply-side structural-reform program.
In short, China’s incomplete contracts need to be completed.
The key is judicial reform and the development of an orderly and institutionalized process for resolving property-rights and contractual disputes.
Stronger bankruptcy laws, for example, would enable Chinese banks and state authorities to enforce credit discipline, pushing weak or failed borrowers out of the system.
China’s continued progress toward high-income status requires it to develop a strong and comprehensive property-rights system based on more complete contracts.
Its leaders should look to the work of Hart and Holmström for guidance.
China’s Incomplete Growth Strategy
BEIJING – China’s economic growth has been slowing for six years – far longer than expected.
Eager to stem the slide, Chinese government officials and economists have desperately sought a clear explanation pointing toward an effective policy response.
And, last November, they officially placed the blame on long-term supply-side shortcomings, which they pledged to address with far-reaching structural reforms.
But, although Chinese officials should be applauded for their commitment to implementing painful – and badly needed – structural reforms, the supply-side focus largely ignores the present.
China faces two separate challenges: the long-term issue of a declining potential growth rate and the immediate problem of below-potential actual growth.
Among the long-term factors undermining potential growth are diminishing returns to scale, a widening income gap, and a narrowing scope for technological catch-up through imitation.
Moreover, even as the country’s demographic dividend dissolves, its carrying capacity (the size of the population the environment can sustain) is being exhausted – a situation that high levels of pollution are certainly not helping.
Finally, and most important, the country is suffering from inadequate progress on market-orientated reform.
While some of these factors are irreversible, others can be addressed effectively.
And, indeed, the government’s supply-side reform strategy will go a long way toward doing just that, ultimately stabilizing and even raising China’s growth potential.
But, contrary to popular belief, they will not boost China’s actual growth rate today.
Why are so many economists convinced that a long-term reform strategy is all China needs?
One reason is the widely held notion that today’s overcapacity reflects supply-side problems, not insufficient demand.
According to this view, China should implement policies like tax cuts to encourage companies to produce products for which there is genuine demand.
That way, the government would not inadvertently sustain “zombie enterprises” that cannot survive without bank loans and support from local governments.
But only some of China’s overcapacity can be attributed to bad investment decisions. A large share has emerged because of a lack of effective demand.
And that is, at least partly, a result of the government’s effort to moderate real-estate investment, which has caused the sector’s annual growth to tank, plunging from 38% in 2010 to 1% at the end of 2015.
With real-estate investment still accounting for more than 14% of GDP last year, plummeting growth in the sector has put considerable downward pressure on the economy as a whole, helping to push China into a debt-deflation spiral.
As overcapacity drives down the producer price index – which has now been falling for 51 consecutive months – real debt rises.
This is undermining corporate profitability, spurring companies to deleverage and reduce investment, and fueling further declines in PPI.
The enduring importance of real-estate investment to China’s economic growth is reflected in trends from the first quarter of this year.
Annual GDP growth of 6.7%, despite being the slowest rate for any quarter in seven years, exceeded market expectations.
And it was driven partly by an unforeseen increase in real-estate investment growth, to 6%.
This is not to say that what China needs is more real-estate investment.
According to the National Bureau of Statistics, China had 718 million square meters of unsold commercial and residential floor space at the end of 2015; when space under construction is factored in, inventory expands to more than five billion square meters.
With an average of only 1.2 billion square meters of housing being sold each year, the best way to reduce this supply glut is clear: limit future construction.
One of the most important reasons for the recent investment surge was abundant liquidity driving speculative demand – and that is hardly sustainable.
But not all investment is created equal.
Infrastructure investment, in particular, may well be the key to tackling China’s economic woes.
After all, such investment, which grew at 19.6% in the first quarter of 2016, has already proved to be a critical driver of economic growth – and, unlike real-estate investment, it has not worsened China’s resource allocation or set the stage for major imbalances.
When there is slack in the economy, the only way to escape the debt-deflation trap is to grow strongly.
Given that China is saddled with large local-government and corporate debts, but also enjoys large domestic savings and a strong fiscal position, this message could not be more pertinent.
In an ideal world, domestic consumption would serve as the main engine of growth; under current circumstances, infrastructure investment is the most reliable option.
In the short term, when overcapacity and deflation are the main obstacles, infrastructure investment boosts growth through the economy’s demand side.
In the long run, it operates through the supply side to boost productivity and thus raise growth potential.
China can fund such investment with fiscal deficits, given strong demand for government bonds.
And, with China’s major banks still state-owned, and capital controls still in place, the risk of an imminent financial crisis is very low.
Of course, China’s government must uphold its commitment to implement structural reforms.
But infrastructure investment is also badly needed, not just to prevent the economy from sliding further, but also to enable China to generate the sustained long-term growth that it requires to achieve developed-country status.
Revolusi Energi Terbarukan
SYDNEY – Di Amerika Serikat dan Eropa, keuntungan dari energi terbarukan umumnya dipandang sebagai manfaat bagi lingkungan hidup.
Energi yang dihasilkan dari angin dan matahari dapat menyeimbangkan kebutuhan dari pembakaran bahan bakar fosil, sehingga membantu mengendalikan perubahan iklim.
Akan tetapi di Tiongkok dan India, energi terbarukan dipandang dari sudut yang sangat berbeda.
Transisi yang relatif cepat untuk menghindari penggunaan bahan bakar fosil di kedua negara tidak didorong oleh kekhawatiran akan perubahan iklim, tapi justru lebih dari keuntungan ekonomi yang diyakini akan dihasilkan dari sumber-sumber energi terbarukan.
Memang benar, meskipun keuntungan ekonomis yang dihasilkan energi terbarukan juga menjadi daya tarik bagi negara-negara maju seperti Jerman dan Jepang (keduanya secara cepat beralih dari bahan bakar fosil), manfaat bagi raksasa industri yang berkembang (emerging industrial giants) sangat besar.
Bagi India dan Tiongkok, trajektori ekonomi berdasarkan bahan bakar fosil bisa mengakibatkan malapetaka, ketika upaya-upaya untuk menghasilkan energi yang memadai bagi jumlah penduduk yang sedemikian besar dapat memperburuk ketegangan geopolitik.
Selain dari meningkatnya keamanan energi, perekonomian yang rendah karbon dapat menguatkan produksi domestik dan meningkatkan kualitas lingkungan hidup setempat, misalnya dengan mengurangi asap di perkotaan.
Benar bahwa bahan bakar fosil telah menyumbangkan banyak keuntungan bagi dunia Barat dalam industrialisasi selama 200 tahun terakhir.
Transisi menuju ekonomi berdasarkan karbon (carbon-based economy) akan membebaskan perekonomian dari keterbatasan-keterbatasan sumber daya berdasarkan teori Malthus yang ada sejak lama.
Bagi beberapa negara yang mewakili sebagian kecil populasi dunia, pembakaran bahan bakar fosil memungkinkan terjadinya ledakan pertumbuhan, diikuti dengan perbaikan besar-besaran dari segi produktivitas, pendapatan, kesejahteraan, dan standar kehidupan.
Hampir selama 20 tahun terakhir, Tiongkok dan India memimpin perubahan dalam menyerukan manfaat bahan bakar fosil ke seluruh dunia.
Namun akhir-akhir ini, kedua negara mulai memperlunak pendekatannya.
Ketika penggunaan bahan bakar fosil mereka melebihi batas kemampuan lingkungan hidup dan menantang geopolitik, mereka menempatkan dirinya di barisan terdepan dalam transisi global yang dalam beberapa dekade ke depan dapat menghilangkan penggunaan bahan bakar fosil secara keseluruhan.
Alasan ekonomi yang diutarakan untuk melawan penggunaan sumber-sumber energi terbarukan – energi terbarukan membutuhkan biaya besar, bersifat intermiten, atau tidak cukup terpusat – dapat dengan mudah disanggah.
Meskipun lawan dari energi terbarukan ini adalah satu kelompok, mereka terdorong oleh keinginan untuk mempertahankan status quo yakni bahan bakar fosil dan tenaga nuklir, bukan oleh kekhawatiran bahwa turbin angin dan ladang tenaga surya (solar farm) akan merusak lanskap.
Dalam kondisi apapun, mereka yang ingin menghambat perluasan energi terbarukan kemungkinan besar akan gagal melawan ekonomi sederhana.
Revolusi energi terbarukan tidak digerakkan oleh pajak emisi karbon atau subsidi energi bersih, namun ini merupakan dampak dari pengurangan biaya produksi yang segera akan membuat produksi listrik dari tenaga air, angin, dan surya lebih murah (cost-effective) dibandingkan membakar batubara.
Setiap negara bisa menguatkan keamanan energinya dengan berinvestasi pada kapasitas industrial yang diperlukan untuk membuat turbin angin, sel surya/fotovoltaik, dan sumber-sumber energi terbarukan lainnya semaksimal mungkin.
Ketika Tiongkok dan India mengerahkan economic weight mereka ke dalam revolusi energi terbarukan, keduanya memicu reaksi berantai global yang dikenal dengan “circular and cumulative causation.”
Tidak seperti pertambangan, pengeboran, atau ekstraksi, produsen memperoleh keuntungan dari kurva pembelajaran (learning curves) yang menjadikan produksi semakin efisien dan rendah biaya.
Investasi pada energi terbarukan akan menurunkan biaya produksi, sehingga memperluas pasar bagi pengunaan energi terbarukan dan menciptakan daya tarik lebih untuk investasi lebih besar.
Pada tahun 2009 hingga 2014, mekanisme ini telah menurunkan biaya energi surya fotovoltaik sebesar 80% dan biaya tenaga angin berbasis tanah sebesar 60%,  berdasarkan studi yang dilakukan oleh Lazard’s Power, Energy &amp; Infrastructure Group.
Dampak dari begitu cepatnya pemanfaatan energi terbarukan bisa memiliki konsekuensi yang besar seperti yang diakibatkan oleh Revolusi Industri.
Pada abad kedelapan belas, perekonomian Eropa dan Amerika Serikat memulai transisi menuju sistem energi berbasis bahan bakar fosil tanpa sepenuhnya memahami kondisi yang sedang terjadi.
Kali ini, kita dapat melihat banyak hal sedang berubah dan mempersiapkan diri menghadapi hasilnya.
Untuk saat ini, prospeknya terlihat menjanjikan.
Upaya untuk mengurangi emisi karbon dioksida mungkin tidak menjadi pendorong utama dari revolusi energi terbarukan; tapi sangat mungkin bahwa tanpa adanya revolusi, upaya-upaya untuk mengurangi dampak perubahan iklim tidak akan pernah berhasil.
Jika kita mampu menghindari bahaya terburuk akibat pemanasan di bumi, barangkali kita perlu berterima kasih kepada India dan Tiongkok.
A Good Economy for China
NEW YORK – Decades of plodding growth together with the 2008 financial crisis have prompted a seismic shift in economic thinking in much of the world.
There is talk of moving resources from investment to consumption, from heavy industry to “services,” and from private sector to public sector.
But what strikes me is that these arguments focus only on improving the mix of outputs within an economy, with no attention paid to labor.
This is obvious in the case of China, now the world’s biggest economy by some measures.
No doubt, China must reject further investment in hulking steel mills and empty apartment buildings.
At the same time, however, it must focus on workers and elevating the experience of their work, which economists from Adam Smith to Karl Marx and Alfred Marshall placed at the center of their concerns.
Not everyone agrees.
When it comes to the experience of work, many – especially in continental Europe – believe that optimal allocation (entailing well-functioning institutions), if accompanied by investment in education, is all that is needed.
After all, the Italians, Germans, and French work hard and well over a relatively small number of hours, resulting in high hourly productivity and wages – higher than in the United States and the United Kingdom.
Yet continental Europeans do not seem particularly happy with their work.
Circumstantial evidence is their preference for record-setting vacations – and relatively low labor-force participation.
And data on job satisfaction provide direct evidence: among large Western countries, workers in continental Europe report the lowest levels.
That is not surprising.
Europe’s companies are generally no longer places where new stimuli and new challenges engage workers’ minds.
But if China should avoid the efficiency-seeking European model, which model should it embrace?
I argue in my book Mass Flourishing that the right model is the good economy, which is an economy that offers the good life.
Optimal resource allocation (of which efficiency is a part) is a necessary but not sufficient feature of a good economy.
Indeed, the single-minded focus on raising domestic consumption is likely to distract China’s leaders from other policies needed for a good economy.
Here I differ with many economists – including my dear friends Joseph Stiglitz, Jean-Paul Fitoussi, and Vladimir Kvint – whose preferred standard is the quality of life.
By this they mean mainly ample consumption and ample leisure, together with public goods – for example, clean air, safe food, and safe streets – and civic amenities such as municipal parks and sports stadiums.
This is a fleshed-out version of an ideal traceable to antiquity.
I don’t oppose these services or their provision by the state; but they do not add up to philosophers’ concept of the “good life.”
(Aristotle joked that we need these services to recover for the next day’s work.)
Another dear friend, Amartya Sen, points out that economists’ focus on consumption leaves out people’s need to “do things.”
But he does not go far enough.
People want out of programs of work in which they have no autonomy.
For a good life, people need a degree of agency in their work.
They want to be able to take the initiative and do work that is engaging.
People value room to express themselves– to voice their thoughts or show their talents.
In other words, people value attainment through their own efforts.
I have used the word “prospering” (from the Old Latin prospere, meaning “as hoped, or expected”) to refer to the experience of succeeding in one’s work: a craftsman’s gratification at seeing his skills valued by others, a merchant’s satisfaction at seeing his “ships come in,” or a scholar’s sense of validation from an honorary professorship.
People also value the personal growth that may come from their career.
I use the word “flourishing”to refer to the satisfaction from a journey into the unknown – the excitement of the challenges and the appeal of overcoming obstacles.
Indeed, attaining, prospering, and flourishing all refer to experiential rewards, not to money.
What sort of economy would offer this good life?
History suggests that it would be one of entrepreneurial people (alert to unnoticed opportunities, and exercising their initiative to try out new things) and innovative people (imagining new things, developing new concepts into commercial products and methods, and marketing them to potential).
The participants in such a good economy would range from the grassroots of society to the most advantaged.
This is the kind of economy I hope China will develop.
Of course, in a time of hardship, a country may not immediately be able to afford a good economy; its people will first want clean air and safe food.
The risk is that fully satisfying all the myriad demands for public services would require a public sector so big that it might well crowd out innovative activities in the private sector.
China must keep in mind that the private sector can match – or surpass – the public sector in supplying many services now provided by the public sector.
Underground railways were once the creation of private entrepreneurs.
Today, the most radical step in urban transportation is Uber, and the most radical change in the near future is probably the self-driving car – both creations of the private sector.
Of course, some cynics say that the Chinese possess neither the sophistication nor the temperament to be innovators.
Yet estimates of indigenous innovation in China and the G7 countries show that China already ranked fourth in the 1990s; and in the next decade, when the UK and Canada fell back, China moved up to second place – not very far behind the US.
The fact is that there is much less innovation coming out of America than there once was – and hardly any coming out of Europe.
So China could become a major source of innovation for the global economy, equaling or exceeding America.
To my mind, this is an invaluable opportunity for China – and a development to be welcomed in the rest of the world.
Innovation with Chinese Characteristics
SHANGHAI – China’s slowing growth has dominated global economic news this year – and for good reason.
Beyond being the world’s second-largest economy, China is the largest manufacturer and consumer of raw materials; so any sign of weakening there is bad news for the global economy.
But, while concerns about growth certainly merit attention, they should be viewed in the context of China’s longer-term economic trajectory, especially its emergence as a global hub of innovation.
China is not given enough credit for how far it has come as an innovator.
And yet, over the next decade, China could become not only the place where global companies conduct research and launch new products, but also the source of a low-cost and nimble approach to innovation that affects competition everywhere.
This conclusion is based on an in-depth research project by the McKinsey Global Institute, which aimed to gauge where China stands in terms of innovation, by measuring innovation’s true impact – that is, how commercialized ideas actually fare in markets worldwide.
Using a database of 20,000 public companies representing about 30% of global GDP, we looked at global revenue in industries that fit four innovative “archetypes”: customer-focused, efficiency-driven, engineering-based, and science-based.
A Chinese industry was classed as strong in innovation if Chinese players were capturing more than 12% of global revenue, the equivalent of China’s share of global GDP, in that sector.
The data show that China has built considerable strengths in industries fitting two of these archetypes: customer-focused and efficiency-driven.
The first category includes industries like appliances, in which China has captured 36% of global revenues, and Internet services and software, where China accounts for 15% of global revenues.
The second includes the solar-panel industry, where Chinese players have 51% of global revenue, and the textile industry, in which Chinese companies claim 20% of global revenue.
Chinese companies have prospered in customer-focused industries because they have learned to tailor their goods to the needs of their country’s emerging consumer class.
Whereas Chinese companies used to focus on designing products that were “good enough” – not quite matching the standard of Western products, but offering huge cost savings – they are now out to create products that are cheaper and better, in order to satisfy wealthier consumers.
The sheer size of China’s market – comprising more than 100 million mainstream consumer households – also helps, as it enables companies to commercialize new ideas rapidly and on a large scale.
In efficiency-based industries, China’s prowess is rooted in its role as the “world’s factory.”
The country’s massive manufacturing ecosystem – 150 million factory workers, five times the supplier base of Japan, and modern infrastructure – enables process innovations that cut costs, raise quality, and shorten time to market.
Chinese manufacturers are also moving up the value chain, building more “knowledge-intensive” products (for example, communications equipment) and developing flexible approaches to automation that blend labor and machinery to maintain responsiveness, while reducing cost.
As for the other innovation archetypes, China has some work to do.
To be sure, in engineering-based industries, Chinese companies have had some success.
Indeed, while it takes time to build up a base of knowledge and experience strong enough to thrive in this area, some Chinese industries have learned fast, partly owing to the government’s efforts to facilitate technology transfer with global partners.
Examples include high-speed trains (41% of global revenue), wind turbines (20%), and communications equipment (18%).
But plenty of industries have not fared so well.
China’s auto industry, for example, commands just 8% of global revenue, which largely reflects limited learning opportunities.
China has the most catching up to do in science-based innovation, which includes industries like specialty chemicals, semiconductor design, and branded pharmaceuticals.
In fact, despite significant investment in technical capabilities – the country spends more than $200 billion annually on research and development (second only to the US) – no Chinese industry in this area has captured more than 12% of global revenues.
One key problem for China’s science-based industries is the long time horizon for new discoveries to be perfected and commercialized.
So companies are developing uniquely Chinese approaches to such innovation.
For example, to speed up the 15-year process of taking a new drug from the lab to market, Chinese pharmaceutical companies are implementing industrial-style approaches.
Over the next ten years, China has a chance to move beyond merely absorbing and adapting global technologies to become a true innovation leader.
If it succeeds, fears of a prolonged slowdown that hampers global growth will prove unwarranted.
We estimate that innovation in China’s service industries, where productivity lags far behind that of developed economies, could create anywhere from $500 billion to $1.4 trillion in economic value per year by 2025.
In manufacturing, where China can use its vast resources to lead the world in an era of digitized manufacturing, innovation can add $450-$780 billion in value each year.
This would go a long way toward raising productivity enough to offset challenges like population aging.
Most important, China’s emergence as a true innovator could turn it into a global R&D hub.
After all, unlike today’s leading innovators like the US, China offers low costs and proximity to large – and largely untapped – markets, including its own, which enables the rapid deployment of new products.
Even with rising wages, Chinese researchers – not to mention other kinds of labor – receive only 10-20% of what their advanced-country counterparts earn.
With a combination of a massive market, low costs, flexibility, and ambition, China offers innovative companies from all over the world the chance to transform their ideas into commercial products more quickly and at lower cost than ever.
As more of them recognize this, and move their operations to China, all sorts of markets could be disrupted.
And, eventually, the Chinese model of innovation could become the global standard.
China’s Institutional Challenge
HONG KONG – Last month, the Nobel laureate economist Douglass North, who applied economic theory to history to gain insight into institutional and social change, died at his home in Michigan.
But his ideas will live on, particularly in China.
Though North never focused explicitly on China’s institutional development, his theoretical framework could prove invaluable to the country’s leaders as they navigate the next phase of institutional change.
In his Nobel lecture in 1993, North identified three lessons that policymakers should draw from his research.
First, what determines economic performance is the mix of “formal rules, informal norms, and enforcement characteristics.”
Second, polities have a major impact on economic performance, because they “define and enforce the economic rules.”
And, finally, adaptive efficiency (how the rules are changed), not allocative efficiency (the most effective rules right now), is the key to long-term growth.
These lessons are reflected in North’s assessment of Western Europe’s institutional and economic development, in which he attributed the Industrial Revolution to two key factors: varying belief systems and intense competition between and within the emerging sovereign powers.
Specifically, the English and the Dutch created diverse political/economic units that evolved institutions nurturing specialization and division of labor.
These institutions delivered superior economic and political outcomes through lower transaction costs, clear and enforceable property rights, and other shared rules and norms.
North observed that institutional change is extremely difficult, as it requires overcoming not only vested interests, but also outdated belief systems and mental models.
The breakthrough, he noted, comes when institutions go beyond trade within local communities to permit anonymous and impersonal exchange across time and space.
Sustainable institutions are those that learn and adapt, overcoming their own biases and limitations.
North’s work goes a long way toward explaining the dramatic institutional and economic changes that have occurred in China over the last three decades, as well as illuminating the challenges that it will face over the next decade.
In fact, it should temper the pessimism that pervades most current discussion of China’s prospects.
For starters, intense competition is alive and well in China.
Its major cities (including Shanghai, Guangdong, Tianjin, and Xiamen) are still competing vigorously with one another, and a new breed of technologically innovative companies (such as Huawei, Tencent, and Alibaba) are battling to open up new markets in goods, services, talent, capital, and knowledge.
The ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has dedicated itself to creating a more efficient, services-driven economy, subject to the market and the rule of law.
For example, it has committed to ease market access by loosening entry requirements for both domestic and foreign investors.
It has also strengthened property rights relating to land, labor, capital, and knowledge; this, together with advances in digital and robot technology, has brought down Chinese transaction costs.
Moreover, having built the needed physical infrastructure in the last decade (perhaps to excess), China is now emphasizing the software infrastructure needed to sustain the growth of its burgeoning services sector.
In 2014, services’ share of GDP already exceeded 50%, more than the manufacturing and primary sectors combined.
While the government has not pursued adequate reform of state-owned enterprises, it has deliberately allowed new, largely private-owned technology giants to compete against state-owned banks and financial institutions.
And no one predicted the intensity of the CCP’s campaign to root out corruption, including in the military, the financial sector, and the highest levels of the party itself.
China’s market-oriented shift will be reinforced by the commitments that its leaders made to the International Monetary Fund when the renminbi was added to the basket of currencies that determine the value of the Fund’s unit of account, Special Drawing Rights.
The need to cope with trade pressures after the Trans-Pacific Partnership encompasses most of China’s neighbors will have a similar disciplining effect.
The CCP is judging itself not against the Western benchmark of liberal democratic governance, but against the ancient Chinese legalist tradition of strong, central authority that maintains legitimacy by upholding meritocratic standards of accountability.
Perhaps more important, it has relied on seasoned intellectuals and policymakers – not Party ideologues – to design its development roadmap.
This approach was fortified last summer, when despite serious market turmoil, the CCP upheld its commitment to allow the market to play a “decisive role in resource allocation.”
There could be no clearer indication that China is willing to upgrade its belief systems and mental models in order to achieve high-income status.
Nonetheless, China still has rivers to cross, particularly when it comes to adaptive efficiency.
Here, it is important to note that whereas formal rules can be altered quickly, informal cultural norms are difficult to change in the short run.
New formal rules can conflict with established norms, causing bureaucratic incentives to become distorted, with adverse effects on institutional behavior and performance.
China’s leaders must cope with an asymmetry between what they can deliver and what consumers demand.
According to North, institutional under-capacity is a short-term allocative problem, or sunk cost, for which the state can compensate with greater adaptive efficiency, or better mechanisms for bringing about the exit of less efficient institutions.
North’s theoretical legacy could prove vital for China’s policymakers in the coming years, because it gives them specific guidance about how to cross the river of rapid institutional change.
The alternative is to continue relying on what Deng Xiaoping, the father of China’s institutional breakthrough more than three decades ago, called “feeling the stones.” That, as North would put it, may not be the most efficient way to get to the other side.
China’s International Growth Agenda
MILAN – For most of the past 35 years, China’s policymakers have set their focus on the domestic economy, with reforms designed to allow the market to provide efficiency and accurate price signals.
Though they had to be increasingly aware of their country’s growing impact on the global economy, they had no strategy to ensure that China’s neighbors gained from its economic transformation.
But now China does have such a strategy, or at least is rapidly developing one.
Moreover, it extends well beyond Asia, embracing Eastern Europe and the east coast of Africa.
A key element of China’s strategy is the recently established Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), and to some extent the BRICS’ New Development Bank, established last year by Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
Both banks are obvious alternatives – and so rivals – to the Western-dominated World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
Also vital to the new strategy are two prospective modern-day Silk Roads: an overland route through Central Asia to the Black Sea and a “Maritime Silk Road” by which shipping will pass from the South China Sea, through the Strait of Malacca, across the Indian Ocean to East Africa, and from there through the Red Sea into the eastern Mediterranean.
Economists sometimes portray the global economy as a huge bazaar.
But it is not.
It is a network, in which the links are built by expanding the flows of goods, services, people, capital, and – importantly – information.
China’s goal is to create these links, and it has plenty of assets that will allow it to act as a catalyst of global growth and development.
The most obvious asset is China’s large and growing domestic market, to which other economies can gain access via trade and investment.
China will thus be joining the ranks of the advanced countries in providing an export market (and jobs) for countries at earlier stages of economic development.
In addition, because China has built up a capacity to invest that is far larger than its domestic economy can now absorb, it will inevitably seek opportunities abroad, both public and private.
Chinese companies, in particular, will increasingly want to establish their brands internationally.
With the involvement of the AIIB and the New Development Bank, China has developed what amounts to a multinational development strategy.
While there are skeptics, broad support for the AIIB suggests that the benefits outweigh the risks, and that China’s initiatives may help build a network that is open to everyone.
After all, the trade and investment that will follow could not possibly all flow through China.
Meanwhile, by virtue of more than 30 swap arrangements with other central banks (the first was with South Korea in December 2008), China is using its foreign-exchange reserves to help its neighbors and others defend themselves against volatile international capital flows.
This is in tandem with the authorities’ efforts to promote the internationalization of the renminbi, which is rapidly expanding its role in trade settlement.
There are significant efficiency gains to be had by settling transactions in trading partners’ currencies, without the intermediation of, say, the US dollar.
Of course, there is much more to the internationalization of a currency, not least large and liquid domestic financial markets and the establishment of trust and confidence.
This takes time, but China is already applying to the IMF to have the renminbi included in the basket of currencies that determines the value of the Fund’s unit of account, Special Drawing Rights, with a decision likely in late 2015.
Joining the US dollar, the British pound, the euro, and the Japanese yen in the SDR club would be symbolically significant.
More important, as with China’s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, which required substantial reforms, fulfilling the conditions for joining the SDR promises to speed progress toward full capital-account liberalization – and thus toward a fully convertible renminbi.
China’s policymakers have long time horizons.
Their strategy will doubtless face obstacles in the coming years.
The question is whether the strategy is worth pursuing now.
The answer almost certainly is yes.
The overland “silk road,” for example, will reduce China’s reliance on sea-lanes, which can be blocked or disrupted, especially at the Strait of Malacca.
More generally, Chinese investment will ease the constraints on the silk road economies caused partly by slow growth and investment shortfalls in advanced economies.
Ultimately, vibrant growing economies in the region will benefit China’s economy and its stature.
Many believe that public-sector investment is a good way (perhaps the best way) to use the global economy’s productive resources and increase its efficiency and growth potential.
But this requires a multinational effort.
China’s leaders surely want international recognition of their country’s global stature.
But they also want China’s rise to high-income status to occur in a way that is – and that is perceived to be – beneficial to its neighbors and the world.
The new external focus of China’s growth and development strategy seems to be intended to make that vision a reality.
China in the Eye of the Beholder
CLAREMONT – One of the most glaring, if unremarked, oddities concerning China nowadays is how perceptions of its leaders diverge depending on the observer.
In the eyes of the Chinese public, government officials are venal, incompetent, and interested solely in getting lucrative appointments.
But Western executives invariably describe Chinese officials as smart, decisive, knowledgeable, and far-sighted – roughly the same adjectives that they once used to describe Bo Xilai, the disgraced Communist Party boss of Chongqing, before he was purged.
It is impossible to reconcile these views.
Either the Chinese public is impossible to please, or Western executives are hopelessly wrong.
But, given that daily experience places Chinese citizens in an infinitely better position than Western executives to evaluate Chinese officials and their conduct, one would have to conclude that they are almost certainly right.
And that means that Westerners who have spent considerable time in China and consider themselves seasoned “China hands” need to ask why they have gotten it so wrong.
One obvious explanation is that Chinese officials are extremely good at seducing Western businessmen with friendly gestures and generous promises.
The same officials who lord it over ordinary Chinese people often summon irresistible charm to woo Western investors.
Another selling point for Western executives is that many Chinese officials have engineering backgrounds, in contrast to their Western counterparts, most of whom are lawyers.
To businessmen, engineers are practical problem solvers, whereas lawyers are obsessed with procedural complexities and intent on exploiting contractual loopholes.
Moreover, most Chinese officials have learned the jargon of Western business, and can speak intelligently about the problems that companies need to solve.
A more subtle reason for Western executives’ perceptions is their subconscious frame of reference when assessing Chinese officials.
Senior executives of multinational companies tend to have pre-conceived notions of China as just another developing country, and thus evaluate Chinese officials by comparing them with those in other developing countries.
This unwitting comparison usually comes out in favor of Chinese officials, who are, as a group, better educated, more cosmopolitan, and more focused on business (because the ruling Communist Party uses economic growth and foreign investment as criteria for promoting officials).
And, as an organization, the Chinese state is far stronger and more purposive than states are in more typical developing countries.
But, while it may be natural for Western businessmen to compare China with other developing countries, Chinese citizens have much higher standards, because they do not regard theirs as just another developing country.
They view China as special, a re-emerging great power bound to join the ranks of the world’s most advanced countries, and the governance practices that their newspapers cite as models are invariably those of rich societies, not developing ones.
Indeed, one sure way to insult the Chinese is to tell them they should feel lucky, because they have a better government than the Indians or Brazilians.
A third reason why Western businessmen get China wrong is that their admiration of the Chinese government is a reflection of their frustrations with their own governments.
They have grown impatient with the messiness of the democratic process, stifling regulations, high taxes, and media scrutiny.
By contrast, in China’s one-party state, they find it is easier to do business with officials who can make quick decisions and implement them almost instantly.
Of course, sometimes these executives do miss the rule of law that prevails in the West.
But, compared with Chinese private entrepreneurs, representatives of large Western firms are a privileged group, and are not victimized as frequently by official corruption.
As a result, they have little direct appreciation of the worst aspect of one-party rule: a rapacious, legally unrestrained elite.
The most regrettable aspect of Western executives’ misconceptions of the Chinese government is that they are likely to persist, at least among those who have no direct experience with the dark side of the Chinese state.
They are successful, intelligent, and have a high degree of confidence in their political judgment.
Moreover, Western corporations are hierarchical and autocratic, similar to the Chinese one-party state, so senior executives’ errors of judgment are rarely challenged directly by their underlings.
That is a real pity.
Few Western executives understand the political consequences of their misperceptions.
Their praise of Chinese officials’ quality and effectiveness is often held up by the Communist Party as an international endorsement of its policies and legitimacy – even if ordinary Chinese know otherwise.
China is Okay
NEW HAVEN – Concern is growing that China’s economy could be headed for a hard landing.
The Chinese stock market has fallen 20% over the past year, to levels last seen in 2009.
Continued softness in recent data – from purchasing managers’ sentiment and industrial output to retail sales and exports – has heightened the anxiety.
Long the global economy’s most powerful engine, China, many now fear, is running out of fuel.
These worries are overblown.
Yes, China’s economy has slowed.
But the slowdown has been contained, and will likely remain so for the foreseeable future.
The case for a soft landing remains solid.
With the Chinese economy far less threatened by export-led weakening than it was three and a half years ago, a hard landing is unlikely.
To be sure, the economy faces other headwinds, especially from the policy-induced cooling of an overheated housing market.
But construction of so-called social housing for lower-income families, reinforced by recent investment announcements in key metropolitan areas such as Tianjin, Chongqing, and Changsha, as well as in Guizhou and Guangdong Provinces, should more than offset the decline.
Moreover, unlike the bank-funded initiatives of 3-4 years ago, which led to a worrisome overhang of local-government debt, the central government seems likely to play a much greater role in financing the current round of projects.
Reports of ghost cities, bridges to nowhere, and empty new airports are fueling concern among Western analysts that an unbalanced Chinese economy cannot rebound as it did in the second half of 2009.
With fixed investment nearing the unprecedented threshold of 50% of GDP, they fear that another investment-led fiscal stimulus will only hasten the inevitable China-collapse scenario.
But the pessimists’ hype overlooks one of the most important drivers of China’s modernization: the greatest urbanization story the world has ever seen.
In 2011, the urban share of the Chinese population surpassed 50% for the first time, reaching 51.3%, compared to less than 20% in 1980.
Moreover, according to OECD projections, China’s already burgeoning urban population should expand by more than 300 million by 2030 – an increment almost equal to the current population of the United States.
With rural-to-urban migration averaging 15 to 20 million people per year, today’s so-called ghost cities quickly become tomorrow’s thriving metropolitan areas.
Shanghai Pudong is the classic example of how an “empty” urban construction project in the late 1990’s quickly became a fully occupied urban center, with a population today of roughly 5.5 million.
A McKinsey study estimates that by 2025 China will have more than 220 cities with populations in excess of one million, versus 125 in 2010, and that 23 mega-cities will have a population of at least five million.
China cannot afford to wait to build its new cities.
Instead, investment and construction must be aligned with the future influx of urban dwellers.
The “ghost city” critique misses this point entirely.
All of this is part of China’s grand plan.
The producer model, which worked brilliantly for 30 years, cannot take China to the promised land of prosperity.
The Chinese leadership has long known this, as Premier Wen Jiabao signaled with his famous 2007 “Four ‘Uns’” critique – warning of an “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and ultimately unsustainable” economy.
Two external shocks – first from the US, and now from Europe – have transformed the Four Uns into an action plan.
Overly dependent on external demand from crisis-battered developed economies, China has adopted the pro-consumption 12th Five-Year Plan, which lays out a powerful rebalancing strategy that should drive development for decades.
The investment and construction requirements of large-scale urbanization are a key pillar of this strategy.
Urban per capita income is more than triple the average in rural areas.
As long as urbanization is coupled with job creation – a strategy underscored by China’s concomitant push into services-led development – labor income and consumer purchasing power will benefit.
Contrary to the China doubters, urbanization is not phony growth. It is an essential ingredient of the “next China,” for it provides China with both cyclical and structural options.
When faced with a shortfall of demand – whether owing to an external shock or to an internal adjustment, such as the housing-market correction – China can tweak its urbanization-led investment requirements accordingly.
With a large reservoir of surplus savings and a budget deficit of less than 2% of GDP, it has the wherewithal to fund such efforts.
There is also ample scope for monetary easing; unlike central banks in the West, the People’s Bank of China has plenty of ammunition in reserve.
A growth slowdown is hardly shocking for an export-led economy.
But China is in much better shape than the rest of the world.
A powerful rebalancing strategy offers the structural and cyclical support that will allow it to avoid a hard landing.
China’s Jobless Growth Miracle
BEIJING – Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang recently cited job creation as vital to his country’s “ultimate goal of stability in growth.”
His observation could not be more accurate.
In fact, one of the most baffling features of China’s economic rise is that, even amid double-digit GDP growth, employment grew at a measly 1.8% average annual rate from 1978 to 2004.
Households, it seems, have largely missed out on the benefits of economic development in China.
The superficial explanation of the discrepancy between GDP growth and job gains attributes the gap to the restructuring of inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which caused public-sector employment to plummet, from 112.6 million to 67 million, from 1995 to 2004.
But there is a more fundamental cause: China’s bias toward industrialization.
China’s government has long viewed industrialization as the key to modernization.
During Chairman Mao’s Great Leap Forward, scrap metals were melted to meet wildly optimistic steel-production targets and thus to propel rapid industrial development.
Today, the government promotes industrial and infrastructure projects that, by encouraging investment and generating tax revenues, enable the economy to meet ambitious – though no longer harebrained – growth targets.
The problem is that the manufacturing sector does little to create jobs, largely because relatively high productivity growth in the sector – averaging more than 10% annually over the last two decades – constrains demand for more workers.
By contrast, China’s services sector has registered only about 5% annual productivity growth, and thus is a much more effective engine of job creation.
In fact, services are responsible for the lion’s share of employment in most advanced economies.
But, whereas 80% of the American labor force was employed in service industries in 2012, only 36% of China’s workers worked in the sector.
To bolster employment in services, China’s government must loosen its regulatory grip, ease barriers to entry in branches like telecommunications, and encourage labor mobility.
China’s focus on industrial production is problematic in another respect: it is extremely capital-intensive, owing largely to the distortions wrought by government policies.
Beyond keeping interest rates below market levels, the government offered the automobile, machinery, and steel industries, among others, preferential access to cheap credit, favorable tax treatment, and public investment support.
Such policies spurred firms to adopt capital-intensive technologies, obscuring labor’s natural comparative advantages.
At the same time, the government’s interventions have limited the growth of private-sector firms by impeding their access to finance.
Though SOEs employ only 13% of the total workforce, and contribute about 30% of GDP, they absorb half of all investment.
Together, banks and the government provide about 35% of investment in SOEs, but only 10% of investment in private companies.
But private firms are significantly more labor-intensive than SOEs – which use almost four times as much capital – and thus have been responsible for most of China’s job creation in recent decades.
With average employment growth of 10.4% per year, the formal private sector partly compensated for the SOE layoffs from 1995 to 2004.
The informal sector grew even faster, at an annual rate of 24%, albeit from a low base.
Given the obvious benefits of a flourishing and rapidly expanding private sector, China’s government should take steps to ensure that such firms – especially the small and medium-size enterprises that so often are crowded out of credit markets – can access the capital they need to expand.
This would inevitably lead to a surge in job creation.
The uncomfortable truth is that Chinese households have benefited far too little from the country’s economic-growth miracle.
Indeed, households’ share of national income has declined considerably in the last decade, in sharp contrast to the advanced economies, where households’ share is consistently high.
By allowing the private sector to flourish, and encouraging the shift toward a services-oriented economy, China’s government could bolster employment growth and, in turn, domestic consumption.
As Li seems to recognize, structural rebalancing is needed not only to improve Chinese citizens’ wellbeing, but also to bolster economic and social stability at a time of profound global uncertainty.
Fairness and Free Trade
CAMBRIDGE – The global trade system faces an important turning point at the end of this year, one that was postponed when China joined the World Trade Organization almost 15 years ago.
The United States and the European Union must decide whether they will begin to treat China as a “market economy” in their trade policies.
Unfortunately, even as the battle escalates over the course of this year, the terms of the choice ensure that nothing will be done to address the global trade regime’s deeper flaws.
China’s WTO accession agreement, signed in December 2001, permitted the country’s trade partners to deal with China as a “non-market economy” (NME) for a period of up to 15 years.
NME status made it a lot easier for importing countries to impose special tariffs on Chinese exports, in the form of antidumping duties.
In particular, they could use production costs in more expensive countries as a proxy for true Chinese costs, increasing both the likelihood of a dumping finding and the estimated margin of dumping.
Today, though many countries, such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and South Korea, have already rewarded China with market-economy status, the world’s two biggest economies, the US and the EU, have not.
But, regardless of whether they do, antidumping measures are ill-suited to the task of addressing concerns about unfair trade – not because such concerns are ungrounded, but because they go well beyond dumping.
Antidumping facilitates protectionism of the worst kind, while doing nothing for countries that need legitimate policy space.
Economists have never been fond of the WTO’s antidumping rules.
From a strictly economic standpoint, pricing below costs is not a problem for the importing economy as long as the firms that engage in the strategy have little prospect of monopolizing the market.
That is why domestic competition policies typically require evidence of anti-competitive practices or the likelihood of successful predation.
Under WTO rules, however, pricing below costs on the part of exporters is sufficient for imposing import duties, even when it is standard competitive practice – such as during economic downturns.
This and other procedural considerations make antidumping the preferred route for firms to obtain protection from their foreign rivals when times are tough.
The WTO does have a specific “safeguard” mechanism that enables countries to raise tariffs temporarily when imports cause “serious injury” to domestic firms.
But the procedural hurdles are higher for safeguards, and countries that use them have to compensate adversely affected exporters.
The numbers speak for themselves.
Since the WTO was established in 1995, more than 3,000 antidumping duties have been put in place (with India, the US, and the EU being the heaviest users).
The corresponding number for safeguard measures is a mere 155 (with developing countries being the heaviest users).
Clearly, antidumping is the trade remedy of choice.
But the global trade regime has to address issues of fairness, in addition to economic efficiency.
When domestic firms must compete with, say, Chinese firms that are financially supported by a government with deep pockets, the playing field becomes tilted in ways that most people would consider unacceptable.
Certain types of competitive advantage undermine the legitimacy of international trade, even when (as with this example) they may imply aggregate economic benefits for the importing country.
So the antidumping regime has a political logic.
Trade policymakers are deeply familiar with this logic, which is why the antidumping regime exists in its current form, enabling relatively easy protection.
What trade officials have never taken on board is that the fairness argument extends beyond the dumping arena.
If it is unfair for domestic firms to compete with foreign entities that are subsidized or propped up by their governments, is it not similarly unfair for domestic workers to compete with foreign workers who lack fundamental rights such as collective bargaining or protections against workplace abuse?
Aren’t firms that despoil the environment, use child labor, or provide hazardous employment conditions also a source of unfair competition?
Such concerns about unfair trade lie at the heart of the anti-globalization backlash.
Yet legal trade remedies permit little room for them beyond the narrow commercial realm of below-cost pricing.
Labor unions, human rights NGOs, consumer groups, or environmental organizations do not have direct access to protection in the way that firms do.
Trade experts have long been wary of opening up the WTO regime to questions about labor and environmental standards or human rights, fearing the slippery slope of protectionism.
But it is becoming increasingly clear that excluding these issues does greater damage.
Trade with countries that have very different economic, social, and political models raises genuine concerns about legitimacy.
Refusal to acknowledge such concerns not only undermines these trade relationships; it also jeopardizes the legitimacy of the entire global trade regime.
None of this implies that democracies should not trade with non-democracies.
The point is that commercial logic is not the only consideration that should govern their economic relationships.
We cannot escape – and therefore must confront – the dilemma that gains from trade sometimes come at the expense of strains on domestic social arrangements.
Public discussion and deliberation are the only way that democracies can sort out the contending values and tradeoffs at stake.
Trade disputes with China and other countries are an opportunity for airing – rather than repressing – these issues, and thus taking an important step toward democratizing the world’s trade regime.
Xi’s Reform Gambit
HONG KONG – When Deng Xiaoping initiated China’s market-oriented reforms 35 years ago, he – and the Chinese Communist Party – was taking the biggest political risk since the founding of the People’s Republic in 1949.
When President Xi Jinping unveiled his own reform agenda at last year’s Third Plenum of the 18th CCP Congress, he was taking an equally large risk.
Will his strategy pay off?
In 1979, Deng was in a difficult situation.
He knew that the shift from centrally planned egalitarian socialism toward market-oriented capitalism could destabilize the CCP’s rule, and the unequal accumulation of wealth in the short term could cause significant social and political division.
But, with China on the verge of economic and social collapse, following the decade-long chaos of the Cultural Revolution, he had to take action – and there were few, if any, alternatives available.
The reforms turned out to be extremely rewarding: more than three decades of double-digit economic growth followed their implementation.
Moreover, they allowed the CCP to retain its hold on power. But they benefited some people and regions much more quickly than others – a problem that was tougher to address than Deng had anticipated.
Xi’s reforms, like Deng’s, reflect the absence of alternatives.
Not only has China’s labor-intensive, investment-led growth model run out of steam; bureaucratic inefficiencies and pervasive corruption – not to mention severe and worsening pollution – are also damaging China’s long-term prospects.
Only by addressing these weaknesses and shifting to an innovation-based, environmentally sustainable growth model can the country continue to prosper – and ultimately achieve high-income status.
The difference between the two reform efforts is that Xi must also address the shortcomings of Deng’s work.
Deng mistakenly believed that the state, which retained its central role in the economy, would be able to use new market-generated resources to correct the short-run inequalities created by his reforms.
But the bureaucracy and its privileged networks benefited most, and a second, non-market source of inequality – endemic official corruption – became entrenched.
That is why Xi’s anti-corruption campaign was a critical precursor to reform.
In other words, beyond completing China’s transformation into an open, market-based economy, Xi must establish a strong rule of law that applies to all, while addressing acute inequality of income, opportunity, wealth, and wellbeing.
For this reason, Xi must pursue reforms that allow people, money, resources, information, and companies to move more freely across sectors, regions, and national borders.
The resulting convergence of wealth and opportunities would generate massive economic and social gains.
But, by effectively transforming the economic geography of China, Asia, and the world, liberalization would also lead to significant creative destruction.
Furthermore, market forces could reduce inequality in the longer term only if China’s authorities tolerated the short-term inequalities created by fluctuations in prices for housing, stocks, labor, natural resources, and currency.
The problem is that the Chinese bureaucracy prefers stability, and it has strong incentives to strengthen its own position relative to the market, thereby exacerbating power inequalities and dampening innovation and growth.
Yet the bureaucracy remains integral to the implementation of any policy that promotes social cohesion.
To mitigate the serious systemic risks stemming from the power of China’s overweening, corrupt mandarins, Xi must rebalance their incentives.
He is already working to eliminate graft, restrict the scope of administrative approvals, reduce the state-owned sector’s advantages, clarify property rights in land, and simplify welfare, tax, and financial regulations.
Beyond reducing systemic risks, these efforts – if they are sustained – could generate “reform dividends” over time.
But the incentive problem is not confined to the bureaucracy.
Systemic reform requires recognizing and atoning for two original sins: not only that of bureaucrats who made money by abusing their power, but also that of capitalists who made money by breaking the rules.
This challenge is best illustrated in the competition between state-owned enterprises and private firms.
The failure of private firms that lack access to subsidies or affordable financing deters others from innovating and challenging the status quo.
Meanwhile, SOEs – which can invest in excess capacity, record net losses (often through corruption and incompetence), and count on government subsidies – never face a reckoning.
The implication is that macroeconomic policies like low interest rates and easy access to credit should be used to ensure equal access to credit for all qualified companies, based on their competitiveness, not their ownership.
Unfortunately, implementing such measures would entail micro-level bureaucratic intervention, leading to further expansion of state powers.
That is why the bureaucracy must be given incentives – higher salaries, clear performance indicators, and awareness that abuses of power will not be tolerated – to abandon the micro-management of market activities.
China’s recent relaxation of macroeconomic policy, despite ongoing market volatility, is an important step toward breaking unnecessary barriers to implementing the reforms needed to mitigate systemic risks.
Now that Xi’s anti-corruption campaign has taken down some of the CCP’s biggest “tigers,” it is time to focus on structural reform.
With the right approach and sustained political will, Xi’s risk-taking can bring China the kind of returns that Deng’s did – and more.
The New Normal in China’s Cities
HONG KONG – For decades, rapid urbanization in China created clusters of knowledge, manufacturing, and distribution in areas that benefited from well-established connections to the global economy.
But that growth model has reached its end.
With the share of people living in cities rising to 53% in 2013, from 20% in 1981, China is shifting to a “new normal.”
According to President Xi Jinping, the aim is to ensure annual economic growth of around 7%, driven by new opportunities in value-added manufacturing, information technologies, and modernized agricultural production.
In moving toward this goal, however, China will face difficult balance-sheet adjustments that cannot easily be managed by conventional fiscal and monetary policies.
A new Deutsche Bank study reports that, last year, China’s 300 cities faced a 37% drop in their land-sale revenues – a major setback, given that land sales accounted for 35% of total local-government revenues.
Such revenues had risen at an average annual rate of 24% from 2009 to 2013.
Moreover, annual consumer and producer inflation dropped to 1.5% and -3.3%, respectively, last December, owing partly to the sharp decline in world oil prices.
China now faces deflation and an inhospitable external economic environment, and its urban centers are struggling with the complex interaction of solvency, liquidity, and structural issues.
But some cities are better equipped than others to weather these challenges.
China’s first- and second-tier cities are very wealthy, benefiting from high property values and the continuous inflow of talent, capital, companies, and investment projects.
Despite a property-market slowdown, Beijing’s recent land auction concluded with record-breaking prices of about CN¥38,000 ($6,200) per square meter.
Third- and fourth-tier Chinese cities, however, face more challenging balance-sheet adjustments, owing to falling asset prices, outflows of labor, and the need to define new growth models.
In the aftermath of the post-2008 debt-fueled infrastructure-investment boom, these cities need to reform how revenue is shared with the central government, increase the transparency and accountability of local budgets, and overhaul the use of municipal-bond and public-private partnership models for local infrastructure projects.
But, before such changes can be implemented, these cities must address the overhang of poorly performing projects and loss-making state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
In fact, Chinese cities and local enterprises will need even more liquidity than would be required in a classic case of deflation, credit tightening, and falling prices, because infrastructure and property investments by local governments and SOEs are still consuming funds.
And, given state intervention, interest rates do not adjust quickly enough to allocate resources efficiently.
Of course, the People’s Bank of China could lower the interest rate and relax its liquidity policy. But it remains concerned that doing so would spark inflation and fuel wasteful investment – and greater excess capacity – in the real-estate sector.
Maintaining relatively tight liquidity, however, also has serious consequences.
For starters, as long as external conditions remain relatively liquid, tighter conditions in China put upward pressure on interest rates in the shadow-banking sector. Together with the growth of the renminbi carry trade, this has pushed up the exchange rate at a time when non-US dollar-linked currencies are largely depreciating.
Moreover, interest-rate volatility and uncertainty encourages arbitrage and investment in socially costly rent-seeking and speculation, with central-bank liquidity flowing to financial markets, instead of fulfilling its intended purpose of helping the real sector.
Despite slowing growth, China’s A-share market has risen by nearly 50% since last July, and the banking sector’s margins remain exceptionally large.
Meanwhile, confidence in the non-financial private sector remains depressed, as diminished demand leads to increased production costs.
China’s growth model hinges on a governance system in which regions, cities, companies, and individuals compete within an increasingly market-oriented, but still centrally regulated, economy.
But, in a country as large and diverse as China, a one-size-fits-all approach will not ensure that the market functions effectively. After all, different local economies have different needs.
Consider the city of Foshan’s economy, which, driven by private-sector activity, boasts a higher per capita GDP than Beijing or Shanghai.
Given that Foshan’s ratio of bank credit to GDP in 2011 was only 85% – much lower than Shanghai’s 184% and Beijing’s 221% – the city could use land as collateral to borrow money to expand investment.
A tight national credit policy, though potentially useful in some highly indebted areas, would impede such growth-enhancing activities in Foshan.
More generally, most of the structural tools needed to strengthen market allocation – including planning, zoning, environmental standards, property rights, and bankruptcy procedures – are implemented at the local level.
And, adding yet another layer of variability, local economies may experience “creative destruction” as their growth models change, potentially causing temporary slowdowns that drag down overall growth.
Against this background, the best way to sustain China’s economic transition and prevent a hard landing is to implement looser monetary and credit policies that enable the most productive cities, companies, and industries to generate new added value.