As a stable and strong world currency, the euro is also limiting exchange-rate instability globally.
Second, the euro area benefits from an independent European Central Bank whose swift actions to ease liquidity constraints and coordinate monetary policy have recently helped to avert a financial meltdown.
Such rapid, coordinated steps by 16 national central banks would have been unthinkable.
Third, the EMU’s stability-oriented macroeconomic framework has better prepared euro-area countries for economic storms.
Thanks to the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, the euro area achieved its soundest budgetary position in 2007, bringing deficits to their lowest levels in 25 years.
This allowed many European Union countries to approach the crisis with room for maneuver.
Such are the EMU’s benefits that the visible costs of remaining a non-member are beginning to recast the political debate surrounding euro adoption in several countries.&#160; 
Of course, the euro is no panacea, nor has it functioned perfectly over the last decade.
Divergences between euro-area economies in terms of growth and inflation have been a persistent challenge.
Though differences are no bigger than those found within larger economies such as the US or Germany, they risk being amplified by the crisis. 
This is why it is even more important that we continue to improve the EMU’s functioning.
This requires not just reinforcing resilience in the face of crisis, but also equipping euro-area economies for the longer-term challenges of globalization, aging, resource scarcity, and climate change.
In a potentially more volatile twenty-first century global economy, we must reap the maximum benefits of economic integration in terms of growth and jobs. 
The key to a better functioning EMU is closer surveillance and deeper coordination of economic policies.
Leaders must start living up to the responsibilities that come with sharing a single currency.
They must recognize the impact that national economic policies have on the euro area as a whole, and thus discuss and coordinate economic programs at the euro-area level.
Here, the launch of the European Economic Recovery Plan – the initiative for an EU-wide fiscal stimulus equivalent to 1.5% of GDP, endorsed by the European Heads of Government in December – constitutes a major step forward.
This must now be followed by closer budgetary monitoring, particularly given that fiscal stimulus measures, the economic downturn, and bank rescue plans will take a toll on public finances.
The Stability and Growth Pact must remain the cornerstone of the EU’s budgetary framework, and effective surveillance and peer support will be vital to help member states work towards balanced budgets once the economy rebounds. 
Deeper fiscal surveillance should be matched by broader economic surveillance, especially since current-account imbalances have become more acute during the crisis.
The European Commission is now working on extending the focus of surveillance beyond fiscal policy so that we can identify risks stemming from macroeconomic imbalances or changes in competitiveness and address them before they become entrenched.
Finally, euro-area nations must strive harder to find common positions on international issues and to speak with a single voice in the global arena.
This is the only way to promote and defend the EMU’s economic interests in a world where the challenges are global and overcoming them will increasingly depend on multilateral cooperation. 
Consider November’s international summit on the financial crisis.
Agreeing a common position ahead of the meeting gave Europe a greater role.
When the euro area manages to agree swiftly on a coordinated position, this can be instrumental to finding agreement in the EU as a whole and internationally.
It is vital we now build on this success and develop a genuine international strategy for the euro.
The European single currency has been a major success, but it remains a work in progress.
A decade after the euro’s introduction, we must follow the example of its founders and turn crisis into opportunity by uniting in a spirit of cooperation and ambition – and thereby reinforce the EMU’s foundations.
The Euro Awaits Its Verdict
WASHINGTON, DC – The creation of the euro just over a decade ago was a courageous and unique experiment.
Today, the outcome – whether the euro will survive, and whether the Europeans are right to keep it – is very much in doubt.
But, if the eurozone does survive, it promises great advantages for member countries – and perhaps for the world.
The euro is an ultra-fixed currency among members: participating countries locked themselves into an initial exchange rate vis-à-vis their pre-existing currencies and then threw the keys into the long grass.
Nowadays, an increasing number of Europeans are combing that grass, quietly looking for those keys.
The euro shares important features with versions of the old gold standard, under which countries fixed their exchange rates relative to each other by setting the price at which domestic currency could be redeemed in gold.
Today, some people espouse the view – often loudly – that the gold standard was synonymous with economic and financial stability.
But that is completely at odds with the historical record: the era of the gold standard is replete with boom-bust episodes fueled by over-borrowing by governments, firms, individuals, or all of the above.
There are three differences between the euro and the gold standard – none of which is particularly reassuring at this moment.
First, the gold standard’s central premise was a finite quantity of gold in the world; more of it cannot be created or discovered, at least not quickly.
By contrast, the European Central Bank can create more euros if so desired.
Countries cannot run out of liquidity, because the ECB can always provide more cash.
But governments and investors know this, and the result has been much higher debt-to-GDP ratios than would have been possible under the gold standard.
The eurozone as a whole has a debt-to-GDP ratio of 90%, which is high by any standard.
Such debt levels are sustainable as long as investors continue to assume that another bailout is just around the corner.
But if the ECB is threatening to cut off support – for example, because a government will not comply with what the Germans regard as good economic policy – the whole house of cards can come tumbling down.
Second, financial markets have become huge relative to anything seen under the gold standard.
European banks could bulk up in large part because it was assumed that their respective governments backed them.
Not only are these banks now large relative to some national economies, but the quality of government credit is now in question across the eurozone periphery – up to and including Italy.
The term “risk-free asset” has become an oxymoron in contemporary Europe.
European banks have been operating on a great deal of debt and very little shareholder capital – the essential buffer against potential losses.
Any shock to sovereign debt or further downturn in local economies will be transmitted through an overleveraged and undercapitalized banking system to other European countries and – quite possibly – elsewhere, including the United States.
Finally, for all the talk today of the discipline that the gold standard supposedly provided, countries that adhered to it regularly suspended convertibility – meaning that the domestic currency could no longer be converted freely into gold.
But today’s Europeans have no domestic currency – just the euro.
If any country – for example, Greece – left the euro, all contracts in that country would have to be rewritten.
The disruption, particularly to credit, would be profound.
The proper functioning of the gold standard required a high degree of flexibility in wages and prices.
If exchange rates cannot depreciate, wages and prices need to fall when a country has an unsustainable current-account deficit.
But, as peripheral Europe can now attest, this is a cumbersome, painful, and politically unpopular form of economic adjustment.
Expect the backlash against it to grow in the months and years ahead.
The news focus today is on how hard it is for the eurozone periphery to adjust and return to growth, owing to the combination of high public debt and actual or perceived austerity measures.
But there is a flip side to the problem: capital is flowing to Germany as the regional safe haven, making credit more readily available there.
The dynamics of adjustment within the eurozone exacerbate the underlying imbalances – Germany is becoming more competitive while the periphery remains uncompetitive.
The recent Greek elections have brought more radical parties to the fore.
Alexis Tsipras, the head of the Coalition of the Radical Left has a valid point:&nbsp;“internal devaluation” – cutting wages and prices – is failing as a strategy.
His alternative appears to be to abandon the euro.
If Greece can’t do better than this, he argues, then it should leave.
But this is not about Greece any longer.
Italy, Spain, Portugal, and even Ireland face the same issues, but are at an earlier stage in the backlash.
Unemployment is rising, their economies are not becoming more competitive, and the interest rates on their debt continue to rise.
These countries may eventually decide to leave.
And, even if they don’t make that choice, fear of such exits can easily become self-fulfilling.
The euro system was designed to deliver prosperity and stability for all. It has clearly failed for some countries, and it may fail for many.
Severe mismanagement by European politicians has caused damage that will last for decades.
Perhaps a stronger fiscal union, a central ministry of finance, and debt sharing would reduce the difficulties and imbalances enough to allow the euro to survive.
Perhaps adjustment will start to work just in time.
There is a lot of shouting in the jury room. Expect a verdict soon.
The Euro Grows Up
On January 1, the euro celebrated its sixth birthday.
Today, we look back on a period in which the European Central Bank has successfully pursued a stability-oriented single monetary policy serving more than 300 million citizens.
This is a remarkable achievement.
When the Maastricht Treaty was ratified in 1993, many people doubted whether Economic and Monetary Union would work.
The Treaty’s objective was widely thought to be laudable – but realizable only in the indefinite future.
To the surprise of many, Europe demonstrated great determination to ensure that the single currency became a reality. 
A single monetary policy for a currency area comprising 11 – and later 12 – countries, each with a sovereign national government, was something entirely new.
Would it be compatible with autonomous national fiscal policies?
Given the decentralized nature of the system, would national interests distort the conduct of monetary policy? 
I see several reasons underlying the ECB’s success in implementing a supranational monetary policy – and thus in firmly establishing the euro’s stability.
First, the ECB’s mandate – enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty – is to deliver and maintain price stability.
Focusing on the goal of maintaining a low and stable rate of inflation is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to economic welfare, sustainable growth, and job creation. 
Second, the Treaty made the ECB perhaps 
 the 
 most independent central bank in the world.
The political temptation is always there to resort to inappropriate monetary expansions that bring temporary relief at the expense of harming longer-term growth.
Institutional independence has allowed the central bank to conduct its monetary policy in a consistent manner, insulated from short-term political influences.
Admittedly, the ECB’s first years were a “baptism of fire.”
Blessed at the start with a very low inflation rate in the euro area, the common currency soon faced a series of one-off shocks.
The biggest impact initially came from sharply rising oil prices and later from a rapidly weakening exchange rate, which led to a sharp rise in import prices.
By the end of 2000, oil prices had risen to levels not seen since the beginning of the 1990’s.
These shocks were naturally beyond the ECB’s control.
The policy response, however, required preventing these shocks from becoming entrenched in medium to long-term inflation expectations.
In this context – and in view of the robust economic growth recorded in 1999 and 2000, the still-booming stock markets, and the continued accumulation of excess liquidity – the ECB’s Governing Council progressively tightened policy, thereby keeping upward risks to price stability from materializing.
A bigger challenge came with the protracted stock market slowdown, the terrorist attacks on the United States in 2001, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
These events hindered the global economy by thwarting confidence and momentum.
Another period of excessive pessimism arose a year ago.
In the summer of 2003, public debate and market sentiment in the euro area were influenced by Japan’s protracted deflation and the expectation of a possibly severe disinflationary process in America.
Some observers saw a risk of sustained deflation in the euro area as well. 
Our assessment was different.
Inflation in the euro area was then slightly above 2%.
Given the movements in the euro’s exchange rate in previous months and sluggish growth in the euro area, we expected that inflation rates would decline, but only to levels close to 2%.
Indeed, our monetary analysis suggested that the risk of protracted deflation was negligible.
So we did not overreact.
We continued to guide monetary policy by our assessment of the risks to price stability over the medium term.
This medium-term orientation paid off.
Fears of euro-area deflation soon vanished and an incipient recovery started later in 2003.
Several lessons can be learned from these episodes.
First, in all cases we remained clearly focused on the mandate of price stability.
Second, we kept a steady hand, guided by our medium-term orientation, while eschewing oversimplified diagnostics and mechanistic reactions to a few indicators.
Third, we aimed at guiding markets and inspiring confidence in monetary policy, thereby helping to stabilize the economy by keeping inflation expectations anchored at levels compatible with our definition of price stability.
So the brief history of the ECB’s monetary policy is already a success story.
Most of the initial uncertainties and concerns – and, to a large extent, the skepticism – have been dispelled.
A still relatively young institution – and the common currency that it manages – has quickly gained public and global confidence.
A current indicator is that the world’s central banks are holding an increasing share of their foreign-exchange reserves in euros rather than US dollars.
The main question now is whether the ECB will be able to sustain its hard-won reputation following enlargement of the euro zone in coming years.
Indeed, when the ECB was established, some observers raised concerns even then about possible inefficiencies resulting from its supposedly outsized Governing Council and about possible distortions in its deliberations due to national considerations.
However, these concerns were misplaced.
So are concerns about the effect of further enlargement of the euro area.
The voting rules unanimously approved by the Governing Council and adopted by the European Council in early 2003 have prepared the ECB well.
As the world has learned, credibility and reliability are the ECB’s two most important attributes.
The Euro in a Shrinking Zone
LONDON – The recent European Union summit was a disaster.
Both Britain and Germany played the wrong game: British Prime Minister David Cameron isolated Britain from Europe, while German Chancellor Angela Merkel isolated the eurozone from reality.
Had Cameron brought an economic-growth agenda to the summit, he would have been fighting for something real, and would not have lacked allies.
As it was, he fully accepted Merkel’s austerity agenda – which his own government is implementing independently – and chose to veto proposals for a new European treaty to protect the City of London.
This cheered up the Euroskeptics in Cameron’s Conservative Party, but it offered nothing to counter the lethal medicine prescribed by Germany’s Iron Lady.
The agreement reached in Brussels forecloses any possibility of Keynesian demand management to fight recession.
“Structural” budget deficits would be limited to 0.5% of GDP, with (as yet undisclosed) penalties for violators.
This is the wrong cure for the eurozone crisis.
The Merkel doctrine holds that the crisis is the result of government profligacy, so only a “hard” balanced-budget rule can prevent such crises from recurring.
But Merkel’s analysis is utterly wrong.
It was not deficit spending by governments that fueled the economic collapse of 2007-2008, but excessive lending by banks.
Government’s mounting debts have been a response to the economic downturn, not its cause.
What ought to have been hard-wired into the EU’s institutional structure was not permanent fiscal austerity, but tough financial regulation.
Of this there is little sign.
More immediately important is the failure of the proposed “fiscal union” to do anything for European recovery.
The figures are grim: before the summit, the European Central Bank slashed its eurozone GDP growth forecast for 2012 from 1.3% to 0.3%.
That is almost certainly optimistic.
In fact, the eurozone will contract in the first half of next year – and probably in the second half, because of the deficit-cutting policies now being pursued – placing further pressure on banks and sovereigns.
The reason why recovery from the crash of 2007-2008 has been so anemic is straightforward. When an economy shrinks, government debt grows automatically, because its revenues decline and its expenses rise.
When it cuts spending, its debt grows even more, because its cuts cause the economy to shrink further.
This makes the government more, not less, likely to default.
In the eurozone, most government debt is held by private banks.
As this debt increases, the value of banks’ assets falls.
So the crisis of the sovereigns engulfs the banks.
To put weakened governments on iron rations, as Merkel did, was to make a financial crisis inevitable.
To continue to preach salvation through austerity as the economy declines and banks collapse is to repeat the classic mistake of German Chancellor Heinrich Brüning in 1930-1932.
To be sure, the eurozone needs more than a bailout.
The periphery needs to recover competitiveness, and some have taken heart from the Mediterranean countries’ shrinking trade deficits – the structural trade imbalances within the eurozone are correcting themselves, they say.
Unfortunately, these corrections are not based on increased exports, but on declining imports, owing to depressed levels of economic activity.
The idea that a country can achieve a trade surplus by importing nothing is as fanciful as the idea that a government can repay its debt by starving itself of revenue.
One person’s spending is another person’s income.
In insisting that its main trade partners cut their spending, Merkel is cutting Germany off from the main sources of its own growth.
So, will the single currency survive?
Two policies that might, in combination, save it are off the agenda. The first is quantitative easing (printing money) on a heroic scale.
The ECB should be empowered to buy any amount of Greek, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese government bonds needed to drive down their yield to near the German rate.
This might stimulate real growth through several channels: by reducing lending rates, by raising the nominal value of public and private assets, and by weakening the euro against the dollar and other currencies.
But the effects of quantitative easing on economic activity are uncertain, and such an inflationary policy might well invite retaliation from Europe’s trading partners.
That is why quantitative easing should be run in conjunction with a eurozone-wide investment program designed to modernize the creaking infrastructure of eastern and southern Europe.
Capital spending by governments, unlike current spending, can be self-financing through user charges.
But, even if it is not, well-chosen public investment produces high returns: new roads reduce transportation costs, and new hospitals produce a healthier workforce.
An institution, the European Investment Bank (EIB), already exists to carry out such a program.
It should be recapitalized on a sufficient scale to offset the contractionary effects of Europe’s national deficit-reduction programs.
Quantitative easing, combined with public investment, would impart the growth impetus that the eurozone sorely needs to bring about a gradual reduction in its aggregate debt burden.
But it is almost certain that neither policy, much less both, will be implemented.
The ECB is stealthily buying government bonds on the secondary market, but its new governor, Mario Draghi, insists that such intervention is temporary, limited, and intended solely to “restore the functioning of monetary transmission channels.”
No one at the recent EU summit suggested making the EIB an engine of growth. So the bleeding will go on.
This means that the eurozone is beyond saving; the euro will survive, but the zone will shrink.
The only question is the scale, timing, and manner of its breakup.
Greece, and probably other Mediterranean countries, will default and regain the freedom to print money and devalue their exchange rates.
This will send shock waves throughout the world. But sometimes shock waves are needed to break the ice and start the water flowing again.
The European Banking Union?
MUNICH – In blatant violation of the Maastricht Treaty, the European Commission has come forward with one bailout plan after another for Europe’s distressed economies.
Now it wants to socialize not only government debt by introducing Eurobonds, but also banking debt by proclaiming a “banking union.”
Socializing bank debt is both unjust and will result in a future misallocation of resources.
Socialization of bank debt across borders implies that a country’s private borrowing costs are artificially reduced below market rates, as insurance (in the form of credit-default swaps) is provided free of charge by other countries.
Thus, capital flows from the core to the periphery would continue to exceed the optimal amount, undermining growth for Europe as a whole.
History offers countless examples of the misallocation of resources that can result from socialization of bank debt.
One is the 1980’s savings and loan crisis in the United States, which cost US taxpayers more than $100 billion.
Under the umbrella of common deposit insurance, US savings banks made a “gamble for resurrection” – borrowing excessively from their depositors and lending the money out to risky enterprises, knowing that potential profits could be paid out as dividends to shareholders while potential losses would be socialized.
In other words, private profits were generated out of socially wasteful activities.
And essentially the same happened with US subprime mortgage lending and with the Spanish banking system in the 2000’s.
In both cases, banks took excessive risks in the expectation – eventually vindicated – that governments would bail them out.
Spanish banks speculated on a continuing increase in real-estate prices, which would bring large capital gains to their customers.
Indeed, they often lent homeowners more than 100% of the underlying property’s value.
To compensate for the damage that their reckless behavior caused, they received €303 billion ($378 billion) in extra credit through Target, the European Central Bank's interbank payment settlement system, and can now expect a further €100 billion in help from the European Financial Stability Facility.
Much of this money will never return.
Debt-equity swaps would be a much better way to recapitalize the banks.
Rather than imposing the costs of the ECB’s and EFSF’s losses on European taxpayers, the banks’ creditors could give up some of their claims in exchange for receiving shares from the banks’ owners.
Debt-equity swaps rescue the banks without rescuing their shareholders.
Ideally, bank creditors would not lose money, because their fixed-interest claims would be converted into bank shares of similar value.
This would be the case as long as the banks’ losses remained smaller than their equity capital.
A true loss would be inflicted on a bank’s creditors only if the write-off losses on toxic mortgage loans exceeded the bank’s equity.
But, even then, it would be better for creditors to bear the loss than for taxpayers to do so, because this would encourage more cautious lending in the future.
Socializing public debt is already posing a risk to the still-stable eurozone countries.
To do the same thing with bank debt could pull hitherto sound economies into the abyss, because bank’s balance sheets are much larger than the volume of government debt.
In Spain, the public debt-to-GDP ratio is 69%, but the debt of the Spanish banking system totals 305% of GDP, or about €3.3 trillion – about as much as the combined public debt of all five crisis-stricken eurozone countries.
While the enormous volume of the bank debt implies that governments should shy away from socializing banking risks, it also suggests that only the banks’ creditors could reasonably be asked to foot the bill without being overburdened.
Indeed, if, as some believe, only a fraction of the banks’ equity is at risk, the potential debt-equity swaps would be minuscule.
Spanish banks have 7% equity capital on average on their balance sheets.
Thus, a debt-equity swap of less than 7.5% of the creditors’ investment would be enough to compensate for the banks’ losses.
And, even if the banks’ private depositors, whose claims are 39% of the aggregate balance sheet, were excluded, the debt-equity swap necessary to compensate for a loss of up to 100% of the equity would be less than 12% of the creditors’ investment volume.
Debt-equity swaps have been used successfully in many cases, and they follow from normal bankruptcy procedures.
Apart from avoiding the excess burden and injustice of taxation, they also have the benefit of inducing banks’ owners to choose a prudent investment strategy, while persuading creditors to scrutinize and select carefully the banks to which they want to lend.
The care taken in augmenting and preserving the wealth that current generations inherited from their ancestors is the ultimate reason for economic growth and capitalism’s success.
Massive government interventions during the crisis have undermined this principle, and have probably already destroyed much of the inherited wealth.
It is time to heed the fundamental laws of economics and put a stop to the imprudence that those charged with fighting the crisis have been allowed to get away with.
Europe needs no banking union beyond a common regulatory system.
The European Economic Model Lives
Back in the early 1990's, American officials like me who were making long-term forecasts for the Clinton administration cautioned that it would be rash to forecast an average long-run growth rate of more than 2.5% per year - and that actual growth might turn out to be even slower.
Now we look back at a decade during which the American economy has grown at an average rate of 3.4% per year.
Indeed, the United States today is 9% richer than we would have dared forecast a decade ago, and that is true despite labor-market slack and thus the largest production shortfalls below potential output in two decades.
In America, the "new economy" has proven to be real, and there is every reason to think that growth in the next decade will be faster than it was in the past.
The acceleration of US economic growth in the late 1990's posed a puzzle for those of us who looked across the Atlantic at Western Europe: where was Europe's "new economy"?
We could see it in Scandinavia, and in scattered pockets elsewhere, but the strong imprint of improved computer and communications technologies on the growth rates of output and productivity economy-wide seemed to be missing.
Europe seemed to be falling further and further behind the US.
Yet today, if we look at transatlantic comparisons, Western Europe appears to be doing much better than one would expect if one were to judge from the past decade's business press.
Western Europe's productivity per hour worked, for example, is now only 10% or so below America's.
Northwestern University economist Robert Gordon points out several interesting features of America's GDP that should give cheerleaders of the US model and critics of Europe cause for greater circumspection.
For example, Americans must buy cars because public transport is so lousy.
The value of the cars is calculated in American GDP, but European public-transport systems are counted not at their value to passengers but as a cost to government.
Similarly, Americans keep two million of their fellow citizens in jail: the cost of building the prisons and paying the jailers is also included in GDP.
Professor Gordon also points out that America's more extreme climate - colder winters (save in Florida and California) and hotter summers (save in Washington, Oregon, and California) - must spend more on heating and cooling.
The net result of all these calculations?
Western Europeans work some 25% less than Americans, yet they have a level of social welfare (including climate) that is only around 15% lower than Americans, and they have more equal income distributions and lower poverty rates as well.
From this perspective, Western Europe appears to have at least as good a claim to the title of "Good Society" as does the US.
Moreover, the economy-wide productivity gap between the US and Western Europe does not appear to be widening very rapidly, if at all.
Western European productivity growth almost matches America's, suggesting that the new economy is coming to Western Europe, only quietly and with much less fanfare than in America.
Of course, all favorable judgments of the state of the Western European economy must come with fine print.
European unemployment, for example, appears to be half again as high as in the US.
Labor force participation is lower - and a substantial part of that lower labor force participation is not the result of untrammeled choice but of discouraged workers and institutions that make it very difficult for households that have every adult at work.
Moreover, European labor productivity figures are inflated by the fact that potential workers who would be less productive are much less likely to hold any jobs at all.
Looming over everything is the impending demographic crisis of Western Europe's social-insurance state as its population ages.
But where is the country or region without serious economic worries and deep structural problems?
During the late 1990's, the US had an amazingly long run of economic good luck, assisted by some very good institutions and some quite good economic policies.
By 2000, European senior bureaucrats began to dread the approach of each international meeting as the likely occasion for yet another lecture by the Americans on how Europe needed to become much more like America right now.
Thus, it is important to note how little - if any - ground America has gained relative to Europe in the past decade according to the yardstick of social welfare.
Learning needs to go both ways.
The European Museum
In the late nineteenth century, Europe viewed Asia mainly as either a source of inspiration for its artists or a focus of imperial ambition.
Asians, for their part, viewed Europe as either a model of modernity, as in Meiji Japan, or a barometer of decay, as in China.
A century later, the Japanese economic miracle had transformed the image of at least a small part of Asia in European eyes into a place of rapid technological and industrial progress.
Now, in the first years of the twenty-first century, the perception of Europe in Asia and of Asia in Europe is changing dramatically, as Asia’s economies boom while the European Union finds itself mired in a crisis of identity and confidence.
Prominent Asians, such as former Singaporean leader Lee Kuan Yew, are now warning Europeans that if they continue on their current course, Europe will rapidly become irrelevant for anything other than tourism and high-end real estate.
A prominent Chinese businessman who divides his time between Hong-Kong and London was even more specific.
At a private gathering of top business and political leaders in Paris a few weeks ago, he said, “You Europeans are becoming a Third World country, you spend time on the wrong subjects –the constitution, the welfare state, the pensions crisis – and you systematically give the wrong answers to the questions you raise.”
Europeans’ views of Asia in general, and China in particular, are more complex and swing from lucid adjustment to a new and respected competitor to pure ideological rejection.
In May 1968, in France, the students – or some of them, at least – who took to the streets to invent a new world were dreaming of Maoist China, a China in the midst of the brutal and senseless Cultural Revolution.
Their absurd and baroque infatuation was as much the product of ignorance of Mao’s crimes as it was the result of boredom in a prosperous society where unemployment was virtually nonexistent.
Today, by contrast, their heirs are openly criticizing the Asian capitalist model.
Yesterday China was an anti-capitalist lodestar for utopian revolutionaries; today it has become an ultra-liberal nemesis for a new generation of utopian reactionaries – the defenders of the status quo in Europe.
The student demonstrators in the streets of Paris recently don’t want to become like Chinese and Indians; they reject the logic of globalization and refuse to surrender hard-won social guarantees.
European economic elites perceive China and India very differently.
They are now fully aware that their slightly nostalgic post-colonial view of these countries as large export markets and deep reservoirs of cheap labor has become outdated.
China and India have become genuine competitors who deserve respect, if not sheer awe.
Quality, costs, and delivery times in auto manufacturing, for example, are reaching the European level.
Europe retains an advantage in terms of pure science, as in the pharmaceutical industry, but emerging world-class companies, particularly in India, are increasingly able to recruit M.I.T. and Harvard graduates, while maintaining lower labor costs and thus global competitiveness.
Unfortunately, although European leaders recognize the Asian challenge, they have failed to use it as a reality test in the irresistible process of globalization and as a call to arms in social and economic terms.
In fact, it would be fair to say that European politicians, with few exceptions, such as Tony Blair, have been slow to adjust their worldviews in accordance with the revolutionary pace of change in Asia.
Caught between their lack of long-term strategic vision and their obsession with short-term interests, Europe’s political leaders have largely failed to win the respect of their Asian counterparts, in contrast to European companies, which are faring much better in Asian eyes.
Of course, on a continent that has largely failed to bury its past and close the door to nationalist ghosts, the EU is also often regarded by Asians as a model of reconciliation, peace, and prosperity.
But if Europe’s performance continues to decline, would this perception survive?
Perhaps Asians would then come to regard the European model as a political version of Venice – a place to visit with nostalgia for its past glory and admiration for its museum-like quality.
The Great Bank Debate
OXFORD – Christine Lagarde, the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, recently said of the unfinished agenda for global financial-sector reform: “To start, we need concrete progress with the too-important-to-fail conundrum.
We need a global-level discussion of the pros and cons of direct restrictions on business models.”
Five years on from the start of the crisis, with the publication of the Liikanen report on European Union banking reform, that debate has finally begun.
The Liikanen proposals have much in common with those made in 2011 by the United Kingdom’s Independent Commission on Banking (ICB), which I chaired.
Both sets of recommendations stress the importance of an interlocking package of measures that combine much greater loss-absorbency with structural reform.
And both make the same economic case for such reforms: to insulate basic banking services from investment banking risks; to make resolution easier and thus more credible; to shield taxpayers from risks that belong in the private sector; and hence to ensure that banks’ risk-taking is subject to adequate market discipline.
Moreover, both Liikanen and the ICB favor structured universal banking – legally separate entities with separate capital, management, and so forth – rather than calling for its demise, as urged by those who want to split commercial from investment banking fully.
For large banks, Liikanen would separate trading from deposit banking, while the ICB’s proposals, which are now incorporated in draft legislation in Britain, would ring-fence retail banking.
This by itself is a distinction without a difference.
After all, a fence to protect the deer from the lions is the same as a fence to keep the lions away from the deer.
Unlike their cousin the Volcker Rule, neither Liikanen nor the UK approach attempts to draw a line between types of trading.
Judging whether trading is proprietary might not quite require “windows into men’s souls” (which in another context Queen Elizabeth I wisely avoided), but America’s experience shows that it is difficult all the same.
Still, the Liikanen and UK designs are not identical.
Nor should they be.
The UK has a much larger banking system relative to its economy’s size than does Europe as a whole – let alone the United States.
The UK’s system is exposed to different risks, which it is in Europe’s interest to have well managed.
Moreover, Liikanen is not a one-size-fits-all approach, as it explicitly proposes powers to require wider separation, if needed, to ensure resolvability.
One clear difference, though, is that Liikanen, unlike the UK proposals, allows securities underwriting in deposit banks.
This contrasts with the US, even after the 1999 repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act’s ban on affiliation between banks and companies engaged principally in underwriting securities.
And it sits oddly with separating trading and derivatives from deposit banking, since underwriting is akin to selling a large put option, and typically riskier than normal market-making.
With underwriting on the trading side of the fence, the deposit bank could still supply the service to customers, but as a broker, not as a dealer.
Underwriting belongs with the lions.
Aside from its implementation difficulties, there are good reasons not to introduce the Volcker rule, rather than the ICB/Liikanen proposals, in the UK and Europe.
First, it does not do enough to shield retail banking from investment-banking risks, of which only a small share relate to proprietary trading.
Second, the US has a very different banking system to begin with, including various regulations on how depository institutions can relate to affiliated trading entities.
This suggests that a better question is whether to introduce the Volcker rule in addition to, rather than instead of, ring-fencing.
In the interest of simplicity, I would say no.
Enforcing total separation instead of ring-fencing would provide a stronger barrier, but at a potentially high cost, including a risk to financial stability.
After all, full separation implies that resources from elsewhere in a given banking group are unavailable to address a retail-banking crisis resulting from, say, a slump in residential and commercial property prices.
Structural reform is also fundamental to the moves toward a European banking union, for a union with well-capitalized and safely structured banks has much better prospects than one without.
Otherwise, mutualization of contingent liabilities could exacerbate the too-important-to-fail problem.
Now that structural reform is explicitly on the agenda, the debate about European banking reform is entering a new phase.
But, as the IMF has stressed, the debate needs to go beyond Europe.
Moreover, it is more than a debate about public policy, because, in the post-crisis world, market incentives might point toward forms of separation between retail and investment banking.
But market incentives surrounding various business models will remain distorted so long as taxpayers are liable for bank losses.
That provides all the more reason to get them off the hook via structural and other banking reforms.
The Erosion of Europe
BERLIN – Just weeks ago, the worst of the financial crisis in Europe seemed to be over.
Stability seemed to be returning.
But appearances proved to be deceptive.
A minor problem (at least in scale) like Cyprus, when combined with an almost unbelievable degree of incompetence among the “troika” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund), was enough to turn a molehill into a mountainous crisis.
While markets remained calm, the Cyprus crisis revealed the full extent of the political disaster that the eurozone crisis has wrought: the European Union is disintegrating at its core.
Europeans’ current crisis of confidence concerning Europe is far more dangerous than renewed market anxiety, because it cannot be overcome with another liquidity injection by the ECB.
Europe’s old political order was based on competition, mistrust, power rivalries, and, ultimately, war among sovereign states.
It collapsed on May 8, 1945, and was replaced by a system based on mutual trust, solidarity, the rule of law, and compromise.
But, with the crisis eroding these foundations, trust is giving way to mistrust, solidarity is succumbing to ancient prejudices (and even new hatred between the poor south and the rich north), and compromise is being overwhelmed by diktat.
And Germany is once again at the center of the process of disintegration.
That is because Germany, by far the EU’s strongest economy, has enforced a strategy for overcoming the eurozone crisis that worked for Germany at the beginning of the millennium, but under completely different internal and external economic conditions.
For the distressed southern European states, the German-backed mixture of austerity and structural reforms is proving fatal, because the decisive third and fourth components – debt relief and growth – are missing.
It is only a matter of time before one of the large European crisis countries elects a political leadership that no longer accepts the austerity diktats.
Even now, come election time, national governments more or less openly promise to protect their citizens from Europe, because Germany has seen to it that austerity and structural reforms take pride of place in managing the crisis.
The argument that “tough love” was necessary in southern Europe, because nothing there would ever have changed otherwise, has been settled.
The love has been very tough indeed, generating rapid economic contraction, massive unemployment (upwards of 50% among young people), and continued fiscal deterioration, owing to rising debt-service costs.
Indeed, all eurozone members are now experiencing weak economic growth, if not recession.
What does Germany want?
A German Europe would never work, and the country’s political class lacks both the courage and the determination to pursue a European Germany.
So, does Germany want to hold together the monetary union and thus preserve the EU, or will it allow dithering and a lack of vision to hasten the erosion of Europe’s foundations?
In this crisis, intention takes a back seat to action (or lack thereof).
The International Herald Tribunerecently quoted Winston Churchill: “It’s not enough that we do our best; sometimes we have to do what’s required.”
That is precisely the order of the day in Europe and the eurozone.
What needs to be done has long been clear.
The price of the monetary union’s survival, and thus that of the European project, is more community: a banking union, fiscal union, and political union.
Those who oppose this because they fear common accountability, transfers from rich to poor, and a loss of national sovereignty will have to accept Europe’s re-nationalization – and thus its exit from the world stage.
No alternative –&#160;and certainly not the statusquo – will work.
It has become common knowledge in Europe that the ongoing crisis will either destroy the EU or bring about a political union, and that, without a solidarity-based solution to existing debt and a partial mutualization of new debt, the euro cannot be saved.
Such steps will make far-reaching transfers of sovereignty unavoidable.
Is Germany – or France – willing to do that?
The real crisis of the EU and the monetary union is not financial but political – or, more precisely, it is a leadership crisis.
A lack of vision, courage, and strength of purpose is on display in all European capitals, but especially so in Berlin (and on the part of government and opposition alike).
Europe’s national politicians routinely criticize the EU for its lack of democratic legitimacy, yet they bear part of the responsibility for it.
Or have pro-Europeans become so faint-hearted and dejected that they prefer simply to hand over the reins to anti-European populists and nationalists?
That would be a disaster, because the crisis now runs too deep to be resolved by technocratic means.
Germany is preparing for a national election in which – much like in last year’s French presidential election – the European crisis is to play no part, or at least only a minor one.
Both government and opposition believe that it would be better to tell the people the truth concerning the most vital question of the day only after the election (and in measured doses).
Such an outcome would make a mockery of democracy.
But things may turn out very differently if the dynamics of Europe’s crisis throw German politicians’ plans into disarray.
An unpleasant surprise cannot be ruled out; at this point, it might be Europe’s greatest source of hope.
The Europe of the Future
PARIS – Whenever people seek a justification for European integration, they are always tempted to look backwards.
They stress that European integration banished the specter of war from the old continent.
And European integration has, indeed, delivered the longest period of peace and prosperity that Europe has known for many centuries.
But this perspective, while entirely correct, is also incomplete.
There are as many reasons to strive towards “ever closer union” in Europe today as there were back in 1945, and they are entirely forward-looking.
Sixty-five years ago, the distribution of global GDP was such that Europe had only one role model for its single market: the United States.
Today, however, Europe is faced with a new global economy, reconfigured by globalization and by the emerging economies of Asia and Latin America.
It is a world where economies of scale and networks of innovation matter more than ever.
By 2016 – that is, very soon – we can expect eurozone GDP in terms of purchasing power parity to be below that of China.
Together, the economies of China and India could be around twice the size of the eurozone economy.
Over a longer time horizon, the entire GDP of the G-7 countries will be dwarfed by the major emerging economies’ rapid growth.
So Europe must cope with a new geopolitical landscape that is being profoundly reshaped by these emerging economies.
In this new global constellation, European integration – both economic and political – is central to achieving ongoing prosperity and influence.
Like individuals in a society, eurozone countries are both independent and interdependent.
They can affect each other both positively and negatively.
Good governance requires that both individual member states and EU institutions fulfill their responsibilities.
First and foremost, every eurozone country needs to keep its own house in order.
This means responsible economic policies on the part of governments, as well as rigorous mutual surveillance of those policies – not just fiscal policies, but also measures affecting all aspects of the economy – by the Commission and member states.
In a society, law-enforcement institutions can ultimately compel a citizen to abide by the rules.
In the eurozone, a framework based on surveillance and sanctions has, until the most recent decisions, depended on offending states’ willingness to comply.
But what can be done if a member state cannot deliver on its promises?
For countries that lose market access, the approach of providing aid on the basis of strong conditionality is justified.
Countries deserve an opportunity to correct the situation themselves and to restore stability.
This approach nonetheless has clearly defined limits.
So a second stage is now envisaged for countries that persistently fail to meet their policy targets.
During this second stage, eurozone authorities would play a much deeper and more authoritative role in the formulation of countries’ budgetary policies.
This moves us away from the current framework, which leaves all decisions in the hands of the country concerned.
Instead, it would be not only possible, but in some cases compulsory, for the European authorities to take direct decisions.
Implementing this idea also implies embracing a new concept of sovereignty, given the complex interdependence that exists between eurozone countries.
But it is ultimately in the interests of all eurozone citizens that these changes be made.
It is my firm conviction that the Europe of the future will embody a new type of institutional framework.
What might it look like?
Would it be too bold to envisage there being an EU finance ministry one day?
Any future European finance ministry would oversee the surveillance of both fiscal policies and competitiveness policies, and, when necessary, impose the “second stage.”
Moreover, it would carry out the usual executive responsibilities regarding supervision and regulation of the EU financial sector.
Finally, the ministry would represent the eurozone in international financial institutions.
Recent events have only strengthened the case for pursuing this approach.
Europe’s leaders are discussing a Treaty change to create stronger economic governance at the EU level, and eurozone citizens are themselves calling for better supervision of the financial sector.
And I know that our partners in the G-20 look to Europe as a whole, rather than to individual member states, for solutions.
So, increasingly, it seems that it would be too bold not to consider creating a European finance ministry at some point in the future.
But an EU finance ministry would be only one component of Europe’s future institutional framework.
One can imagine that, as various elements of sovereignty come to be shared, the European Council might evolve into the EU Senate, with the European Parliament becoming the lower house. Similarly, the European Commission could become the executive, while the European Court of Justice takes on the role of an EU judiciary.
And, given European countries’ long and proud history, I have no doubt that “subsidiarity” will play a major role in the future Europe – significantly greater than in current models of federation.
Mine are the personal views of a European citizen.
The future of Europe is in the hands of its democracies, in the hands of Europe’s people.
Our fellow citizens will decide the direction Europe is to take.
They are the masters.
But, however Europe’s institutions take shape, a truly pan-European public debate is essential.
As Europeans, we identify deeply with our nations, traditions, and histories.
These are Europe’s roots.
But we also need to extend our branches more widely.
So, today, we should not look back. We must look forward – to opportunities of collective betterment, and to every country’s potential to be stronger and more prosperous in a well-functioning union.
Photograph of Jean-Claude Trichet: (c) European Central Bank/Andreas Böttcher
The Euro’s Final Countdown?
The introduction of the euro in 1999, it was claimed, would narrow the economic differences between the member countries of the monetary union.
Unemployment rates would converge, as would other important macroeconomic variables, such as unit labor costs, productivity, and fiscal deficits and government debt.
It also became the currency of the Finns, runners-up in innovation and market flexibility, and of Italy, which lacked both, earning the apt moniker “the sick man of Europe.”
Such differences were a highly complicating factor for the newly established European Central Bank (ECB), which had to determine the appropriate interest rate for all members (the so-called “one size fits all” policy).
The larger the differences have become during the euro’s first decade, the more the ECB’s policy could be described as “one size fits none.”
We have compared the performance of the best-performing and worst-performing euro-zone countries between 1999 and 2009.
To avoid comparing apples and oranges, we have compared the data for the 11 countries that were included in the first wave in 1999, supplemented by Greece, which joined shortly thereafter.
(All data are from Eurostat, the European statistics bureau.)
Because the ECB was given the sole task of achieving and maintaining price stability in the euro area, inflation rates seem the most logical starting point for comparison.
In 1999, the difference between the euro-zone countries with the lowest and highest inflation rate was two percentage points.
By the end of 2009, the difference had almost tripled, to 5.9 percentage points.
As for economic growth, we have made an exception. For that variable, we looked at the average yearly GDP growth in the first five years after the introduction of euro banknotes and coins in 2002.
The difference between Ireland and Portugal in the first half of the decade was 4.8 percentage points.
Nor could we find any convergence regarding government deficits and debt.
In 1999, Finland boasted the smallest government debt, equal to 45.5% of GDP.
As a result, the difference between the debt positions of Finland and Italy, the most prudent and most profligate euro-zone members, shot up to 73.3 percentage points in 2009.
(The situation is even worse for government deficits.)
The implications of these increasing differences could be severe.
Increasing tensions between the euro countries on economic policy are likely, as are growing rifts within the ECB governing council in the coming years.
We might get a sneak preview this year and in 2011, when European leaders must select a new ECB president and vice-president.
As always, those seats will be hotly contested, but, with more at stake than ever, the fight for them could be fiercer than it would otherwise.
Tensions at the ECB and between the euro-zone countries do not bode well for the stability of the common currency, both externally, vis-à-vis other currencies, and internally, in terms of inflation.
The ECB will be scapegoated for that. If it keeps its interest rate too low for too long, countries like Germany and the Netherlands will protest.
Almost 20 years later, the Swedish band Europe’s hit song, “The Final Countdown,” seems more appropriate for the euro area with every passing day.
The Euro’s Imagined Community
NEW HAVEN – Great significance – probably too much – has been attached to a possible breakup of the eurozone.
Many believe that such a breakup – if, say, Greece abandoned the euro and reintroduced the drachma – would constitute a political failure that would ultimately threaten Europe’s stability.
Speaking before the Bundestag last October, German Chancellor Angela Merkel put the matter starkly:
“Nobody should believe that another half-century of peace and prosperity in Europe is guaranteed.
It is not.
So I say: If the euro fails, Europe fails.
That must not happen.
We have a historical obligation to protect by all prudent means at our disposal Europe's unification process begun by our forefathers more than fifty years ago after centuries of hatred and spilling of blood.
None of us can foresee what the consequences would be if we were to fail.”
Europe has had more than 250 wars since the beginning of the Renaissance in the mid-fifteenth century.
So, it is not alarmist to worry aloud about preserving the sense of community that Europe has enjoyed for the past half-century.
In a fascinating, but largely overlooked book, How Enemies Become Friends,Charles A. Kupchan reviews many historical case studies of how nation-states with a long history of conflict managed eventually to become secure and peaceful friends.
His examples include the formation of the Swiss Confederation (1291-1848); the creation of the Iroquois Confederation in the century or so before the first Europeans arrived in America; the establishment of the United States (1776-1789); the unification of Italy (1861), and of Germany (1871); the Norway-Sweden rapprochement (1905-1935); the formation of the United Arab Emirates (1971); and the Argentine-Brazilian rapprochement of the 1970’s.
Kupchan also examines some notable failures of friendship: the United States’ Civil War (1861-65); the end of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance (1923); the breakdown of Sino-Soviet relations (1960); the demise of the United Arab Republic (1961); and the expulsion of Singapore from Malaysia (1965).
Kupchan never mentions a common currency as a condition of comity among nations; in fact, economic integration tends to follow, rather than precede, achievement of political unity.
Rather, he regards diplomatic engagement as the essential element to strategic accommodation and mutual trust, and this is more easily accomplished if the states have similar social orders and ethnicities.
But Kupchan’s analysis implies that a common currency can help nation-states to build lasting friendships, for he argues that friendship-building is most secure after an identity-changing “narrative” takes root, leading to a sense that the nations are like members of a family.
A common currency can help to generate such a narrative.
For example, the Iroquois tell the story of a great warrior and skilled orator named Hiawatha, who, traveling with the mystic Deganawidah, negotiated the treaties that established their confederation.
He advocated new condolence ceremonies to commemorate lost warriors – and to replace wars of vengeance.
The new narrative was reinforced with physical symbols, akin to a currency or a flag, in the form of belts of beads made of wampum, the Iroquois’ money.
A surviving Hiawatha belt, dating from the eighteenth century (and probably a copy of earlier belts), contains symbols of the five nations – Seneca, Cayuga, Onondaga, Oneida, and Mohawk – much as the US flag contains stars representing each of its states.
The belt also preserves Hiawatha’s status as the confederation’s forefather.
Flags may be a more inspiring symbol of common destiny, but most of us do not carry them around, and many people never display them, except perhaps at major sports events; their origin, rooted in battle standards, can seem uncomfortably aggressive.
There is a European Union flag, but it is rarely seen anywhere but outside of EU government buildings.
A British schoolteacher expressed the sentiment well in 1910: “We suspect the man who talks patriotism and imperialism, just as we suspect him who talks religion or any of the things that are of deepest value in life.
We think him either a humbug or a shallow person who has not realized the inadequacy of words to express what is deepest.”
And yet national currency, which we display every time we make a cash purchase, arouses no such suspicions.
So currency works as a constant, if latent, reminder of identity.
In using it, one has the psychological experience of participating with others in a common venture, and thus developing a sense of trust in both the endeavor and one’s fellow-participants.
Every currency union chooses symbols of common cultural values for its coins and notes, and these symbols become part of the sense of shared identity.
We see the human faces on the notes so often that they come to seem like family, creating what the political scientist Benedict Anderson called the “imagined community” that underlies and sustains a sense of nationhood.
The euro notes feature bridges as they appeared throughout Europe in various epochs, rather than images of actual structures that might seem to imply preferential regard for some countries.
The town of Spijkenisse in the Netherlands is now in the process of building all seven bridges depicted on the euro notes.
But the bridges remain symbols of European culture, in which presumably all Europeans share.
Modern electronic technology will not eliminate paper notes and coins soon, so there is still plenty of time to make use of the symbolic value of a common currency.
Indeed, even if the eurozone breaks up, each European country could adopt a different currency but retain common symbols.
For example, there could be a Greek euro, a Spanish euro, etc.
The notes could even show the same pictures of bridges.
Even electronic transactions should be able to generate symbols of peace, trust, and unity.
The point is that if Europe can keep these symbols alive, even a eurozone breakup would not have the dire political consequences for Europe that so many predict.
The Euro’s Latest Reprieve
NEW YORK – Like an inmate on death row, the euro has received another last-minute stay of execution.
It will survive a little longer.
The markets are celebrating, as they have after each of the four previous “euro crisis” summits – until they come to understand that the fundamental problems have yet to be addressed.
There was good news in this summit: Europe’s leaders have finally understood that the bootstrap operation by which Europe lends money to the banks to save the sovereigns, and to the sovereigns to save the banks, will not work.
Likewise, they now recognize that bailout loans that give the new lender seniority over other creditors worsen the position of private investors, who will simply demand even higher interest rates.
It is deeply troubling that it took Europe’s leaders so long to see something so obvious (and evident more than a decade and half ago in the East Asia crisis).
But what is missing from the agreement is even more significant than what is there.
A year ago, European leaders acknowledged that Greece could not recover without growth, and that growth could not be achieved by austerity alone.
Yet little was done.
What is now proposed is recapitalization of the European Investment Bank, part of a growth package of some $150 billion.
But politicians are good at repackaging, and, by some accounts, the new money is a small fraction of that amount, and even that will not get into the system immediately.
In short: the remedies – far too little and too late – are based on a misdiagnosis of the problem and flawed economics.
The hope is that markets will reward virtue, which is defined as austerity.
But markets are more pragmatic: if, as is almost surely the case, austerity weakens economic growth, and thus undermines the capacity to service debt, interest rates will not fall.
In fact, investment will decline – a vicious downward spiral on which Greece and Spain have already embarked.
Germany seems surprised by this.
Like medieval blood-letters, the country’s leaders refuse to see that the medicine does not work, and insist on more of it – until the patient finally dies.
Eurobonds and a solidarity fund could promote growth and stabilize the interest rates faced by governments in crisis.
Lower interest rates, for example, would free up money so that even countries with tight budget constraints could spend more on growth-enhancing investments.
Matters are worse in the banking sector.
Each country’s banking system is backed by its own government; if the government’s ability to support the banks erodes, so will confidence in the banks.
Even well-managed banking systems would face problems in an economic downturn of Greek and Spanish magnitude; with the collapse of Spain’s real-estate bubble, its banks are even more at risk.
In their enthusiasm for creating a “single market,” European leaders did not recognize that governments provide an implicit subsidy to their banking systems.
It is confidence that if trouble arises the government will support the banks that gives confidence in the banks; and, when some governments are in a much stronger position than others, the implicit subsidy is larger for those countries.
In the absence of a level playing field, why shouldn’t money flee the weaker countries, going to the financial institutions in the stronger?
Indeed, it is remarkable that there has not been more capital flight.
Europe’s leaders did not recognize this rising danger, which could easily be averted by a common guarantee, which would simultaneously correct the market distortion arising from the differential implicit subsidy.
The euro was flawed from the outset, but it was clear that the consequences would become apparent only in a crisis.