Initially viewed as a sign of weakness, Cameron’s move has turned out to be a masterstroke.
Having been offered the freedom to “vote your conscience” on the EU deal, most significant Conservative politicians – with the notable exceptions of Boris Johnson and Michael Gove – have come around to supporting Cameron.
As a result, the Out campaign has been left effectively leaderless and has already split into two rival factions – one driven mainly by anti-immigrant and protectionist sentiment, the other determined to concentrate on neoliberal economics and free trade.
It can be confidently predicted that as the political tide turns, the British media and business opinion will follow, mainly because of direct financial interests.
For example, Rupert Murdoch, whose outlets dominate the media landscape, needs membership in the EU single market to consolidate his satellite TV businesses in Britain, Germany, and Italy.
Another powerful motivator for Murdoch, as well as for other media proprietors and business leaders, is to be on the winning side and to maintain good relations with Cameron, unless they see overwhelming evidence that he will lose.
That brings us to the main reason for ignoring current opinion polls: Only when Britain starts seriously debating the costs and benefits of leaving the EU – and this may not happen until a few weeks before the referendum – will voters realize that Brexit would mean huge economic costs for Britain and no political benefits whatsoever.
The economic challenges of Brexit would be overwhelming.
The Out campaign’s main economic argument – that Britain’s huge trade deficit is a secret weapon, because the EU would have more to lose than Britain from a breakdown in trade relations – is flatly wrong.
Britain would need to negotiate access to the European single market for its service industries, whereas EU manufacturers would automatically enjoy virtually unlimited rights to sell whatever they wanted in Britain under global World Trade Organization rules.
Margaret Thatcher was the first to realize that Britain’s specialization in services – not only finance, but also law, accountancy, media, architecture, pharmaceutical research and so on – makes membership in the EU single market critical.
It makes little economic difference to Germany, France, or Italy whether Britain is an EU member or simply in the WTO.
Britain would therefore need an EU association agreement, similar to those negotiated with Switzerland or Norway, the only two significant European economies outside the EU.
From the EU’s perspective, the terms of any British deal would have to be at least as stringent as those in the existing association agreements.
To grant easier terms would immediately force matching concessions to Switzerland and Norway.
Worse still, any special favors for Britain would set a precedent and tempt other lukewarm EU members to make exit threats and demand renegotiation.
Among the conditions accepted by Norway and Switzerland that the EU would surely regard as non-negotiable are four that completely negate the political objectives of Brexit.
Norway and Switzerland must abide by all EU single market standards and regulations, without any say in their formulation.
They agree to translate all relevant EU laws into their domestic legislation without consulting domestic voters.
They contribute substantially to the EU budget.
And they must accept unlimited EU immigration, resulting in a higher share of EU immigrants in the Swiss and Norwegian populations than in the UK.
If Britain rejected these encroachments on national sovereignty, its service industries would be locked out of the single market.
The French, German, and Irish governments would be particularly delighted to see UK-based banks and hedge funds shackled by EU regulations, and UK-based businesses involved in asset management, insurance, accountancy, law, and media forced to transfer their jobs, head offices, and tax payments to Paris, Frankfurt, or Dublin.
When confronted with this exodus of high-value service jobs and businesses, Britain would surely balk and accept the intrusive regulations entailed by Swiss and Norwegian-style EU association agreements.
Ultimately, Brexit would not only force a disruptive renegotiation of economic relations; it would also lead to a loss of political sovereignty for Britain.
Or maybe just for England, given that Scotland would probably leave the UK and rejoin the EU, taking many of London’s service jobs to Edinburgh in the process.
Once Britain’s political, business, and media leaders start drawing attention to these hard facts of life after Brexit, we can be confident that voters will decide to stay in the EU.
Japan’s Coming Political Earthquake
OSAKA – Japan is now confronting challenges at home and abroad that are as serious as any it has had to face since World War II’s end.
Yet the Japanese public is displaying remarkable apathy.
The country’s two major political parties, the governing Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) and the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) recently chose their leaders, yet ordinary Japanese responded with a collective shrug.
But Japan’s political system is unlikely to remain a matter of popular indifference for much longer.
The DPJ first came to power in September 2009, with an ambitious program promising comprehensive administrative reform, no tax increases, and a freer hand in Japan’s alliance with the United States.
But, owing to the party’s inexperience and incompetence at every level of policymaking – shortcomings that were compounded by the unprecedented devastation of the great earthquake of March 11, 2011 – the first two DPJ governments, under Yukio Hatoyama and Naoto Kan, ended with those pledges in tatters.
Consequently, several dozen legislators, led by the perpetual rebel Ichiro Ozawa, defected from the DPJ, forming a new rump opposition party.
The DPJ has now reelected incumbent Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda as its president, despite his very low public-approval rating.
With a thin majority in the lower house and a narrow plurality in the upper house (which has adopted a censure resolution against Noda), the DPJ on its own is unable to pass fiscal and other legislation essential to running a government.
As a result, the prime minister is barely muddling through – and only by agreeing with the major opposition parties to dissolve the lower house.
Though he has not specified exactly when he will do so, the endgame for the DPJ government has begun.
Yet the rival LDP, which had governed almost uninterruptedly for several decades until 2009, has proven itself to be an ineffective opposition party.
Unable to overcome popular distrust, owing to its longstanding symbiosis with the bureaucrats and subservience to the US, the LDP has been incapable of holding the DPJ accountable in the legislature.
Instead, the LDP, having failed to reinvigorate itself and attract allies, has occasionally taken a buck-passing approach, such as permitting the DPJ to pass an unpopular but inevitable and necessary increase in the consumption tax.
In an effort to enhance popular support for the party, the LDP presidential campaign took advantage of a heightened sense of crisis centered on Japan’s territorial disputes with Russia, South Korea, and, most recently and alarmingly, China.
The party chose as its leader former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who is known as the hardest of hardliners on nationalist matters, but who is also widely perceived as having acted irresponsibly when he abruptly gave up his premiership in 2007, after only one year in office, due to health problems.
His comeback has given the country a rather odd feeling of déjà vu.
So, the Japanese public is now searching for a party that can take on the tasks of reforming the country, reviving the economy, and enhancing national security.
Neither the DPJ nor the LDP appears dependable in any of these areas.
As a result, the public is paying increasing attention to the newly created Japan Restoration Party (JRP) and its populist leader, Osaka City Mayor Toru Hashimoto, a former governor of Osaka prefecture and the son of a minor Yakuza (mafioso).
The JRP aspires to be a ruling party, or at least a kingmaker in Japanese politics, but it has an almost exclusively domestic agenda and suffers from a dearth of talent below Hashimoto.
Without a comprehensive agenda and expertise in foreign and security policy, the party will most likely stumble badly should it come to power.
It is almost certain that the next general election will not produce a parliamentary majority for a single party.
Given the parties’ ideological, organizational, and policy disarray, Japan will enter a period of profound uncertainty, ultimately leading to an unprecedented political shakeup.
This prospect may seem surprising, given that Japan has already lost two decades since its economy’s bubble burst in the early 1990’s.
But, after a short-lived non-LDP government, successive coalition governments until 2009 had the LDP at their core.
Japan’s hidebound postwar regime has been insulated, externally and internally, by relatively unchanging geostrategic and economic conditions.
The country remains the world’s largest creditor, and has slowly but steadily eliminated enormous non-performing loans in its banking sector.
Moreover, the Cold War never ended in East Asia, requiring the preservation of a US-led security system centered on the US-Japan alliance – an alliance that appears to presuppose a pliant Japanese political system.
In fact, the system’s resilience in absorbing huge disruptions – the 2008 financial crisis and the 2011 earthquake – is one key reason for its survival.
Thus, Japan remains broadly credible, at least relative to the US and the European Union.
The yen’s appreciation reflects markets’ assessment that Japan’s economic position is stronger than that of the US and the EU, which are burdened with serious structural problems of their own.
Indeed, with a huge capital surplus and very low interest rates in a time of creeping deflation, Japan now has a golden opportunity to invest in public infrastructure, education, defense, and overseas projects – a burst comparable to the British Empire in the late nineteenth century.
But Japan is unable to seize these opportunities, because its political system is incapable of producing competent leadership.
Given rising tensions in Asia, the question is how long this can last.
China’s rise and America’s relative decline present not only a danger for Japan, but also an opportunity – and perhaps the needed momentum boost – for real reform.
No Escape from Empire’s Graveyard
NEW DELHI – With the stage set for secret talks in Qatar between the United States and the Taliban, US President Barack Obama’s strategy for a phased exit from war-ravaged Afghanistan is now being couched in nice-sounding terms that hide more than they reveal.
In seeking a Faustian bargain with the Taliban, Obama&#160;risks repeating US policy mistakes that now haunt regional and international security.
Since coming to office, Obamahas pursued an Afghan strategy that can be summed up in three words: surge, bribe, and run.
The military mission has now entered the “run” part, or what euphemistically is being called the “transition to 2014.”
The central objective is to cut a deal with the Taliban so that the US and its NATO partners exit the “graveyard of empires” without losing face.
This approach – aimed more at withdrawing forces as soon as possible than at ensuring enduring peace and regional stability – is being dressed up as “reconciliation,” with Qatar, Germany, and the United Kingdom getting lead roles in facilitating a settlement.
Yet what stands out is how little the US has learned from the past.
In critical respects, it is beginning to repeat its own mistakes, whether by creating or funding new local militias in Afghanistan, or by striving to come to terms with the Taliban.
As with the covert war that the US waged in the 1980’s in Afghanistan against Soviet military intervention, so, too, have short-term interests driven US policy in the current overt war.
To be sure, any leader must work to extricate his country from a protracted war, so Obama is right to seek an end to this one.
But he was not right in laying out his cards in public and emboldening the enemy.
Within weeks of assuming office, Obama publicly declared his intention to withdraw US forces from Afghanistan, before he even asked his team to work out a strategy.
A troop surge that lasted up to 2010 was designed not to rout the Taliban militarily, but to strike a political deal with the enemy from a position of strength.
Yet, even before the surge began, its purpose was undercut by the exit plan, followed by a publicly announced troop drawdown, stretching from 2011 to 2014.
A withdrawing power that first announces a phased exit and then pursues deal-making with the enemy undermines its regional leverage.
It speaks for itself that the sharp deterioration in US ties with the Pakistani military has occurred since the drawdown timetable was unveiled.
The phased exit encouraged Pakistani generals to play hardball.
Worse, there is still no clear US strategy on how to ensure that the endgame does not undermine Western interests or further destabilize the region.
The US envoy to the region, Marc Grossman, has already held a series of secret meetings with the Taliban.
Qatar has been chosen as the seat of fresh US-Taliban negotiations in order to keep the still-skeptical Afghan government at arm’s length (despite the pretense of “Afghan-led” talks), and to insulate the Taliban negotiators from Pakistani and Saudi pressure.
Meanwhile, even as a civil-military showdown in Pakistan compounds Washington’s regional challenges, the new US push to contain Iran threatens to fuel greater turbulence in neighboring Afghanistan.
In truth, US policy on the Taliban, at whose birth the CIA played midwife, is coming full circle for the second time in little more than 15 years.
The Clinton administration acquiesced in the Taliban’s ascension to power in 1996 and turned a blind eye as that thuggish militia, in league with Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence, fostered narcotics trafficking and swelled the ranks of Afghan war alumni waging transnational terrorism.
With the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, however, the chickens came home to roost.
In declaring war on the Taliban, US policy came full circle.
Now, US policy, with its frantic search for a deal with the Taliban, is about to complete another orbit.
Indeed, the Qatar-based negotiations highlight why the US political leadership has deliberately refrained from decapitating the Taliban.
The US military has had ample opportunities (and still has) to eliminate the Taliban’s Rahbari Shura, or leadership council, often called the Quetta Shura because it relocated to that Pakistani city.
Yet, tellingly, the US has not carried out a single drone, air, or ground strike in or around Quetta.
All of the US strikes have occurred farther north, in Pakistan’s tribal Waziristan region, although the leadership of the Afghan Taliban and of its allied groups, like the Haqqani network and the Hekmatyar band, is not holed up there.
Like the US occupation of Iraq, the NATO war in Afghanistan will leave behind an ethnically fractured country.
Just as Iraq today is, for all intents and purposes, ethnically partitioned, it will be difficult to establish a post-2014 government in Kabul whose writ runs across Afghanistan.
And, just as the 1973 US-North Vietnam agreements were negotiated after the South Vietnamese regime was shut out of the talks, the US today is shutting out the Afghan government, even as it compels President Hamid Karzai to lend support and appears ready to meet a Taliban demand to transfer five incarcerated Taliban leaders from Guantánamo Bay.
These negotiations, in which the US is seeking the creation of ceasefire zones to facilitate its forces’ withdrawal, can only undercut the legitimacy of the Karzai government and bring the Quetta Shura back to center stage.
But Afghanistan is not Vietnam.
An end to NATO combat operations will not mean the end of the war, because the enemy will target Western interests wherever they may be.
America’s fond hope to contain terrorism regionally promises instead to ensure that Afghanistan and Pakistan remain a festering threat to regional and global security.
Don’t Fear a Rising Dollar
LONDON – The US Federal Reserve is almost certain to start raising interest rates when the policy-setting Federal Open Markets Committee next meets, on December 16.
How worried should businesses, investors, and policymakers around the world be about the end of near-zero interest rates and the start of the first monetary-tightening cycle since 2004-2008?
Janet Yellen, the Fed chair, has repeatedly said that the impending sequence of rate hikes will be much slower than previous monetary cycles, and predicts that it will end at a lower peak level.
While central bankers cannot always be trusted when they make such promises, since their jobs often require them deliberately to mislead investors, there are good reasons to believe that the Fed’s commitment to “lower for longer” interest rates is sincere.
The Fed’s overriding objective is to lift inflation and ensure that it remains above 2%.
To do this, Yellen will have to keep interest rates very low, even after inflation starts rising, just as her predecessor Paul Volcker had to keep interest rates in the 1980s very high, even after inflation started falling.
This policy reversal follows logically from the inversion of central banks’ objectives, both in America and around the world, since the 2008 crisis.
In the 1980s, Volcker’s historic responsibility was to reduce inflation and prevent it from ever rising again to dangerously high levels.
Today, Yellen’s historic responsibility is to increase inflation and prevent it from ever falling again to dangerously low levels.
Under these conditions, the direct economic effects of the Fed’s move should be minimal.
It is hard to imagine many businesses, consumers, or homeowners changing their behavior because of a quarter-point change in short-term interest rates, especially if long-term rates hardly move.
And even assuming that interest rates reach 1-1.5% by the end of 2016, they will still be very low by historic standards, both in absolute terms and relative to inflation.
The media and official publications from the International Monetary Fund and other institutions have raised dire warnings about the impact of the Fed’s first move on financial markets and other economies.
Many Asian and Latin America countries, in particular, are considered vulnerable to a reversal of the capital inflows from which they benefited when US interest rates were at rock-bottom levels.
But, as an empirical matter, these fears are hard to understand.
The imminent US rate hike is perhaps the most predictable, and predicted, event in economic history.
Nobody will be caught unawares if the Fed acts next month, as many investors were in February 1994 and June 2004, the only previous occasions remotely comparable to the current one.
And even in those cases, stock markets barely reacted to the Fed tightening, while bond-market volatility proved short-lived.
But what about currencies?
The dollar is almost universally expected to appreciate when US interest rates start rising, especially because the EU and Japan will continue easing monetary conditions for many months, even years.
This fear of a stronger dollar is the real reason for concern, bordering on panic, in many emerging economies and at the IMF.
A significant strengthening of the dollar would indeed cause serious problems for emerging economies where businesses and governments have taken on large dollar-denominated debts and currency devaluation threatens to spin out of control.
Fortunately, the market consensus concerning the dollar’s inevitable rise as US interest rates increase is almost certainly wrong, for three reasons.
First, the divergence of monetary policies between the US and other major economies is already universally understood and expected.
Thus, the interest-rate differential, like the US rate hike itself, should already be priced into currency values.
Moreover, monetary policy is not the only determinant of exchange rates.
Trade deficits and surpluses also matter, as do stock-market and property valuations, the cyclical outlook for corporate profits, and positive or negative surprises for economic growth and inflation.
On most of these grounds, the dollar has been the world’s most attractive currency since 2009; but as economic recovery spreads from the US to Japan and Europe, the tables are starting to turn.
Finally, the widely assumed correlation between monetary policy and currency values does not stand up to empirical examination.
In some cases, currencies move in the same direction as monetary policy – for example, when the yen dropped in response to the Bank of Japan’s 2013 quantitative easing.
But in other cases the opposite happens, for example when the euro and the pound both strengthened after their central banks began quantitative easing.
For the US, the evidence has been very mixed.
Looking at the monetary tightening that began in February 1994 and June 2004, the dollar strengthened substantially in both cases before the first rate hike, but then weakened by around 8% (as gauged by the Fed’s dollar index) in the subsequent six months.
Over the next 2-3 years, the dollar index remained consistently below its level on the day of the first rate hike.
For currency traders, therefore, the last two cycles of Fed tightening turned out to be classic examples of “buy on the rumor; sell on the news.”
Of course, past performance is no guarantee of future results, and two cases do not constitute a statistically significant sample.
Just because the dollar weakened twice during the last two periods of Fed tightening does not prove that the same thing will happen again.
But it does mean that a rise in the dollar is not automatic or inevitable if the Fed raises interest rates next month.
The globally disruptive effects of US monetary tightening – a rapidly rising dollar, capital outflows from emerging markets, financial distress for international dollar borrowers, and chaotic currency devaluations in Asia and Latin America – may loom less large in next year’s economic outlook than in a rear-view glimpse of 2015.
A No-Fly Zone for Syria
WASHINGTON, DC – A recent front-page photo in the New York Times of a boatload of Syrian refugees drifting on the Mediterranean Sea beneath an enormous setting sun could not have been more apt.
The sun seems to be setting on Syria itself.
In the words of David Miliband, a former British foreign secretary and current president of the International Rescue Committee, the disaster in Syria has reached “almost biblical proportions.”
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights estimates that, over the last four years, nearly 250,000 people have been killed, including more than 100,000 civilians, many of whom were killed in horrific ways by their own government.
The United Nations estimates that over half of the country’s 22 million citizens have left their homes, something the world has not seen since World War II.
Today’s rising tide of disease, hunger, squalor, and illiteracy – more than half of the refugee children are not in school – will affect an entire generation for life.
Fortunately, the United States’ foreign-policy elite finally seems ready to do something to protect Syria’s people.
Generals, diplomats, national-security officials, and development professionals are approaching a consensus in favor of a no-fly “safe zone” along one of Syria’s borders.
In fact, Turkey’s government proposed such a sanctuary (calling it a “buffer zone”) four years ago.
But the Turkish authorities never proved willing to turn words into action – not that they received any encouragement.
Indeed, until recently, the US and most NATO countries were resolutely opposed to the idea.
The change of heart was driven by four factors.
First, there is the migrant crisis in southern Europe, a threat more diffuse but no less dangerous and challenging than Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
According to the International Organization for Migration, as of July, some 150,000 migrants had reached Europe by sea this year, double the number during the same period in 2014.
But the headline-making stories of sinking boats and drowning children are just the beginning.
An estimated 30,000 migrants are now crossing the Serbian border into Hungary every month, spurring the country’s right-wing government to launch the construction of a 110-mile fence to keep them out.
And, in July alone, almost 50,000 migrants entered the European Union through Greece.
While Syria is not the only country fueling this refugee crisis, it is the largest contributor.
Indeed, according to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, 34% of the 137,000 people who arrived in the EU from January 1 to June 29 were from Syria, with the next-largest contributor, Afghanistan, accounting for 12%.
Other notable contributors include Eritrea (12%), Somalia (5%), and Iraq (3%).
The number of Syrians is thus essentially triple that of the next highest group, a proportion that holds true among European asylum-seekers as well.
With more than ten million Syrians displaced, this trend will only continue unless something is done to ensure that they can live safely within their home country.
The second factor that is spurring a shift in America’s attitude is the recognition that a new Syrian government is vital to defeat – or even contain – the Islamic State.
The fact is that the Islamic State is not the only violent and destructive force in the country; Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, whom the militant group is committed to overthrow, is also a mass murderer and war criminal.
According to the Violations Documentation Center, the leading cause of death among Syrian civilians this year has been the indiscriminate use of aerial weapons – barrel bombs and chlorine gas dropped from helicopters by the Syrian army.
For Syria’s many rebel groups, Assad represents the greater threat, and thus will have to be removed from power before attention can be focused on defeating the Islamic State.
Third, the nuclear deal with Iran, despite facing continued scrutiny in Iran and the US, has raised hopes that the country could play an important role in pushing for a political solution in Syria.
Not only is Iran’s policy of supplying weapons and fighters to keep Assad in power unpopular at home; the country’s leaders also recognize that fighting the Islamic State in Iraq is a half-measure at best, as long as the group controls vast swaths of Syrian territory.
Finally, longer-term thinkers understand that a generation growing up alienated and angry in refugee camps, as several generations of Palestinians have done, is a generation of potential radicals.
With nothing to lose, they seek revenge for their parents’ expulsion from a homeland that, over time, becomes increasingly idealized.
From this perspective, the current humanitarian crisis is, in the longer term, a strategic crisis.
Taken together, these factors are compelling the US and Europe to change course.
And the Western perspective is not the only one that is evolving.
Syria’s neighbors finally seem to understand that the country could fragment into a Kurdish state that destabilizes Turkey and an Islamic State territory that destabilizes Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia.
By establishing a no-fly zone – which could be defended using sea-based missile systems – the US and its partners would demonstrate to Assad that their patience has finally run out, and that they are prepared to defend Syrians within Syria.
This, together with the knowledge that his army is weakening and the pool of new recruits is drying up, would force Assad to reconsider his long-term prospects and, most likely, force him to the negotiating table.
After all, the only time he has been prepared to strike any kind of deal over the last four years was when he believed that the US was prepared to intervene militarily in response to his use of chemical weapons.
Syria will take decades to rebuild, with future generations scarred by the political and psychological consequences of the current turmoil – much like Bosnia, but on a much larger scale.
The arms and money flowing to self-proclaimed holy fighters over the last four years have fanned revolutionary flames that may yet lead to a redrawing of the map of the Middle East.
But we cannot simply write off the millions of people caught in the middle.
For both moral and strategic reasons, the time for a no-fly zone is now.
Masters of War in Syria and Iraq
DENVER – The Middle East’s tragic tale of two cities – Aleppo in Syria and Mosul in Iraq – speaks to a fundamental lack of consensus in the region and within the broader international community.
The lack of order in the international order is greatly complicating the task of bringing these conflicts to an end.
When the bloody conflict finally ends in Syria, there will be no victory parades, no moment of national catharsis.
More likely than not, what there will be is a political arrangement that leaves Syria within its current borders but with local autonomy that reflects the diversity and – at least for the time being – the mutual distrust of its various ethnic and religious groups.
No one will be happy.
The accoutrements of a civil state do not exist, and there are no institutions around which to build social consensus or the rule of law.
Until these broad principles can be articulated, the war will never be truly over.
Ceasefires work best – and hold the longest – when the combatants finally understand that a set of principles agreed by the broader international community will be the basis for shaping the future of their country.
The Syrian war is not unprecedented in the region.
The Lebanese Civil War was even longer: from 1975 to 1990, that war produced a similar number of casualties and refugees, and when all is said and done, probably a similar number of unsuccessful ceasefires.
The Syrian civil war is not yet even half the length of that horrific struggle; but nor is there any sign that the various combatants are fatigued by it.
The international community will likely be affected by Syria’s civil war more than it was by Lebanon’s, owing to its greater global impact.
The refugee tide was at first contained within the neighborhood, especially in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey, and even Iraq.
But soon refugees began to flow to Europe and elsewhere, causing political tensions in countries far removed from the conflict.
The huddled masses of refugees crossing one European frontier after another soon became a metaphor for what angers so many Europeans in this globalized age.
The lack of international consensus on Syria, reflected in the failure of the United Nations Security Council’s permanent players to agree on a way forward, has caused the situation on the ground to worsen.
Fueled by continued support of the combatants by Middle Eastern states (which seem to have no confidence in the international system), and with Russia’s direct participation in the fighting, the crisis has deepened.
Russia’s intervention on behalf of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has also caused further deterioration in US-Russian relations, which could fuel danger elsewhere in the world.
US Secretary of State John Kerry and his Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov have so far failed to find any workable way forward to end the fighting.
One longs for the day that Kerry and Lavrov emerge from a negotiating room to announce to the world that they have agreed on a set of principles that will guide Syria’s future and will work to achieve consensus among other members of the international community and with the combatants themselves.
Only when the combatants can envision the post-war future can a ceasefire work.
Nobody wants to be the last person to die fighting when the future is already known.
In Mosul, the fighting is not a civil war.
Unlike in Syria, where there must be tradeoffs among the combatants, in Mosul the struggle against the so-called Islamic State (ISIS) is a war of annihilation.
And, in contrast to the Russian and Syrian offensive in Aleppo, the Iraqi Arabs and Kurds and their American advisers most likely worked for months to anticipate issues and to ensure success before the fighting began.
But it is already clear that there is far more at stake in the Mosul campaign than the eradication of ISIS.
Depending on how it ends, we will know whether Iraq emerges as a multi-sectarian state or a set of sectarian and ethnic enclaves.
Sunnis seem to want no part of the Shia-majority government in Baghdad, even though the Iraqi army (along with the Kurds) is playing the largest role in the fight against ISIS.
As if the Sunni-Shia divide within Iraq were not difficult enough, a deeper and even more problematic fissure has now emerged – Turkey’s own struggles with its identity and its externally imposed borders.
The extraordinarily harmful statement by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that his country has not reconciled itself to its 100-year-old southern border with Iraq’s Ninewa Province has greatly complicated Turkey’s ability to play a role in Iraq’s healing process.
Arabs have long harbored deep suspicion that the Turks want more than just to protect the Turkmen minority and Sunni Arabs in the conflict.
Now, Erdoğan has confirmed these suspicions, and in so doing has created conditions for more violence in Iraq.
How the fighting in Aleppo and Mosul ends will help clarify the tasks ahead.
But until Russia, the US, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and others (Europe, is anyone home?) can come together around a set of principles that steer the region toward peace, the carnage will continue.
Who Killed the Nokia Phone?
HELSINKI – It seems to be a law in the technology industry that leading companies eventually lose their positions – often quickly and brutally.
Mobile-phone champion Nokia, one of Europe’s biggest technology success stories, was no exception, losing its market share in the space of just a few years.
Can the industry’s new champions, Apple and Google – not to mention titans in other tech sectors – avoid Nokia’s fate?
In 2007, Nokia accounted for more than 40% of mobile-phone sales worldwide.
But consumers’ preferences were already shifting toward touch-screen smartphones.
With the introduction of Apple’s iPhone in the middle of that year, Nokia’s market share shrunk rapidly and revenue plummeted.
By the end of 2013, Nokia had sold its phone business to Microsoft.
What sealed Nokia’s fate was a series of decisions made by Stephen Elop in his position as CEO, which he assumed in October 2010.
Each day that Elop spent at Nokia’s helm, the company’s market value declined by €18 million ($23 million) – making him, by the numbers, one of the worst CEOs in history.
Elop’s biggest mistake was choosing Microsoft’s Windows Phone as the only platform for Nokia’s smartphones.
In his “burning platform” memo, Elop compared Nokia to a man on a burning offshore oilrig, facing a fiery death or an uncertain leap into the frigid sea.
He was right that business as usual meant certain death for Nokia; he was wrong to choose Microsoft as the company’s life raft.
But Elop was not the only person at fault.
Nokia’s board resisted change, making it impossible for the company to adapt to rapid shifts in the industry.
Most notably, Jorma Ollila, who had led Nokia’s transition from an industrial conglomerate to a technology giant, was too enamored with the company’s previous success to recognize the change that was needed to sustain its competitiveness.
The company also embarked on a desperate cost-cutting program, which included the elimination of thousands of jobs.
This contributed to the deterioration of the company’s once-spirited culture, which had motivated employees to take risks and make miracles.
Good leaders left the company, taking Nokia’s sense of vision and direction with them.
Not surprising, much of Nokia’s most valuable design and programming talent left as well.
But the largest impediment to Nokia’s ability to create the kind of intuitive, user-friendly smartphone experiences that iPhones and Android devices offered was its refusal to move beyond the solutions that had driven its past success.
For example, Nokia initially claimed that it could not use the Android operating system without including Google applications on its phones.
But, just before its takeover by Microsoft, Nokia actually built a line of Android-based phones called Nokia X, which did not include Google apps, but instead used Nokia maps and Microsoft search.
Why didn’t Nokia choose Android earlier?
The short answer is money.
Microsoft promised to pay billions of dollars for Nokia to use Windows Phone exclusively.
Given that Google gives away its Android software, it could not match this offer.
But Microsoft’s money could not save Nokia; it is not possible to build an industrial ecosystem with money alone.
Elop’s previous experience at Microsoft was undoubtedly also a factor.
After all, in difficult situations, people often turn to what is familiar.
In Elop’s case, the familiar just happened to be another sinking company.
After hearing that Nokia had chosen Windows, Google director Vic Gundotra tweeted: “Two turkeys do not make an eagle.”
Apple and Google should not rest easy.
Like Nokia in the mobile-phone industry – not to mention Microsoft and IBM in the computing industry – one day they will lose their leading position.
But there are steps they can take to prolong their success.
First, companies must continue to innovate, in order to improve the chances that disruptive technologies emerge from within.
If market leaders implement a system for discovering and nurturing new ideas – and create a culture in which employees are not afraid to make mistakes – they can remain on their industry’s cutting edge.
Second, major firms should keep track of emerging innovators.
Instead of forming partnerships with smaller companies that suit their current business model, major firms should work with inventive startups with disruptive potential.
Finally, though successful companies must constantly innovate, they should not be afraid to imitate.
If Nokia had immediately begun to develop products modeled after the iPhone, while addressing related patent issues effectively, the mobile-device business would look very different today.
Nokia’s experience also carries an important lesson for regulators, particularly in the European Union.
Attempting to quell disruptive technologies and protect existing companies through, for example, antitrust crusades, is not an option.
Indeed, that approach would ultimately hurt the consumer, both by impeding technological progress and eliminating price competition – like that from Samsung’s Android devices, which forced Apple to lower iPhone prices.
Herein lies the most important lesson in Nokia’s fall.
Technology companies cannot achieve success simply by pleasing their board of directors or even striking multi-million-dollar deals with partners.
Whichever company makes the consumer happy – whether a well-established multinational or a dynamic startup –&nbsp;will win.
Companies that lose sight of that are doomed.
No Licenses to Kill
NEW YORK – In the last year, we endured a remarkable experience; after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, financial markets actually collapsed and required artificial life support.
Nothing like this had happened since the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
What made this collapse so remarkable is that it was not caused by some external factor, but originated within the financial system itself and spread from there throughout the global economy.
This was almost completely unexpected, as the prevailing view was that financial markets are self-correcting.
We now know that they are not.
But, having gone too far in deregulating markets, we must resist a natural tendency to overcompensate.
While markets are imperfect, regulators are not only human but bureaucratic and subject to political influence.
Therefore, new regulations should be kept to a minimum.
Three principles should guide reform. First and foremost, financial authorities must accept responsibility for preventing asset bubbles from growing too big.
Former United States Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and others have argued that if markets can’t recognize bubbles, neither can regulators.
Even so, financial authorities must accept the assignment: while they are bound to be wrong, feedback from the markets will tell them whether they have done too much or too little. They can then correct their mistakes.
Second, controlling asset bubbles requires control not only of the money supply, but also of the availability of credit.
The best-known tools for this are margin requirements and minimum capital requirements.
Similarly, financial authorities should vary the loan-to-value ratio on commercial and residential mortgages for risk-weighting purposes in order to forestall real estate bubbles.
Regulators may also have to revive old tools.
For example, we had no financial crises when central banks instructed commercial banks to limit their lending to particular economic sectors that they believed were overheating, such as real estate or consumer loans.
The Chinese authorities do it today, and they also set the minimum deposits banks must maintain with the central bank.
Or consider the Internet bubble, which Greenspan recognized early but then did nothing to address.
He rightly believed that reducing the money supply would have been too blunt an instrument to use.
But he could have devised more specific measures, such as asking the Securities and Exchange Commission to freeze new share issues, because equity leveraging was fueling the bubble.
The Internet bubble was unusual in this regard.
Usually, it is credit that provides the leverage, and credit is by nature reflexive. That is, an increase in the willingness to lend tends to increase the value of the collateral, and also improves the borrowers’ performance, thereby encouraging a relaxation of credit criteria.
Bubbles recur, especially in real estate, because this reflexive relationship is repeatedly ignored.
This brings me to my third point: we must reconceptualize the meaning of market risk.
According to conventional theory, markets tend towards equilibrium, function without any discontinuity in the sequence of prices, and deviations occur in a random fashion.
As a result, market risks can be equated with the risks confronting individual market participants.
As long as they manage their risks properly, regulators should be happy.
But markets are subject to imbalances that individual participants may ignore if they think they can offload their positions on someone else.
Regulators, by contrast, cannot ignore these imbalances, because if too many participants are on the same side, positions cannot be liquidated without causing a discontinuity or, worse, financial collapse.
Thus, there is systemic market risk, and unregulated securitization of banking assets, which was the main cause of the recent collapse, adds to it.
To avert a repetition, securities held by banks must carry a much higher risk rating than they currently do.
Banks must pay for their implicit government guarantee by using less leverage and accepting restrictions on how they invest depositors’ money.
At a minimum, proprietary trading ought to be financed by banks’ own capital.
If a bank is too big to fail, regulators should go even further, and regulate proprietary traders’ compensation packages to ensure that risks and rewards are properly aligned.
Hedge funds and other large investors must also be closely monitored to ensure that they don’t build up dangerous imbalances.
Moreover, the issuance and trading of derivatives ought to be at least as strictly regulated as that of stocks.
Now, the CDS market offers a convenient way of shorting bonds, but the risk/reward asymmetry works in the opposite way.
Shorting bonds by purchasing a CDS contract carries limited risk but almost unlimited profit potential, whereas selling a CDS contract offers limited profits but practically unlimited risks.
This encourages short-side speculation, which places downward pressure on the underlying bonds.
The negative effect is reinforced by the fact that, because CDS contracts are tradable, they tend to be priced as warrants, which can be sold at any time, rather than as options, which would require an actual default to be cashed in.
People buy CDS contracts not because they expect a default, but because they expect the CDS to appreciate in response to adverse developments.
That is what destroyed AIG, and what led to the recent bankruptcy of Abitibi-Bowater and the pending bankruptcy of General Motors.
In both cases, because some bondholders owned CDS contracts, they stood to gain more from bankruptcy than from reorganization.
Purchasing CDS contracts is like buying insurance on someone else’s life and owning a license to kill him.
It is the job of regulators to ensure that no one is ever granted such a license.
Is China the Next Japan?
NEW HAVEN – Despite deepening concerns about China’s economy, the country is not heading toward “lost decades” of Japanese-style stagnation.
And yet a worrisome ambiguity clouds this verdict.
Japan’s fate was sealed by its reluctance to abandon a dysfunctional growth model.
While China’s embrace of structural rebalancing distinguishes it from Japan, it is struggling to implement that strategy.
Unless the struggle is won, the endgame could be similar.
The same conclusion emerges from a seminar on “The Lessons of Japan” that I have taught at Yale for the past six years.
The course is primarily one in forensic macroeconomics – distilling key lessons from the rise and fall of the modern Japanese economy and then figuring out the relevance of those lessons for other major economies.
The seminar culminates with student research papers aimed at assessing which candidates might be the next Japan.
As recently as 2012, the United States was the top choice, as it struggled to regain its footing in the aftermath of the Great Financial Crisis of 2008.
Not surprisingly, by 2013, the focus had shifted to crisis-battered Europe.
But this year, more than half of the students in the seminar (13 of 23) chose to examine whether China might be the next Japan.
An academic setting provides a wonderful intellectual laboratory.
But a couple of quick trips to China after the end of the spring term gave me a different perspective.
In extensive discussions with Chinese officials, business leaders, academics, and investors, I found great interest in the lessons of Japan and how they might bear on China’s conundrum.
The topic du jour was debt.
China’s nonfinancial debt has risen from 150% of GDP in 2008 to 255% today, with two-thirds of the increase concentrated in the corporate sector, largely state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
As the world’s largest saver – with gross domestic saving averaging 49% of GDP since 2007 – surging debt hardly comes as a surprise.
High-saving economies are prone to high investment, and the lack of capital-market reform in China – exacerbated by the bursting of the equity bubble in 2015 – reinforces the disproportionate role that bank credit has played in funding China’s investment boom.
The Japan comparison is especially instructive in assessing the risks of debt-intensive growth.
At nearly 390% of GDP in late 2015, Japan’s overall debt ratio is about 140 percentage points higher than China’s.
But, because Japan has such a high saving rate – averaging 24% of GDP since 2007 – it basically owes its debt to itself. That means it is not vulnerable to the capital flight of foreign investors that often triggers crises.
With China’s saving rate double that of Japan’s since 2007, that conclusion is all the more pertinent for its debt-intensive economy.
The China scare of early 2016 – stoked by hand-wringing over capital flight and currency risk – missed this point altogether.
Fears of a hard landing stemming from a Chinese debt crisis are vastly overblown.
Zombie firms – the economic walking dead – are also a topic of intense discussion in China.
Key actors in Japan’s first lost decade during the 1990s, zombie corporates were kept alive by the “evergreening” of subsidized bank lending – masking an outsize build-up of nonperforming loans (NPLs) that ultimately brought down the Japanese banking system.
Significantly, the insidious interplay between zombie corporates and zombie banks clogged the arteries of the real economy – sparking a sharp slowdown in productivity growth that Japan has yet to reverse.
In recent public statements, the Chinese leadership has made explicit reference to zombie SOEs.
But, unlike Japan, which remained in denial over this problem for close to a decade, Chinese authorities have moved relatively quickly to rein in excesses in two key industries – steel and coal – while hinting of more to come in cement, glass, and shipbuilding.
China’s deteriorating loan quality is also reminiscent of Japan’s experience.
The official NPL ratio of 1.7% for listed banks is only the tip of the iceberg.
Beneath the surface are “special mention loans” – where borrowers are in the early stages of repayment difficulties – along with bad credits in the shadow banking sector, both of which could raise China’s fully-loaded NPL ratio to around 8%.
In that case, the authorities will eventually need to inject capital into the Chinese banking system.
None of this is a dark secret in Beijing.
On the contrary, an interview in early May with an “authoritative insider,” published in China’s flagship official newspaper, People’s Daily, underscored an increasingly open and intense debate among senior officials over how to avoid ending up like Japan.
The insider, purportedly close to President Xi Jinping, highlighted the insidious connection between China’s debt and zombie problems that might well culminate in a Japanese-like “L-shaped” endgame.
This gets to the heart of the China-Japan comparison.
Two and a half lost decades (and counting) is simply an unacceptable outcome for China.
But knowing what it doesn’t want is not enough to guarantee that China won’t fall into a Japanese-style trap of its own.
Reforms are the decisive differentiating factor.
Japan’s failure to embrace structural reforms was a hallmark of the 1990s, and it is an equally serious impediment to the current “Abenomics” recovery program.
By contrast, China’s strategy emphasizes the heavy lifting of structural change and rebalancing.
In the end, success or failure will hinge on the willingness of the Chinese leadership to confront the powerful vested interests resisting reform.
Interestingly, of the 13 students in my seminar who chose to consider China as the next Japan, two-thirds ultimately rejected the comparison.
They argued that the lessons of modern China – especially the reforms and opening up spearheaded by Deng Xiaoping – are more important than the lessons of Japan.
And they got good grades.
Jangan Tangisi Perjanjian Dagang yang Sudah Berakhir
CAMBRIDGE – Selama tujuh dekade setelah berakhirnya Perang Dunia Kedua adalah masa-masa perjanjian perdagangan.
Negara-negara dengan perekonomian yang besar berada dalam masa dimana mereka secara terus-menerus melakukan perundingan perdagangan, serta menandatangani dua perjanjian multilateral utama yang berskala global, yaitu: Persetujuan Umum Tentang Tarif dan Perdagangan (GATT) dan perjanjian untuk membentuk Organisasi Perdagangan Dunia (WTO).
Selain itu, terdapat lebih dari 500 perjanjian perdagangan bilateral dan regional yang ditandatangani – yang kebanyakan ditandatangani sejak WTO menggantikan GATT pada tahun 1995.
Lonjakan populisme di tahun 2016 hampir pasti akan mengakhiri rangkaian kesibukan pembuatan perjanjian perdagangan.
Saat negara-negara berkembang mungkin melakukan perjanjian perdagangan dengan skala yang lebih kecil, dua perjanjian perdagangan besar, yaitu Kemitraan Trans-Pasifik (TPP) dan Kemitraan Dagang dan Investasi Trans-Atlantik (TTIP), dapat dianggap sudah berakhir ketika Donald Trump terpilih menjadi Presiden Amerika Serikat.   
Kita tidak perlu bersedih atas berakhirnya kedua perjanjian tersebut.
Apa yang sebenarnya menjadi tujuan dari perjanjian perdagangan?
Jawabannya mungkin cukup jelas: berbagai negara melakukan perundingan perjanjian perdagangan untuk mencapai perdagangan yang lebih bebas.
Namun, kenyataannya lebih rumit daripada itu.
Hal ini terjadi bukan hanya karena pada saat ini perjanjian perdagangan yang dilakukan juga mencakup banyak kebijakan lain seperti peraturan mengenai kesehatan dan keselamatan, paten dan hak cipta, peraturan neraca modal, dan hak-hak investor.
Hal ini juga terjadi karena adanya ketidak jelasan apakah hal-hal tersebut berhubungan dengan perdagangan bebas.     
Pertimbangan perekonomian yang menjadi dasar untuk melakukan perdagangan atau tidak adalah pertimbangan dalam negeri.
Akan ada pihak-pihak yang diuntungkan dan ada yang mendapatkan kerugian namun, secara umum, liberalisasi perdagangan akan memperbesar perekonomian negara tersebut.
Perdagangan adalah suatu hal yang baik dan kita harus menghilangkan hambatan atas perdagangan demi kebaikan kita sendiri – bukan demi membantu negara lain.
Oleh karena itu, perdagangan bebas tidak memerlukan konsep kosmopolitanisme; yang diperlukan adalah penyesuaian di dalam negeri untuk menjamin bahwa semua kelompok (atau setidaknya penguasa politik) bisa mendapatkan bagian dari keseluruhan manfaat perdagangan bebas. 
Bagi negara-negara dengan perekonomian yang relatif kecil, hal diatas adalah motivasi untuk melakukan perdagangan bebas.
Hal ini karena mereka tidak memerlukan perjanjian dagang sebab perdagangan bebas adalah suatu hal yang mereka inginkan (dan mereka tidak mempunyai posisi tawar dibandingan negara-negara dengan ekonomi yang lebih besar). 
Para ahi ekonomi mengkaji kasus perjanjian dagang negara-negara dengan ekonomi besar karena mereka bisa memanipulasi peraturan perdagangan mereka – misalnya harga global barang-barang yang mereka ekspor dan impor.
Sebagai contoh, dengan memberlakukan tarif impor untuk baja, Amerika Serikat bisa menurunkan harga baja yang dijual oleh produsen baja dari Cina.
Atau, dengan memberlakukan pajak ekspor pesawat, Amerika Serikat bisa meningkatkan harga yang perlu dibayar oleh orang dari negara-negara lain.
Perjanjian dagang yang melarang kebijakan-kebijakan merugikan mitra dagang seperti itu bermanfaat bagi semua negara, karena tanpa adanya kesepakatan ini, seluruh negara-negara tersebut dapat merugi.
Namun untuk menerapkan penalaran diatas dalam praktek perjanjian dagang yang ada adalah perkara yang sulit dilakukan.
Walaupun Amerika Serikat memberlakukan bea impor pada baja dari Cina (dan ke banyak produk Cina lainnya), namun motifnya bukan untuk menurunkan harga baja global.
Jika dibiarkan, Amerika akan lebih memilih untuk memberikan subsidi ekspor bagi Boeing – seperti yang sering mereka lakukan – dibandingkan memberlakukan pajak ke Boeing.
Memang benar bahwa peraturan WTO melarang subsidi ekspor – yang bisa dibilang akan memperkaya negara mitra dagang -  sementara tidak ada larangan untuk memberlakukan pajak ekspor.   
Jadi ilmu ekonomi tidak membuat kita menjadi lebih memahami perjanjian dagang.
Ilmi politik sepertinya lebih dapat menjelaskan hal tersebut: kebijakan perdagangan Amerika Serikat mengenai baja dan pesawat terbang dilatar belakangi lebih pada keinginan para pembuat kebijakan untuk membantu kedua industri tersebut – kedua industri tersebut mempunyai kekuatan lobi yang besar di Washington DC – daripada pengaruhnya terhadap perekonomian yang lebih luas.
Para pendukung perjanjian perdagangan sering berargumen bahwa perjanjian dapat mempersulit pemerintah untuk memberikan bantuan bagi industri yang memiliki hubungan politik yang erat dengan penguasa. Namun argumen ini memiliki kekurangan.
Jika kebijakan perdagangan sebagian besar dipengaruhi oleh kelompok lobi politik, bukankah hal yang sama juga terjadi di perundingan perdagangan internasional?
Apakah peraturan perdagangan yang dibuat oleh kombinasi kelompok lobi dalam negeri dan asing akan memberikan hasil yang lebih baik dibandingkan peraturan yang hanya dibuat oleh kelompok lobi dalam negeri?
Tentu saja, kelompok lobi di dalam negeri tidak bisa mendapatkan semua yang mereka inginkan ketika mereka berhadapan dengan kelompok lobi asing.
Namun, kepentingan yang sama dalam kelompok-kelompok industri di berbagai negara bisa berujung pada kebijakan yang menguntungkan industri secara global.
Jika perjanjian perdagangan sebagian besar adalah tentang tarif impor, maka perundingan pertukaran atas akses pasar biasanya menghasilkan hambatan impor yang lebih rendah. Ini adalah contoh manfaat keadaan dimana kelompok-kelompok lobi saling mengimbangi satu dengan lainnya.
Tapi tentu banyak contoh kolusi internasional antara kelompok kepentingan.
Larangan subsidi impor dari WTO tidak mempunyai alasan ekonomi yang jelas, seperti yang telah dijelaskan diatas.
Peraturan anti-dumping juga secara jelas bermaksud untuk melakukan aksi proteksionis.   
Kolusi seperti ini semakin berkembang akhir-akhir ini.
Perjanjian perdagangan akhir-akhir ini memasukkan peraturan mengenai “hak intelektual”, arus modal, dan perlindungan investasi yang sebagian besar dirancang untuk menghasilkan dan mempertahankan keuntungan untuk institusi finansial dan perusahaan multinasional dengan mengorbankan tujuan kebijakan sah lainnya.
Peraturan-peraturan ini memberikan perlindungan khusus kepada investor asing yang sering bertentangan dengan peraturan kesehatan masyarakat atau lingkungan.
Peraturan-peraturan tersebut juga mempersulit negara berkembang untuk mempunyai akses terhadap teknologi, mengatur arus modal yang volatil, dan melakukan diversifikasi ekonomi melalui kebijakan-kebijakan sektoral.    
Kebijakan perdagangan yang didorong oleh kelompok lobi politik dalam negeri dan kelompok kepentingan adalah kebijakan yang merugikan diri sendiri.
Hal ini mungkin juga mempunyai konsekuensi yang merugikan mitra dagang, namun hal ini bukanlah motif mereka.
Kondisi ini mencerminkan asimetri kekuatan dan kegagalan politik di masyarakat.
Perjanjian perdagangan internasional hanya mempunyai manfaat terbatas untuk memperbaiki kegagalan di dalam negeri tersebut, dan terkadang mereka justru memperparah kondisi yang sudah ada.
Menyingkapi kebijakan yang merugikan diri sendiri tentu membutuhkan perbaikan pemerintahan dalam negeri, bukan dengan membuat peraturan internasional.         
Mari kita ingat hal ini ketika kita meratapi berakhirnya masa perjanjian perdagangan.
Jika kita mengatur perekonomian kita dengan baik, perjanjian perdagangan yang baru akan menjadi lebih tidak berarti. 
Confronting the Next Global Health Challenge
ZURICH – Thanks to unprecedented international cooperation, the world is making impressive progress in the fight against malaria.
According to the World Health Organization’s just-released 2016 World Malaria Report, malaria mortality rates among children under age five have fallen by 69% since 2000.
And this progress is not limited to malaria.
Many countries have reduced new HIV infections by 50% or more over a similar period, and the infection rates for other debilitating tropical diseases, such as leprosy and Guinea worm, have fallen significantly in recent years.
But while mortality rates from infectious diseases are declining, developed countries’ sedentary lifestyles, tobacco use, and poor diets are catching on in the developing world, and noncommunicable diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer are increasing at an alarming rate.
NCDs now kill 38 million people annually, with almost 75% of those deaths occurring in low- and middle-income countries.
And the outlook for developing countries is dire; for example, by 2030, NCDs are expected to cause more deaths in Africa than communicable, maternal, and nutritional illnesses combined.
Beyond threatening lives, NCDs can destabilize economies, especially in countries with limited health-care infrastructure.
The challenge for governments and global health agencies is to continue making progress against infectious diseases, while also addressing the rising NCD threat.
Fortunately, we can apply lessons from the successful fight against infectious diseases to the emerging fight against NCDs.
Working with nonprofit agencies, intergovernmental organizations, and private companies, world leaders can have a profound impact on public health – even if foreign-aid budgets are strained.
For starters, we need innovation.
Without the great leap forward in antiretroviral therapy in the mid-1990s, we would not have the tools we have today to control HIV.
And without the artemisinin-based combination treatments that also emerged in that decade, malaria death rates would still be stubbornly high.
Policies that improve access to health care should also support innovation – and they must never undermine it.
Beyond innovation, we need strong partnerships to manage NCDs and ensure that patients have access to the treatment they need.
Effective HIV management has transformed that disease from a death sentence into a chronic condition in most places; but, of course, we now need sustainable solutions to provide continuous, long-term care.
The private sector is increasingly committed to this approach.
Novo Nordisk’s Changing Diabetes Care and Eli Lilly’s NCD Partnership are just two examples of how companies are collaborating with governments and health organizations in resource-limited countries to develop scalable, sustainable, and locally driven programs to combat diabetes.
And Novartis Access, which our company launched in 2015, is a socially oriented business that works with governments, NGOs, and other public-sector customers in lower-income countries.
We have two goals for the program: to expand access to affordable medicines to treat NCDs such as heart disease, type-2 diabetes, respiratory illnesses, and breast cancer; and to cooperate with local and international organizations to strengthen health-care systems.
So far, we have observed that developing countries need to shift their paradigm for medicine procurement, and update their national essential-medicines lists.
A third lesson to take from the fight against infectious diseases is that political commitment is crucial.
As Chatham House and other independent observers have warned, too few governments – particularly in developing countries – spend the recommended 5% of annual GDP on promoting health.
Even when national budgets are tight, health investments are worth it; after all, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
Lower-income countries that are heavily affected by NCDs have everything to gain from investments that will make their people healthier and more productive.
As we have learned from managing HIV, investments in public health create a virtuous cycle: as people and communities begin to experience better health, they invest further in making health a priority.
Managing the rise of NCDs will require long-term thinking, and government leaders will have to make investments that might pay off only after they are no longer in office.
This is a serious challenge, especially in electoral democracies; but policymakers from around the world can come together to leverage their investments and those undertaken by the private sector.
And even if most countries reach the recommended spending of 5% of GDP, the world will still need innovative financing mechanisms and policies to enable public-private collaboration.
Leaders from around the world must prioritize the global fight against NCDs.
To this end, governments and global health agencies should apply lessons learned from the successful fight against infectious diseases.
Through innovation, dynamic partnerships to strengthen health systems, and political will, the world can sustain the gains made against infectious disease, while also effectively combating NCDs.
Germany’s Rash Rush for Russian Gas
BRATISLAVA – In the right circumstances, we can all be gullible fools – which will be the case if the European Union welcomes the Nord Stream 2 project to double the delivery of natural gas from Russia via the Baltic Sea to Germany.
According to the five European companies involved in the project (each with a 10% stake), their partnership with Russia’s Gazprom (which owns the remaining 50%) is simply a commercial business initiative.
In fact, it is much more – dangerously more – than that.
A decade ago, when the first Nord Stream pipeline deal was announced, Poland’s then-foreign minister, Radek Sikorski, compared the venture to the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact (the non-aggression treaty between Hitler’s Germany and Stalin’s Soviet Union).
As the EU signed off on the deal, Sikorski was accused of grotesque hyperbole.
Today, in the wake of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and ongoing subversion of Ukraine’s sovereignty, Sikorski’s words don’t seem so outlandish.
Indeed, Gazprom today is even more of a tool of Kremlin policy (and source of revenue), with its gas deliveries repeatedly used for political extortion, particularly to keep ex-Soviet republics like Ukraine in line.
The argument for Nord Stream 2 is that it will meet the EU’s growing demand for gas.
Yet the capacity of existing pipelines between the EU and Russia is already more than double Europe’s current demand.
According to Gazprom’s own data, Russia in 2015 exported slightly more than 100 billion cubic meters (bcm) of natural gas to Western Europe – far below half of existing capacity.
The EU’s consumption of natural gas does not justify building a 55 bcm pipeline.
In 2014, consumption fell 23%, to 387 bcm, from its 2010 peak of 502 bcm, reaching its lowest level since 1995.
Indeed, Nord Stream’s capacity-utilization rate was just 43% in 2013, 65% in 2014 and 71% in 2015.
Some will argue that Europe’s consumption of gas will grow.
Really?
Just seven West European countries (Germany being the biggest) account for some 80% of total EU gas consumption, and all have strong energy-efficiency and renewable-energy programs.
Unless Europe decides to waste cheap natural gas, the decline in its consumption will continue.
On the other hand, doubling Nord Stream’s capacity to 110 bcm would in theory enable Europe to import all of Russia’s gas, via Nord Stream alone.
That, of course, is the danger if Nord Stream 2 is built.
Within a very short time, both the Brotherhood and Yamal pipelines – which link Russia with, respectively, Ukraine and Poland – will almost certainly begin to collapse as businesses.
Without the transit fees that are the heart of their business, lack of maintenance will quickly lead to serious decay.
Poland, Slovakia, Belarus, and Ukraine – with their 100 million people – will be stripped of an important source of revenue, which will weaken them economically and make them more vulnerable to Kremlin pressure.
The only real winner is Russia, which will secure more European money for a longer period of time.
New Western investment in new pipelines would commit Europe’s energy system to sticking with Russian natural gas, and perhaps discourage the transition to efficient energy use.
Corporate and Russian propaganda would have the German public believe that Nord Stream 2 is to be a kind of energy cordon sanitaire, insulating Germany from the troubles of its eastern neighbors, even though they may be fellow EU members.
But Nord Stream 2 would make those troubles inevitable.
A poorer Ukraine would be an even easier victim of Russian aggression than it is today. And the Kremlin’s hold on Belarus would be even tighter should Yamal close down.
Moreover, Germans and other Europeans would not be spared the consequences.
By committing to buy more Russian gas than necessary, and for a longer time, the EU would be helping to finance Russia’s military build-up, which represents a direct threat to peace in Europe.
According to the Global Militarization Index of the Bonn International Center for Conversion, Russia is among the most militarized countries in the world.
Some 37% of Russia’s federal budget in the first quarter of 2016 was spent on the country’s military and security forces – and the vast majority of that spending was financed by selling oil and gas to Europeans.
So it is we Europeans who finance Russia’s wars in Ukraine and Syria, its military occupation of Crimea, South Ossetia, Abkhazia, and Transnistria, and the provocative flights of Russian military aircraft in the Baltic and elsewhere.
The more Russian gas we burn, the more money Vladimir Putin has for military modernization and “hybrid warfare,” when Russia augments conventional forces with irregular troops and cyber weapons.
The question that Germany and its leaders must ask themselves is whether they are serious about peace.
If they are, it is essential that they stop financing Russia’s armies – in or out of uniform.
But are Germans serious about the EU, which has ensured seven decades of peace in what previously was by far the most violent part of the world?
Are they serious about fighting climate change and defending the future of the planet?
If so, they must surely burn much less, not more, natural gas.
Nord Stream 2 stands against everything that the German government says it values most: the survival of the EU, peace in Europe, and the environment.
German politicians would do well to recall the words of another Kremlin ruler: “These capitalists,” Lenin reputedly said, “will sell us the rope with which we will hang them.”
Globalization Is the Only Answer
WASHINGTON, DC – The Brexit referendum in the United Kingdom and the presidential race in the United States have shown, among other things, that public distrust of global integration is on the rise.
That distrust could derail new trade agreements currently in the works, and prevent future ones from being initiated.
The danger implied by this scenario should not be underestimated.
Isolationism and protectionism, if taken too far, would break the trade-based economic engine that has delivered peace and prosperity to the world for decades.
As a former trade minister for Costa Rica, I know how difficult it is for countries – developed and developing alike – to craft trade policies that deliver benefits to all of their people.
But just because managing the effects of globalization is difficult does not mean we should throw our hands up and quit.
In the developing world, trade has delivered high growth and technological progress.
According to the World Bank, since 1990 trade has helped to halve the number of people living in extreme poverty.
But these gains, while impressive, are not necessarily permanent.
If high-income countries close themselves – and their consumers – off from global markets, the world’s poorest people will suffer the most.
Trade thrives in an open environment of willing participants acting in good faith and governed by clear rules.
Short of this, the forces of globalization can turn cooperation into conflict.
That’s why policymakers should focus on four areas.
First, countries should dismantle protectionist measures they have in place, and make a firm commitment not to implement policies that distort global markets.
Second, countries should come together to update the international rules governing trade to account for changing economic conditions, and effectively implement negotiated agreements.
Third, individual countries and institutions such as the World Trade Organization should work together to eliminate barriers that increase trade costs.