At the same time, the international community should work to improve the availability and effectiveness of official development assistance.
The ODA target of 0.7% of GDP – agreed in 2002 at the International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey, Mexico – should motivate countries to increase their contributions.
They can also take steps to make ODA more predictable from year to year.
Donors should structure aid to ensure that it supports sound national development policies and programs, rather than their own narrow interests.
This is particularly relevant as emerging development partners, especially the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), offer new kinds of aid packages that incorporate investment and non-financial assistance.
Private charities, which have been instrumental in promoting innovation in fields such as health care, the environment, and education, could provide valuable insight into channeling aid more effectively.
More generally, improving coordination among donors would help to maximize the impact of aid on the ground.
While ODA remains an important source of financing for fragile and very-low-income countries, it represents only 7% of net financial flows to developing countries, where foreign direct investment, remittances, long-term debt, and portfolio investment have a larger impact.
Donors should leverage aid to “grow the pie” and to diversify financing sources for the world’s poorest countries by providing risk guarantees, innovative investment vehicles, debt syndication, and co-financing arrangements.
Attracting even a fraction of the assets held by institutional investors, sovereign-wealth funds, and public pension funds could boost development finance substantially.
Diaspora populations are another major potential source of development financing.
Reducing transfer costs, which average an estimated 9% of the value of transactions, would put more money into the hands of those who need it most.
Tailoring financial products for diaspora communities could attract resources for investment, while reinforcing migrants’ ties – economic and otherwise – to their home countries.
Finally, the international community bears a special responsibility for delivering global public goods.
The responsibility to preserve the environment, stem the spread of communicable diseases, strengthen the international financial architecture, enhance developing-country participation in the global trading system, and facilitate the exchange of knowledge lies at the intersection of national development priorities and global interests.
Duty-free, quota-free access to OECD markets, complemented by simpler, more transparent rules of origin, would raise GDP by 1% in the least-developed countries, lifting millions out of poverty.
Investment in statistical capacity would help governments and businesses worldwide to make better policy decisions, based on a more accurate accounting of the associated costs and benefits.
The challenge of the post-2015 development agenda lies in finding creative solutions to support prosperity, equality, and sustainability.
Together, governments, civil society, international organizations, and the private sector can improve the availability and quality of finance for development, and shape a better future for all.
A Czech Moment
PRAGUE – As I listened to what some Europeans were saying as my country prepared to take over the presidency of the European Union, I heard dim echoes of Neville Chamberlain’s infamous description of Czechoslovakia as “a faraway country of which we know little.”
I suppose that Donald Rumsfeld’s misguided bid a few years ago to incite a divide between “new and old” Europe contributed to the re-emergence of that disdainful attitude. 
The reality is that there is no such thing as “old and new” Europe, and there never was.
The break with communism and reunification of Europe is now almost two decades old.
We Czechs are 100% European, and were even when the Iron Curtain cut us off from democratic Europe.
Indeed, our pro-EU sentiments may be all the stronger because our membership in the Union, like our freedom, is so comparatively new.
So no one in Europe needs to fear that the Czech Republic has some nostalgic or idiosyncratic agenda that it wants to impose on the Union.
On the contrary, events have imposed an agenda on Europe that we cannot escape and for which solidarity – true union – will be needed.
The primary, and most pressing, of the problems we face is the financial and economic crisis that is enveloping the EU.
Unfortunately, conditions across the Union will likely worsen before they begin to improve.
The type of social unrest recently witnessed in Greece may spread, because the downturn is likely to take a disproportionate toll on Europe’s young people, who are seeking jobs at a time when hard-pressed European businesses will be able to offer them very few.
It will fall to the Union, once again, to help transform despair into hope.
We Czechs know something about this, as the wrenching economic transition that we underwent in the 1990’s taught us much about how the right policies can break the grip of hopelessness.
To contain today’s financial and economic crisis, Europe will also need to continue the cooperation that it has shown up to this point.
The very existence of our Union, and particularly of the euro, has already helped to prevent the competitive devaluations and beggar-thy-neighbor policies that ravaged Europe during the 1930’s – the last time the continent faced so brutal an economic downturn. 
But we cannot be complacent that the forces of national egoism will remain in check.
For now, EU governments’ coordinated fiscal stimulus has deprived populists of their usual charge that the EU is indifferent to the fate of individuals.
Even more policy coordination will be needed both to confront the crisis and to re-establish EU norms once the storm clouds begin to dissipate.
Although it is right that the Stability and Growth Pact has become more flexible in these extraordinary times, its rules did secure a successful first decade for the euro.
These rules must eventually be restored intact if Europe is to return to the path of sustainable growth, and a consensus will need to be forged now to make that happen.
The second key challenge that we will face during our European presidency is that of Russia.
A new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) between the EU and the Russian Federation must be negotiated.
Those negotiations should have begun seriously last year, but the war in Georgia intervened to put them on hold.
Now those talks have resumed, but the background to the negotiations has changed dramatically.
Russia’s economy is now in far worse shape than that of EU members.
The collapse of world oil and gas prices has wounded Russia’s budget, and lack of investment in the country’s energy sector over the years is now causing the declining production that economists have long predicted.
Until now, Russia has cared less about a new PCA than the EU, because two-thirds of Russia’s exports to the Union comprise natural resources, which bring in cash even without the strong rules that a PCA provides.
Given the stark changes in economic conditions, however, it is now in Russia’s national interest to reassure international markets that it is a reliable place to do business, for which a new PCA would serve as an ideal signal.
Moreover, without a new PCA, individual European countries may feel it necessary to seek even more bilateral agreements with Russia.
Indeed, many EU members have been in a race with each other to see who will be Russia’s closest friend in the Union.
But the bilateral deals that have emerged from this race sometimes come at the expense of other Union members, and may unbalance relations within the Union as a whole.  Only a rules-based EU framework can provide a firm foundation for both bilateral and Union-wide relations with Russia. 
Europe’s main strength in foreign policy is not its commitment to a rules-based multilateralism, important as that undoubtedly is, but its unity.
When the Georgia crisis erupted, Europe united around a single position on Russia’s withdrawal.
It is the Czech Republic’s task, and that of the Swedish EU presidency that will follow our own, to maintain this unity as the PCA negotiations move forward.
During the 1990’s, the US and Europe erred in treating Russia with benign neglect.  It would be a mistake for Russia to respond in kind today by seeking to prolong the PCA negotiations in the hope that a possibly more amenable EU president may one day offer softer terms.
We, like all EU presidencies, will be representing the wider Union interests when we negotiate.
The Trade Delusion
LONDON – Since 2008, global trade has grown slightly more slowly than global GDP.
The Doha Round of World Trade Organization negotiations ended in failure.
Transatlantic and transpacific trade negotiations are progressing slowly, held back by the resistance of special interests.
But, though many experts fear that protectionism is undermining globalization, threatening to impede global economic growth, slower growth in global trade may be inevitable, and trade liberalization is decreasingly important.
To be sure, for 65 years, rapid trade growth has played a vital role in economic development, with average advanced-economy industrial tariffs plummeting from more than 30% to below 5%.
The creation of Europe’s single market facilitated increased intra-European trade.
Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan achieved rapid economic catch-up on the basis of export-led growth.
China has followed the same path over the last 30 years.
Trade grew about twice as fast as global output from 1990 to 2008.
But there is no reason why trade should grow faster than GDP forever.
Indeed, even if there were no trade barriers at all, trade might grow significantly more slowly than GDP in some periods.
Several factors make it possible that we are entering such a period.
For starters, there is the changing pattern of consumption in the advanced economies.
Richer people spend an increasing share of their income on services that are either impossible to trade (for example, restaurant meals) or difficult to trade (such as health services).
Non-tradable sectors tend to account for a growing share of employment and economic activity.
For several decades, that tendency has been offset by ever more intensive trading of tradable goods, often passing through many countries in complex supply chains.
In the future, however, the shift to non-tradable consumption may dominate.
Indeed, trade intensity may decline even for manufactured goods.
Trade is partly driven by differences in labor costs.
China’s dramatic manufacturing growth reflected low wages up to now.
But as real wages in China and other emerging economies grow, incentives for trade will decline.
The more that global incomes converge, the less trade there may be.
In addition, as the economists Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee of MIT have argued in their book The Second Machine Age, rapid advances in information technology may enable increasingly extensive automation.
Some manufacturing activities, though few jobs, may well return to developed countries, as the advantages of proximity to customers and lower transport costs outweigh decreasingly important differences in labor costs.
Global trade as a share of GDP may therefore decline, but without adverse consequences for global economic growth.
Rising productivity does not require relentlessly increasing trade intensity.
Earth, after all, does not trade with other planets, yet its economy still grows.
Optimal trade intensity depends on many factors – such as relative labor costs, transport costs, productivity levels, and economy-of-scale effects.
Trends in these factors might make reduced trade intensity not only inevitable but desirable.
Even if that is true, international trade will still play a vital role, and preventing any reversal of past trade liberalization is essential.
But further trade liberalization is bound to be of declining importance to economic growth.
With industrial tariffs already dramatically reduced most potential benefits of trade liberalization have already been grasped.
Estimates of the benefits of further trade liberalization are often surprisingly low – no more than a few percentage points of global GDP.
That is small compared to the cost of the 2008 financial crisis, which has left output in several advanced economies 10-15% below pre-crisis trend levels.
It is small, too, compared to the difference in economic performance between successful catch-up countries – such as China – and other countries that have enjoyed the same access to global markets but have performed less well for other reasons.
The main reason for slow progress in trade negotiations is not increasing protectionism; it is the fact that further liberalization entails complex trade-offs no longer offset by very large potential benefits.
The Doha Round’s failure has been decried as a setback for developing countries. And some liberalization – say, of advanced economies’ cotton imports – would undoubtedly benefit some low-income economies.
But full trade liberalization would have a complex impact on the least developed economies, some of which would benefit only if compensated for the loss of the preferential access to advanced-economy markets that they currently enjoy.
This implies that further progress in trade liberalization will be slow.
But slow progress is a far less important challenge to growth prospects than the debt overhang in developed economies, or infrastructure and educational deficiencies in many developing economies.
That reality often goes unacknowledged.
The importance of past trade liberalization has left the global policy establishment with a bias toward assuming that further liberalization would bring similar benefits.
But while the potential global benefits of trade liberalization have declined, reduced trade intensity might still impede economic development in some countries.
Only a handful of economies over the last 60 years have fully caught up to advanced-economy living standards, and all relied on export-led growth to drive productivity and job creation in manufacturing.
Relying solely on that model will be more difficult in the future.
China is so big that it must develop domestic drivers of growth at an earlier stage of development than did Japan, Taiwan, or South Korea; as a result, its exports will inevitably decline (relative to GDP).
Meanwhile, for some low-income countries, increased manufacturing and service-sector automation of the sort described by Brynjolfsson and McAfee, whether within advanced economies or within China’s established industrial clusters, will make the path to middle- and high-income status more difficult to achieve.
That poses important challenges for development policy, which further trade liberalization can alleviate only marginally.
Rethinking the Monetization Taboo
LONDON – Now that the pace of the US Federal Reserve’s “tapering” of its asset-purchase program has been debated to death, attention will increasingly turn to prospects for interest-rate increases.
But another question looms: How will central banks achieve a final “exit” from unconventional monetary policy and return balance sheets swollen by unconventional monetary policy to “normal” levels?
To many, a larger issue needs to be addressed.
The Fed’s tapering merely slows the growth of its balance sheet.
The authorities would still have to sell $3 trillion of bonds to return to the pre-crisis status quo.
The rarely admitted truth, however, is that there is no need for central banks’ balance sheets to shrink.
They could stay permanently larger; and, for some countries, permanently bigger central-bank balance sheets will help reduce public-debt burdens.
As a recent IMF paper by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff illustrates, advanced economies face debt burdens that cannot be reduced simply through a mix of austerity, forbearance, and growth.
But if a central bank owns the debt of its own government, no net public liability exists.
The government owns the central bank, so the debt is to itself, and the interest expense comes back to the government as the central bank’s profit.
If central bank holdings of government debt were converted into non-interest-bearing perpetual obligations, nothing substantive would change, but it would become obvious that some previously issued public debt did not need to be repaid.
This amounts to “helicopter money” after the fact.
In 2003, then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke argued that Japan, facing deflation, should increase public expenditure or cut taxes, funding the operation by printing money rather than issuing bonds.
This, he argued, was bound to increase national income, because the direct stimulative effect would not be offset by concern about future debt burdens.
His advice was not followed; large Japanese deficits were in fact bond-financed.
But the debts held by the Bank of Japan (BoJ) could still be written off.
In Japan’s case, this would reduce government debt by an amount equal to more than 40% of GDP today, and around 60% if implemented after the bond purchases planned for 2014.
Objections focus on two risks: central-bank losses and excessive inflation.
But both of these outcomes can be avoided.
Central banks have bought government bonds with money on which they currently pay zero or very low interest rates.
So, as interest rates rise, central banks might face costs exceeding their income.
But central banks can choose to pay zero interest on a portion of the reserves that commercial banks hold with them, even when they increase the policy interest rate.
And they can require commercial banks to hold zero-interest reserves at the central bank equal to a defined proportion of their loans, thus preventing inflationary growth of private credit and money.
Permanent monetization of government debts is undoubtedly technically possible.
Whether it is desirable depends on the outlook for inflation.
Where inflation is returning to target levels, debt monetization could be unnecessarily and dangerously stimulative.
Central-bank bond sales, while certainly not inevitable, may be appropriate.
But if deflation is the danger, permanent monetization may be the best policy.
I predict that Japan will, in effect, permanently monetize some government debt.
But the government does not need to repay the ¥140 trillion ($1.4 trillion) of its debt that the BoJ already owns.
The BoJ will continue to increase its balance sheet until it achieves its 2% inflation target.
Thereafter, its balance sheet may stabilize in absolute yen terms and fall slowly as a percentage of GDP, but its absolute size will probably never decrease – a likelihood that should cause no concern.
It is precisely what happened to the Fed’s balance sheet after its wartime and postwar buying of US government bonds came to an end in 1951.
Even as permanent monetization occurs, however, the truth may be obfuscated.
If government bond repayments to the BoJ continued, but were always offset by new BoJ bond purchases, and if the BoJ kept the interest rate on reserves at zero, the net effect would be the same as a debt write-off, but the fiction of “normal” central-bank operations could be maintained.
Central banks can monetize debt while pretending not to.
That pretense may reflect a useful taboo: if we overtly recognize that debt write-off/monetization is possible, politicians might want to do it all the time and in excess, not just in circumstances that make it appropriate.
The historical experience of Weimar Germany, or that of Zimbabwe today, illustrates the danger.
As a result, even when permanent monetization occurs – as it almost certainly will in Japan and possibly elsewhere – it may remain forever the policy that dare not speak its name.
Such reticence may serve a useful purpose.
But it must not blind central banks and governments to the full range of policy tools available to address today’s severe debt overhangs.
The Great Credit Mistake
LONDON – Before the financial crisis erupted in 2008, private credit in most developed economies grew faster than GDP.
Then credit growth collapsed.
Whether that fall reflected low demand for credit or constrained supply may seem like a technical issue.
But the answer holds important implications for policymaking and prospects for economic growth.
And the official answer is probably wrong.
The prevailing view has usually stressed supply constraints and the policies needed to fix them.
An impaired banking system, it is argued, starves businesses, particularly small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), of the funds they need to expand.
In September 2008, US President George W. Bush wanted to “free up banks to resume the flow of credit to American families and businesses.”
The stress tests and recapitalizations of US banks in 2009 were subsequently hailed as crucial to the recovery of both the banking system and the economy.
By contrast, the European Central Bank’s inadequately tough stress tests in 2010 were widely panned for leaving eurozone banks too weak to provide adequate credit.
In the United Kingdom, banks have been criticized for not lending the reserves created by quantitative easing to the real economy, leading the Bank of England to introduce its “funding for lending” scheme in 2012.
In the eurozone, it is hoped that this year’s asset quality review (AQR) and stress tests will finally dispel concerns about bank solvency and free up credit supply.
A “credit crunch” – particularly in trade finance – was certainly a key reason why the financial crisis generated a real economy recession.
Taxpayer-funded bank rescues, higher bank capital requirements, and ultra-easy monetary policy have all been vital to overcome credit supply constraints.
But there is strong evidence that once the immediate crisis was over, lack of demand for credit played a far larger role than restricted supply in impeding economic growth.
That argument is persuasively made by Atif Mian and Amir Sufi in House of Debt, an important new book that analyzes US data on a county-by-county basis.
Mian and Sufi show that the recession was caused by a collapse of household consumption, and that consumption fell most in those counties where pre-crisis borrowing and post-crisis real-estate prices left households facing the largest relative losses in net wealth.
It was in those US counties, too, that local businesses cut employment most aggressively.
For SMEs, a shortage of customers, not a shortage of credit, constrained borrowing, employment, and output.
And the customers were absent because the pre-crisis credit boom had left them over-leveraged.
In the UK, many business surveys from 2009-2012 told the same story.
Poor customer demand was ranked well ahead of credit availability as a constraint on growth.
Economic growth can indeed continue to be severely depressed by a debt overhang even when credit supply is unrestricted and cheap.
Many Japanese companies were left overleveraged by the boom and bust in credit and real estate in the 1980s and early 1990s.
By the late 1990s, the Japanese banking system was offering companies loans at near-zero interest rates.
But, rather than borrow to invest, firms cut investment to pay down debt, driving two decades of stagnation and deflation.
Since 2011, the ECB’s analysis of weak eurozone growth has stressed the negative impact of an impaired and fragmented financial system, with high sovereign-bond yields and funding costs for banks resulting in prohibitive lending terms in the peripheral countries.
Major progress in fixing these problems has already been achieved.
The ECB’s latest Monthly Bulletin documents this, citing multiple indicators of improved credit availability and pricing.
Nonetheless, the rate of decline in private-sector loans has accelerated over the last year – from -0.6% to -2% – and low demand is acknowledged to be the main driver of depressed credit growth.
Simultaneous private deleveraging and fiscal consolidation are restricting eurozone growth far more than remaining restrictions on credit supply.
Despite the ECB’s own evidence, however, the policy focus remains on fixing the credit-supply problem, through the AQR and stress tests, and through the ECB’s own version of a funding for lending scheme, announced on June 5.
That reflects a recurring tendency in official policy debates, particularly in the eurozone, to concentrate on fixable problems to the exclusion of more difficult issues.
Fixing impaired banking systems after a crisis is both essential and achievable.
Moreover, even when public rescue costs are inevitable, they are typically small change compared to the economic harm wrought by the financial crisis and post-crisis recession.
By contrast, a large debt overhang may be intractable unless policy orthodoxies are challenged.
Japan offset private deleveraging in the 1990s by running massive public deficits.
The US has pulled out of recession faster than the eurozone, not only – or even primarily – because it fixed its banking system faster, but because it pursued more stimulative fiscal policies.
But fiscal stimulus is constrained within the eurozone, where member countries no longer issue their own currency and “sovereign” debt therefore carries a default risk.
Aggressive monetary expansion through quantitative easing is also far more complicated and politically contentious in a currency area with no federal debt for the central bank to buy.
To survive and thrive, the eurozone will need to become more centralized, with some common fiscal revenues, expenditures, and debts.
Of course, this scenario implies immensely difficult political choices.
But the starting point for debate must be realism about the nature and severity of the problems facing the eurozone.
If eurozone policy assumes that fixing the banks will fix the economy, the next ten years in Europe could look like the 1990s in Japan.
A Daughter of Dictatorship and Democracy
SEOUL – It is something of a cliché question in South Korea nowadays: Who would be the country’s next president if the election were held tomorrow, rather than in December 2012?
Numerous opinion polls show Park Geun-hye of the ruling Grand National Party (GNP) to be the leading candidate.
If elected, she would be South Korea’s first woman president, and, for her rivals, her dominant position in the race is an uncomfortable but unassailable fact.
South Korean voters of all ages and regions have welcomed Park as a candidate for their country’s leadership.
Her political style is both refreshing and relevant, because she comes across as sincere and forthright at a time when the public is hungry for moral leadership.
And she has an astonishing talent for simplifying complicated issues accurately, which she likely learned – along with how to interpret and manipulate the political connotations of every issue – from her father, former President Park Chung-hee.
Acclaimed as a national hero among radical right-wingers, the iron-fisted Park Chung-hee ruled South Korea from 1963 to 1979, in the wake of the 1961 military coup, only to be assassinated by his intelligence chief.
His daughter is proud of his legacy, which marked the beginning of South Korea’s economic boom.
Indeed, as a pillar of export-oriented modernity, Park Chung-hee was once lionized as the archetype of a modernizing political leadership in military-authoritarian states.
At home, he still ranks first in popularity among the country’s heads of state, kindling nostalgia like a popular old record – a corollary to people’s frustration and anger at the current government of President Lee Myung-bak.
Park, who lost her first bid for the GNP’s nomination to Lee in 2007, needs to ensure that no rupture with her erstwhile rival knocks her off the path to victory in 2012.
An astute politician, Park did not hesitate to campaign wholeheartedly for Lee the last time around – a move that, as part of long-term political strategy, made perfect sense.
To many South Koreans, the election is now Park’s to lose.
No candidate on the horizon seems able to stop her.
If she wins, it will be the result of her seriousness and tenacity, not her political heritage.
No one in South Korea’s conservative movement doubts that Park is one of them.
And, as an icon of the right, she is well aware that she cannot afford to betray her status.
Despite her charisma, Park is neither a Sarah Palin nor an Eva Peron.
Indeed, she looks more like a Korean Margaret Thatcher – a lady not for turning, in Thatcher’s famous phrase, and with clearly thought-through political principles animating her actions.
In any case, she seems destined to establish a new South Korea focusing on her landmark pledge ‘jul pu se,’ literally meaning ‘reduce-loosen-strengthen tax-cuts,’ deregulation, and law and order, not just to add another chapter to her father’s old book.
Her administration would mark a fresh departure from the country’s troubled recent past.
Left-leaning pundits claim that the dictator’s daughter has the same autocratic vision as her father, though Park invariably prefers incremental change to radical measures, and cut her political teeth in the tough-minded politics of the GNP.
Others take a flagrantly sexist stance, arguing that a woman president would be a non-starter as long as the North Korean regime continues to threaten national security.
Although these criticisms don’t seem to bother the electorate very much, Park’s path to victory may yet prove narrower than her supporters expect.
She has been called the “Queen of Elections,” in particular since she won a campaign in 2006 after being slashed with a box cutter by a deranged man.
But she must convincingly outline practical strategies to resolve South Korea’s most serious problems, including high unemployment, worsening educational performance, and North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.
Ms. Park once pledged to provide loans for working-class families from elementary school to college years, while contending that local universities should be empowered to have more autonomy.
She favors engagement policy and the six-party talks so as to resolve the nuclear troubles.
Come presidential election-day in 2012, South Korean voters will pick the candidate who embodies pragmatism and centrism over a partisan or ideologue.
Park’s success will depend, in the end, on the effectiveness of her campaign in further defining her character along those lines.
Unlike former Peruvian dictator Alberto Fujimori’s daughter, who lost her presidential bid in Peru last month, Park is likely to defy her family’s tragic history.
If she does, she will be Asia’s most powerful woman, perhaps the most powerful in the world, at the end of next year.
A Day for Planetary Justice
PRINCETON – What we are doing to our planet, to our children and grandchildren, and to the poor, by our heedless production of greenhouse gases, is one of the great moral wrongs of our age.
On October 24, you can stand up against this injustice.
October 24 is 350 Day.
The name comes from the number of parts per million of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that, according to Jim Hansen, perhaps the world’s leading climate scientist, we should not exceed if we are to avoid potentially catastrophic climate change.
It is a measure of the seriousness of our problem that CO2 is already at 386 ppm, and is rising by two ppm each year.
The need to cut greenhouse gases has become increasingly clear as predictions of global warming – denounced as “alarmist” when they were first made just a few years ago – have repeatedly turned out to have been too conservative.
We are approaching a point of no return, at which feedback loops will kick in and continue to warm the planet, no matter what we do.
The melting of arctic ice is one example.
Four hundred years ago, explorers sought the legendary “Northeast Passage” across the north of Europe and Russia to China.
They found the arctic ice impenetrable, and soon gave up their quest.
This year, commercial vessels successfully navigated the Northeast Passage.
That is one of many recent dramatic signs that our climate is changing and that our planet is warmer than it has been for a very long time.
But ice-free arctic waters are more than a symptom of global warming. They are themselves a cause of further warming: ice and snow reflect the sun’s rays.
An ice-free surface absorbs more warmth from the sun than one covered in snow or ice.  In other words, our greenhouse gas emissions have, by causing enough warming to melt the arctic ice, created a feedback loop that will generate more warming, and melt more ice, even if we were to stop emitting all greenhouse gases tomorrow.
Other feedback loops pose a similar danger.
In Siberia, vast quantities of methane, an extremely potent greenhouse gas, are locked up in what used to be called “permafrost” – regions in which it was assumed that the ground was permanently frozen.
But areas that used to be frozen are now thawing, releasing methane and thus contributing to further warming – and to further thawing, which releases more methane.
Developing nations are grasping just how outrageous the current distribution of greenhouse-gas emissions really is.
At the United Nations Summit on Climate Change in September, President Paul Kagame of Rwanda pointed out that, while developed nations outside Africa are almost entirely responsible for the problem, its greatest impact will probably be on Africa, which has few resources to cope with the challenge.
Kagame then suggested giving every country an annual per capita quota for CO2 emissions, and allowing developing countries that are below the quota to trade their excess quota with countries that are above theirs.
The money that developing countries would receive for this would not be aid, but rather a recognition that the rich nations must pay for something that in the past they simply appropriated: far more than their fair share of our atmosphere’s capacity to absorb our waste gases.
Sri Lanka took a similar stance, using studies from the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to calculate that in 2008, environmentally permissible carbon emissions totaled no more than 2,172 kilograms per person.
In fact, the world’s per capita emissions were 4,700 kilograms, or more than double the permissible limit.
But, while emissions in the rich nations were far above the permissible limit, Sri Lankan emissions were, at 660 kilograms, well below it.
As Sri Lanka’s government pointed out, “That means low-emitting countries like us could not emit more because our space has already been exploited by developed or global heavy polluting countries without our consent.”
This situation is an injustice of vast proportions, reminiscent of – and arguably much worse than – the now-repudiated colonialism of the Western powers in the nineteenth century.
The task of remedying it must begin at the meeting on climate change that will be held in Copenhagen in December.
Many political leaders have expressed support for strong action on climate change, but what most of them regard as “strong action” will not be enough to get us back below 350 ppm.
In some countries, including the United States, there are major political obstacles to taking even modest steps.
On October 24, people in nearly every country will be taking action to raise awareness of the need for an international treaty to bring our atmosphere back to 350 ppm of CO2.
There will be climbers hanging banners high in the Himalayas, where the glaciers are melting, and scuba divers at Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, which is threatened by climate change.
Churches will ring bells 350 times, 350 cyclists will circle towns, and, in many places, 350 trees will be planted.
At www.350.org you can find out what is happening near you and join in, or put your own idea online.
But don’t just sit back and hope that others will do enough to make an impact.
One day your grandchildren will ask you: what did you do to meet the greatest moral challenge of your time?
A Day of Liberation
When I was seven years old, in 1960, my grandmother Angelica opened my eyes to the meaning of 8 May 1945, the day when Nazi Germany surrendered and World War II ended in Europe.
We were spending our summer holidays in Normandy where the liberation of Europe from Nazism had started on D-Day, 6 June 1944.
One evening, I listened to my parents and my grandmother talking about the past.
I have forgotten the details of their conversation, but I can still hear my grandmother’s sigh of relief when she said “Thank God we lost that war!”
From a child’s perspective, it wasn’t self-evident that losing was a good thing.
But of course, my grandmother was right to equate defeat with liberation.
The more I have thought about the lesson she taught me 45 years ago, the clearer I have seen another, less obvious dimension in what she said: It is “we” who lost the war.
Collectively, the Germans had not been the innocent victims of a small gang of criminal outsiders called “Nazis” – Nazism had been an inside ideology supported by millions of Germans, and every German was liable for its atrocities whether or not he or she had adhered to it individually.
In today’s Germany, an overwhelming majority subscribes to the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation – not only for Europe, but also for Germany itself.
Compared to public opinion in 1960, that’s certainly an enormous progress.
But paradoxically, it may also contain an element of forgetfulness, because it tends to conceal the fact that liberation required a military defeat.
To use my grandmother’s parlance, it is not “us” who were the liberators, but “them”.
The way people see the past tells us more about their present attitudes than about the past itself.
This is what the term “politics of memory” is meant to indicate.
And this is why it doesn’t matter whether the relevant events happened 60 years ago (as World War II), 90 years (as in the case of the Armenian genocide) or even 600 years (such as the battle of Kosovo in 1389).
A violent conflict in the past may survive as a war of memories in the present, as can be observed in the current dispute between China and South Korea on one side, and Japan on the other.
A war of memories, in turn, may sometimes lead to a violent conflict in the future.
Former perpetrators often try to de-legitimize their former victims’ moral superiority by claiming they were victims themselves.
Therefore, the 60th anniversary of the firebombing of Dresden by Allied forces on 13 February 1945 has probably been a more crucial moment in terms of the German “politics of memory” than the 60th anniversary of 8 May 1945 is going to be.
Far-right groups infamously dubbed the attack by which at least 30,000 people were killed “Dresden’s Holocaust of bombs.”
Fortunately, their propaganda campaign has been a failure.
Although it is true that thousands of the civilians killed in Dresden and other German cities were innocent at an individual level, there can be no doubt it was morally imperative that Germany be defeated collectively.
On the left side of the German political spectrum, the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation remains unchallenged.
However, it is sometimes repressed that the massive use of force had been necessary to achieve that result.
Left-wing pacifism tends to overlook this simple fact.
Its slogan “Never again war!” is only half the truth – the other half is “Never again appeasement!” 8 May 1945 was not “zero hour,” as a popular saying in Germany goes.
It had an antecedent, that is, a lack of pre-emptive resistance at home and abroad to the threat that built up in Nazi Germany during the 1930’s.
There is yet another lesson to be learned.
Yes, 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation to which the Soviet army contributed decisively.
But for millions of Central and East Europeans, liberation was followed by Stalin’s oppressive regime.
The current war of memories between the Baltic republics and Russia, with regard to the international celebration in Moscow on 9 May this year, reminds Germany of a special historic responsibility.
The German-Soviet non-aggression treaty, the so-called Hitler-Stalin pact, concluded in August 1939, had been supplemented by a secret appendix dividing the border states Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Romania into spheres of interest for the two parties.
But excusing Nazi atrocities by pointing to Stalinist crimes is an intellectually and morally unacceptable stratagem.
When Chancellor Schröder travels to Moscow for the Red Square celebrations, he should bear in mind Nazi Germany’s contribution to the Baltic tragedy.
On 8 May this year, public speakers will remind us how important it is not to forget.
They will stress that if the lessons of history are not learned, history is bound to repeat itself.
All this is perfectly true.
But personally, I will also remember my grandmother’s sentence “Thank God we lost that war!”
Thank God – and thanks to all those brave Allied soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the sake of Europe’s liberty.
Crashing the SDR
SANTA BARBARA – The Chinese government’s campaign to have its currency, the renminbi, included in the International Monetary Fund’s reserve asset appears to be on the brink of success.
Last week, IMF staff formally recommended adding the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determines the value of its so-called Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).
The addition of the renminbi to the basket, which currently includes the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen, would provide China with a boost to its prestige.
More important, it would advance the government’s efforts to internationalize the renminbi.
But it would also be a mistake.
The decision to recommend the renminbi’s inclusion, far from having been made on sound economic grounds, can only be understood as political.
As such, the long-term consequences are likely to be regrettable.
On a purely technical basis, the renminbi’s qualifications for inclusion in the SDR basket are questionable.
Traditionally, the IMF has insisted on two criteria: a currency’s issuing country must be among the world’s leading exporters, and the currency must be “freely usable” – widely used and traded.
As the world’s largest exporter, China clearly meets the first condition.
The second, however, is probably still beyond its reach.
The renminbi is by no means in the same league as the SDR basket’s four incumbent currencies.
In 2014, China’s currency ranked seventh in global central-bank reserves, eighth in international bond issuance, and 11th in global currency trading.
Moreover, the renminbi remains non-convertible for most capital transactions, China’s financial markets are primitive, and trading margins for the exchange rate are still set daily by the monetary authorities.
Indeed, as recently as August, the IMF was skeptical about adding the renminbi to the SDR basket, saying that “significant work” was still needed, and suggesting that a decision should be put off until 2016 in order to ensure a “smooth” transition.
So why did the IMF flip?
The answer is obvious: China mounted a full-court press to change minds.
In August, the currency’s exchange-rate regime was loosened slightly.
Renminbi-denominated government bonds were issued in London, and plans were laid to create new trading platforms for the currency in several European financial centers.
And Chinese policymakers made it abundantly clear how unhappy they would be with a negative decision.
Their pressure paid off.
One by one, Western governments fell in line behind the renminbi, despite its practical limitations.
The Fund got the message, and now the fix is in.
The recommendation to enlarge the SDR basket has been warmly backed by Christine Lagarde, the IMF’s managing director, and a final decision by the Fund’s executive board is expected at the end of the month.
Many would argue that this is a positive development.
Certainly, it mollifies China’s leaders, offering them a stronger incentive to continue to work within the existing international monetary regime.
Recent Chinese initiatives, especially the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, have given rise to fears that the country intends to build a new set of international institutions to compete with Western-dominated organizations like the IMF.
The decision to add the renminbi to the SDR basket may have put that danger into remission.
On the other hand, the move sets a worrying precedent, injecting politics into a policy area that had been governed by objective economic considerations.
Conceivably, over the longer term, China’s successful campaign could now open the door to lobbying by other governments to include their currencies as well.
Why not add the Swiss franc or the Canadian dollar?
Or, for that matter, why not include the Russian ruble or Indian rupee?
What was once the dignified preserve of obviously elite currencies could become the site of messy political battles for elevated status.
Of course, it can be argued that China’s recent economic trajectory means that it is only a matter of time before the renminbi does become a match for the SDR’s incumbents.
After all, international use of the currency has been growing exponentially.
But that optimistic assessment overestimates the renminbi’s prospects and illustrates the danger of linear extrapolation of the past into the future.
Likewise, use of the renminbi for the purpose of invoicing and settling trade with China is bound to continue growing.
But in terms of the all-important roles of a currency as an investment vehicle or reserve asset, the outlook for the renminbi is much less promising, owing to China’s still-tight capital controls and low level of financial development.
Nor is inclusion of the renminbi in the SDR basket likely to provide as big a boost to the currency’s internationalization as many believe.
Some central banks may decide to follow suit, adding renminbi-denominated assets to their reserves to match the composition of the basket.
But the increase will be marginal at best – some $40 billion in the next few years, according to the IMF’s calculations.
With global reserves now totaling more than $10 trillion, that is a mere drop in the proverbial bucket.
The political reasons for including the renminbi in the SDR are all too clear.
Unfortunately, the risks of doing so are no less obvious.
A Defeat for International Tax Cooperation
NEW YORK – Most of the world’s governments – eager to mobilize more tax revenues to finance development and curb pervasive tax-avoidance schemes, such as those revealed in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks scandal last year – have an interest in collaborating on taxation matters.
Yet at the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa last month, the momentum toward strengthening international tax cooperation came to an abrupt halt.
Developed countries blocked a proposal at the conference to establish an intergovernmental tax body within the United Nations to replace the current UN Committee of Experts.
These countries insist that tax cooperation should take place exclusively under the leadership of the OECD, a body that they control.
The rest of the world should hope this will prove to be a pause rather than an end to progress on international tax cooperation, which began 13 years ago, at the first International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey, Mexico.
Two years later, in 2004, the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) upgraded its “ad hoc group” of tax experts to a regular committee.
This meant that the experts would meet regularly and have an expanded mandate that went beyond merely updating a model double-taxation treaty.
Four years later, at the Second Conference on Financing for Development, in Doha, Qatar, policymakers acknowledged that more needed to be done in tax matters, and asked ECOSOC to consider strengthening institutional arrangements.
And then, in the year leading up to the Addis Ababa conference, the UN Secretary-General endorsed the need for “an intergovernmental committee on tax cooperation, under the auspices of the United Nations.”
His endorsement, along with strong support from nongovernmental organizations and the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation, gave greater force to the demand by developing countries, organized around the Group of 77 and China, for an equal voice in setting global tax norms.
Up until the 11th hour of negotiations in Addis Ababa, they stood firm in calling for an intergovernmental body with the mandate and resources to create a coherent global framework for international tax cooperation.
But to no avail: Developed countries, led by the United States and the United Kingdom –home to many of the multinational corporations implicated in the “Lux Leaks” – succeeded in blocking this much-needed advance in global governance.
In the end, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda provides that the current Committee of Experts will continue to function according to its 2004 mandate, with three additional meeting days per year, all funded through voluntary contributions.
That is a profoundly disappointing outcome.
The developed countries have an argument – but not a convincing one.
The OECD, whose members are essentially the world’s 34 richest countries, certainly has the capacity to set international standards on taxation.
Yet the domination of a select group of countries over tax norms has meant that, in reality, the global governance architecture for taxation has not kept pace with globalization.
The Monterrey Consensus reached in 2002 included a call to enhance “the voice and participation of developing countries in international economic decision-making and norms-setting.”
But although the OECD invites some developing countries to participate in its discussions to establish norms, it offers them no decision-making power.
The OECD is thus a weak surrogate for a globally representative intergovernmental forum.
Such a body must operate under the auspices of the United Nations, which bears the institutional legitimacy necessary to respond effectively to the challenges of globalization with coherent global standards to combat abusive tax practices and ensure fair taxation of corporate profits worldwide.
Despite the disappointment in Addis Ababa, the call for reform of the international tax system is not likely to be silenced.
Instead, it will grow louder on all sides, as the developed countries’ counter-productive resistance to any give and take on international cooperation results in a tsunami of unilateral tax measures beyond OECD control.
The Making of Euro-Jihadism
MADRID – The Belgian historian Henri Pirenne linked Europe’s birth as a Christian continent in the eighth century to its rupture with Islam.
Pirenne probably would never have expected a Muslim ghetto in Brussels to emerge, much less become a hub of jihadism, with marginalized and angry young Muslims revolting against Europe from within its own borders.
Divorce is not an option these days.
But nor is the kind of marriage that the Islam scholar Tariq Ramadan advocates.
Ramadan, a grandson of the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, is a Swiss citizen and a resident of the United Kingdom who argues that Islamic ethics and values should be injected into the European system.
Europe would then not just tolerate Islam, but actually embrace it as an integral part of itself.
The problem with Ramadan’s vision is that Europe is an overwhelmingly secular continent, with a profoundly forward-thinking approach to ethics.
Islamic societies, by contrast, are both deeply religious and deeply embedded in the past.
When Islamists speak of political or social reform, they are typically looking backward, hoping to resurrect a time when core European principles – from gender equality to gay marriage – were repudiated.
“We cannot,” he writes, “support dictatorships … be silent when civilians are massacred south of our borders, and hope that we will not receive a response to the injustice and humiliation we have provoked.”
But it is the United States that launched wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, offers unconditional support to Israel, and has repeatedly propped up Arab autocrats.
And it is Europe that has consistently criticized these policies – often harshly.
Yet America is not being subjected to a major surge of jihadist sentiment within its borders.
It might have helped that US President Barack Obama backed away from some of these policies.
When the Arab Spring uprisings began, for example, he was quick to cut support for Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, allowing protesters – inspired by the Western model of democracy – to secure regime change.
The return to autocracy in Egypt in 2013, via Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s coup d’état, certainly was not aided by the US or Europe, both of which supported the democratically elected Muslim Brotherhood.
Europe has offered even more direct help to Arab countries in recent years.
If it were not for Europe’s military intervention, Libyans would still be living under the tyrannical Muammar el-Qaddafi.
True, Europe could have done more to prevent the ensuing chaos in Libya.
But the people of Libya surely must take responsibility for the proliferation of competing militias that refuse to unite to save their state from total collapse.
More broadly, though the West – especially the US – has made grave policy errors in the Arab world over the last 50 years, external powers cannot be blamed entirely for the region’s meltdown.
That is the result of a profound civilizational crisis – one that can be redressed only by the people of the Arab world.
If Europe’s foreign policy is not responsible for the Arab world’s current turmoil, it certainly cannot be the reason for the rise of jihadism within its own borders.
The real problem lies at home: a disastrous deficit of effective policies related to social justice, education, housing, and employment for young European Muslims.
Marginalization generates frustration, which is subsequently fed by growing Islamophobia and the rise of raucous right-wing movements throughout the continent.
This link is apparent in the fact that the majority of European jihadists come from underprivileged backgrounds.
Not particularly well versed in the true teachings of Islam, and lacking opportunities to improve their lives, they become easy prey for extremists.
Jihadism, with its absolute certainty and grand mission, offers a sense of purpose, pride, and identity – not to mention adventure – and an outlet for their anger against the “home” that has denied them those things.
The story of America’s Muslims is the measure of Europe’s failure.
Like most Americans, Muslims in the US maintain a certain amount of faith in the American dream.
They are mostly middle class, and, despite all the talk about rising economic inequality, they have not given up on the belief that, in the US, hard work and initiative are rewarded.
America is a country of immigrants, with a dynamic economy that has enabled newcomers, time and again, to achieve great success.
In Europe, by contrast, improving one’s social standing has always been very difficult; and, at a time of economic stagnation and staggeringly high unemployment, it is not getting any easier.
Socially, America also offers something to Muslims that Europe does not.
Its fundamentally religious culture enables Muslims to retain their identity to a far greater extent than in secular Europe.
Indeed, America’s core values – personal responsibility and constitutional patriotism – can be easier for Muslims to swallow than Europe’s more aggressively secular brand of liberalism.
As a result, integration and assimilation tend to be easier for Muslims in America.
All of this suggests that Europe must look inward to address homegrown jihadism effectively.
This does not mean that it should temper its secularism, much less its liberal values.
Rather, Europe must breathe life into its own “European dream,” ensuring that all people have access to real opportunities to improve their lives.
Otherwise, it will face a lost generation of millions of young Europeans – Muslim and otherwise.
The New Climate Economics
NEW YORK – This Friday, in its latest comprehensive assessment of the evidence on global warming, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will show that the world’s climate scientists are more certain than ever that human activity – largely combustion of fossil fuels – is causing temperatures and sea levels to rise.
In recent years, a series of extreme weather events – including Hurricane Sandy in New York and New Jersey, floods in China, and droughts in the American Midwest, Russia, and many developing countries – have caused immense damage.
Last week, Mexico experienced simultaneous hurricanes in the Pacific and in the Gulf of Mexico that devastated towns and cities in their path.
Climate change will be a major driver of such events, and we risk much worse.
This puts a new debate center stage: how to reconcile increased action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions with strong economic growth.
It is a debate that is already mired in controversy.
As most countries have started making serious investments in renewable energy, and many are implementing carbon prices and regulations, critics complain that such policies may undermine growth.
With the global economy still recovering from the 2008 financial crash, higher energy costs – not yet fully offset by greater energy efficiency – are worrying business and political leaders.
The advent of shale gas has confused the energy debate even more.
If gas is substituted for coal, it can be a useful bridge to a low-carbon future.
But astonishingly, it is coal, the dirtiest fuel, that is experiencing the sharpest increase in use.
Companies and investors are hedging their bets by taking a few resource-efficiency measures and investing in some low-carbon assets, but leaving their high-carbon portfolios and activities largely intact.
Policy vacillation in some countries has not helped.
Advocates of stronger action respond that low-carbon investments can generate much stronger, cleaner growth.
They point to the savings available from energy efficiency, and to the market opportunities generated by clean-energy technologies as the processes of learning and discovery take hold.
They seek to demonstrate the benefits that a more sustainable pattern of development can bring to the world’s cities, to people’s health (from the reduction in air pollution), to energy security, and to the ability of the world’s poor to access energy.
And they propose green bonds and public investment banks to finance new infrastructure and jobs at a time when world interest rates are low and demand is depressed in many countries.
These are serious economic debates, but too often they have become entangled in ideological disputes about the appropriate response to the economic crisis and the value of government intervention in markets.
That is regrettable.
Climate change is not a partisan issue, and climate policy is essentially market-based.
It is about correcting market failures so that markets and entrepreneurship can play their proper role of ensuring innovation and efficient resource allocation.
In order to escape this impasse, we have helped to launch the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate.
The Commission’s New Climate Economy project brings together seven leading policy research institutes from six continents, overseen by a panel of former heads of government and finance ministers and prominent business leaders, and advised by a panel of leading economists from across the world.
Its purpose is to provide authoritative new evidence concerning how governments and businesses can achieve stronger economic growth while simultaneously addressing climate risks.
Few governments or investors start from the standpoint of climate change.
They want to promote investment and economic growth, create jobs, stabilize public finances, expand markets, turn profits, ensure reliable energy and food supplies, produce goods and services, reduce poverty, and build cities.
So the primary question that we need to ask is not whether we can reduce emissions, but how public policy can help to achieve these core goals while reducing emissions and building a more climate-resilient economy.
There is now a lot of experience around the world in this area.
When the Stern Review on the economics of climate change was published seven years ago, the subject was largely theoretical.
Now countries at all stages of development are pursuing new patterns of economic growth that take climate into account.
Germany, for example, is planning the world’s most ambitious low-carbon energy transition, based on energy conservation and renewables.
South Korea has made “green growth” a central economic goal.
Mexico’s 2012 General Law on Climate Change has put it on course for a major increase in clean power.
China has placed the industrial development of green technologies at the top of its agenda.
Ethiopia is seeking to move to lower-carbon farming.
Brazil has significantly reduced the rate of deforestation in the Amazon.
Some major businesses are providing powerful examples of what is possible.
Unilever has committed to the sustainable sourcing of agricultural and forest products.
Coca-Cola is phasing out all use of climate-polluting hydrofluorocarbons.
The retail giant Wal-Mart is driving emissions reduction throughout its supply chain.
Meanwhile, the World Bank and the European Investment Bank have stopped lending to high-emission coal plants.
Yet genuine questions remain about how fast economies should move on to a low-carbon path, and the most effective way to do so.
Some low-carbon policies have clearly been expensive, while other, apparently cost-effective options, have not been pursued at all.
Any structural transformation involves costs, trade-offs, and uncertainties, and it is vital that we understand these properly.
Powerful interests will, of course, oppose any low-carbon transition, dismissing and often drowning out those who stand to benefit.
That makes it even more important to clarify the choices.
As science makes clear how imperative the climate question is, it is time for economists and policymakers to explain how it can be answered.
Only the Poor Die Young
ROTTERDAM – People who are lower on the socioeconomic ladder (indicated by their level of education, occupation, or income) have shorter and less healthy lives, on average, than those on higher rungs.
Indeed, life expectancy at birth often varies by 5-10 years, depending on social and economic well-being, with poorer people spending 10-20 more years of life suffering from illness or disability than their wealthier counterparts.
In the nineteenth century, this situation would not have been surprising, given low average income, widespread poverty, and lack of social security.
But such data are commonly reported for high-income countries today, including those ranking high on indices of economic prosperity and human development – even Western Europe’s highly developed welfare states.
Since the end of World War II, Western European countries have tried to reduce socioeconomic inequality, or offset its consequences, through progressive taxation, social security programs, and a wide range of collectively financed provisions, such as public housing, education, health care, and cultural and leisure facilities.
But, while these policies have reduced inequalities in some social and economic outcomes, including income, housing quality, and health-care access, they have been insufficient to eliminate health inequalities.
Long-term time-series data indicate that the socioeconomic mortality gap narrowed before the 1950’s, but has grown substantially since then.
More puzzling is the fact that more generous welfare policies do not translate into smaller health disparities.
Even the Nordic countries – world leaders when it comes to creating universal and well-designed welfare policies that cover citizens from cradle to grave – face significant health disparities, despite their relatively low income inequality.
To be sure, modern welfare states have far from abolished social inequality, with disparities in access to material and human resources continuing to generate highly unequal lives among their citizens. But the welfare state’s aim has never been radical redistribution of wealth.
Rather, welfare policies are intended to create a compromise between the interests of employees and employers, laborers and the middle classes. As a result, their redistributive effects are modest.
So, while a partial failure of the welfare state may help to explain the persistence of health inequalities, one must look elsewhere to understand – and reverse – their rise. Two possible explanations have emerged from the rapidly growing scientific literature on the subject: selective upward social mobility and delayed diffusion of behavioral change.
In reality, both factors are at work.
During the twentieth century, social mobility increased slowly but steadily in all high-income countries, with educational achievement and occupational status depending less on family background and more on cognitive ability and other personal characteristics.
As a result, the lower socioeconomic groups have not only shrunk in size, but have probably also become more homogeneous in terms of personal characteristics that increase the risk of health problems.
Moreover, people with a higher socioeconomic position tend to adopt new behaviors first, and to abandon more readily behaviors that are found to damage health, such as smoking and high-fat diets.
Given this, new behavioral recommendations by health authorities tend to exacerbate health inequalities, at least temporarily.
Significant disparities in smoking, physical exercise, diet, and alcohol consumption afflict many of Western Europe’s welfare states.
The welfare system, which was created to combat poverty, has been less effective against “diseases of affluence” like heart disease and lung cancer.
All of this highlights the need for creative solutions to disparities that unnecessarily and unfairly blight the lives of those who have the least, generate massive health-care costs, and pose a barrier to increased labor-force participation (impeding efforts in some countries to raise the retirement age).
In the last few decades, social policy in most Western European countries has moved away from redistribution. This is a mistake, given that the consequences of this shift – rising income inequality, weaker social safety nets, and reduced health-care access – will aggravate health inequalities in the long run.
In fact, more, better-targeted redistributive policies, which account for the effects of selective upward social mobility and different rates of diffusion of behavioral change, are crucial to improving health outcomes in lower socioeconomic groups.
Income support should be complemented by preventive health programs, while health literacy programs could help to diminish the link between low cognitive ability and bad health.
Equal access to health care is not enough. Reducing inequalities in health outcomes requires more intensive health care for patients in lower socioeconomic brackets, tailored to their specific needs and challenges.
For example, revenues from tobacco taxation, which disproportionately affects lower income groups, should be used to fund cessation-support programs that target disadvantaged smokers.
Significant and persistent health inequality indicates that, by raising the health levels of those with lower incomes or less education, massive strides could be made in improving populations’ overall health.
This may require reshaping the welfare system to some extent, but the payoff would be well worth the effort.
Read more from "Visionary Voices"
The Mouse Click that Roared
CAMBRIDGE – Until recently, cyber security has primarily interested computer geeks and cloak-and-dagger types.
The Internet’s creators, part of a small, enclosed community, were very comfortable with an open system in which security was not a primary concern.
But, with some three billion or so users on the Web nowadays, that very openness has become a serious vulnerability; indeed, it is endangering the vast economic opportunities that the Internet has opened for the world.
A “cyber attack” can take any number of forms, including simple probes, defacement of Web sites, denial-of-service attacks, espionage, and destruction of data.
And the term “cyber war,” though best defined as any hostile action in cyberspace that amplifies or is equivalent to major physical violence, remains equally protean, reflecting definitions of “war” that range from armed conflict to any concerted effort to solve a problem (for example, “war on poverty”).
Cyber war and cyber espionage are largely associated with states, while cyber crime and cyber terrorism are mostly associated with non-state actors.
The highest costs currently stem from espionage and crime; but, over the next decade or so, cyber war and cyber terrorism may become greater threats than they are today.
Moreover, as alliances and tactics evolve, the categories may increasingly overlap.
Terrorists might buy malware from criminals, and governments might find it useful to hide behind both.
Some people argue that deterrence does not work in cyberspace, owing to the difficulties of attribution.