Reaching an accord in Copenhagen is critical.
But the route to a greener, lower-carbon future already is being forged in countries from Brazil to Bangladesh, Denmark to Indonesia.
From investments in renewable energy and flex-fuel vehicles to reforestation, countries everywhere are realizing that green is not an option, but a necessity for recharging their economies and creating millions of jobs.
For example, with the right investments, tropical countries could significantly reduce emissions from the forestry sector while also creating green jobs.
De-forestation currently accounts for roughly a fifth of all greenhouse-gas emissions.
Last month, China announced a $586 billion economic stimulus package, some 25% of which is to help bolster conservation, environmental protection, and renewable energy efforts.
We hope that the new stimulus package helps to move China toward greener development, and that countries follow suit.
The United States has also signaled a fundamental, abrupt shift in its global climate policy.
In his first, post-election public address, Barack Obama declared that his presidency “will mark a new chapter in America’s leadership on climate change that will strengthen our security and create millions of new jobs.”
In marrying the issues of economic revitalization, energy security, and climate change, Obama has articulated clearly the benefits of any Green New Deal.
We welcome US re-engagement in global climate negotiations and await its leadership in transforming words into concrete policies that promote global green growth.
As the US, China, and many other nations now realize, climate change is much more than an environmental issue.
It is an energy, finance, and security issue.
Indeed, it is a Head of State issue.
We urge other world leaders to join us in forging a shared, long-term vision for cooperative action that is realized at next year’s conference in Copenhagen.
Global cooperation has been key to managing the financial crisis.
It is no less vital to managing climate change, for which the stakes are far higher.
Together, we must invest in the safest, surest option – the green economy.
The Way Forward for Global Financial Policy
Financial globalization is exploding.
Yet, as the world’s leading finance ministers and central bankers convene in Washington this month for the semi-annual International Monetary Fund board meetings, policy paralysis continues.
There is simply no agreement on how to address glaring problems such as America’s increasingly fragile trade deficit, or financial dysfunction in a number of emerging markets.
This paralysis has three layers.
First, rich countries are deeply reluctant to embrace any collective plan that might impinge on their own domestic policy maneuvers.
The United States is the worst offender.
US Treasury secretaries have always loved to lecture their foreign colleagues on America’s economic perfection, and why every country should seek to emulate it.
Never mind that this logic is now in danger of unraveling along with the US housing market; Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson will stick to it.
But the fact that the US looks set to borrow almost $900 billion this year from the rest of the world is hardly a sign of US strength and foreign weakness.
It is difficult to summarize the cacophony of European voices so succinctly.
The French are deeply ambivalent about globalization, as if it were yet another invading force.
The British have nearly the opposite perspective.
Nevertheless, Europeans generally agree that their societies produce the best lifestyles, even if their economies are less efficient than America’s in a Darwinian sense.
Thus, European finance ministers, too, will not be keen to admit any need for major policy changes to deal with risks from financial globalization.
The Japanese typically try to keep quiet.
As huge winners from globalization, they want to avoid criticism of their trade and financial policies, which arguably remain considerably more protectionist than those of their rich-country counterparts.
And they certainly don’t want to be pressed to apologize for holding hostage over $800 billion in foreign currency reserves, acquired to resist yen appreciation.
Developing countries are also at fault.
Too many policymakers still believe that externally imposed opening to international capital flows was the main culprit behind the financial crises of the 1990’s – a view that unfortunately is lent some intellectual respectability by a small number of left-leaning academics.
Never mind that most of the crises could have been avoided, or late least substantially mitigated, if governments had let their currencies float against the dollar, rather than adopting rigid exchange-rate pegs.
Instead, the bogeyman of financial globalization is used as an excuse for continuing to coddle inefficient and monopolistic domestic financial systems.
The inability of backward domestic financial systems to allocate investment efficiently is a big factor pushing funds out of poor countries and into the US.
Last but not least, the IMF, as the multilateral agency charged with maintaining global financial stability, ought to be providing more leadership.
Indeed, it is probably the only player with the universal political and intellectual legitimacy to find a way forward on collective action to address financial globalization.
Unfortunately, the IMF is paralyzed by the need to confront some internal governance problems, the biggest of which is the lack of a sensible way to recalculate the voting shares of countries as their relative influence in the global economy evolves.
In particular, a radical increase in the weight of Asia’s vote is urgently needed.
What, then, should ministers do when they gather in Washington?
First, there is the long-standing litany of policy responses needed to deal with the global trade imbalances.
These include greater fiscal discipline in the US, greater reliance on domestic demand in both Europe and Asia, and more flexible exchange rates in Asia.
But it is time to go further and begin to lobby aggressively for faster financial liberalization in the developing world.
True, most studies suggest that developing countries ought to precede any sharp opening to international financial markets by liberalizing trade.
Stable macroeconomic policies also need to be in place, while fixed exchange rates are to be avoided.
Many developing countries, however, are well on their way to achieving these preconditions.
Ironically, bad memories of the IMF’s first, premature attempt to promote long-term capital market liberalization remain an obstacle today.
The IMF’s attempt to enshrine capital market liberalization in its charter, coming as it did in the middle of the 1990’s Asian financial crisis, was a public relations disaster.
But it is now time to revisit the idea, at least in a modified and more nuanced form.
Weak financial systems in emerging markets are a major obstacle to balanced development.
They are also a big factor behind the global trade imbalances.
Pushing for greater capital market liberalization after the debacle of the 1990’s will be controversial.
But the core of the idea was right then, and it is right now.
In the absence of better mechanisms for capital allocation, global growth in this century will slow down a lot sooner than it should.
Policymakers cannot hide from that reality forever.
The Way Out of Iraq
At last the point has been reached in Iraq where everyone ostensibly wants the same thing: the departure of Coalition forces from the country.
The recent leak from Britain’s Ministry of Defense of a discussion paper on troop withdrawal highlights this desire.
The only question is how to satisfy it.
As long as the Coalition forces stay, violence is likely to escalate.
But if they leave, it will also escalate, only faster.
So the real question is how to get to the point where Iraq has a police force and army that can be trusted to maintain law as well as order.
Much ground must be covered to get anywhere close.
Notwithstanding the courage of the many Iraqis who join either the army or the police, no one should be surprised if some have motives that are less than pure.
In northern Iraq, old scores are being settled and de facto ethnic segregation is being introduced in areas, such as Irbil, that were traditionally diverse.
In other areas, sharia law is being introduced by force.
So how can Iraq create uniformed services that can be trusted to enforce the law effectively and impartially, without consideration of ethnicity, religion and gender?
The traditional answer is to recruit, train, and instill the “right values.”
But there is not enough time for that. Other ways are needed.
In the absence of a deeply instilled value system, Iraq needs grassroots civil society organizations that will hold police and army to account.
These could take different forms, but what is important is that they are truly inclusive at a local level, and that they get support from district, regional, and national power structures when they highlight abuses.
If there is local scrutiny, and national reinforcement and recognition of the value of that scrutiny, then most members of the uniformed forces are likely to behave appropriately –and can be more easily identified and dealt with if they don’t.
This might appear excessively hopeful, yet in Afghanistan, a country akin to Iraq in many ways, there are groups working towards this goal.
The Cooperation for Peace and Unity (CPAU) provides a model of how this can be done.
In Afghanistan, as in Iraq, ordinary people’s highest priority has been to achieve a reduction in violence.
CPAU worked across the country in the last three years to set up District level Peace Committees, supported by satellite Peace Councils in villages.
The initiative faces a culture in which violence is so deeply embedded that children once learned arithmetic by counting numbers of dead Soviet soldiers.
The Committees therefore seek to bring together all sections of the community – including teachers, tribal leaders, religious leaders, women, police, soldiers, judges, and businesspeople – to develop ways of resolving conflicts non-violently.
Although monitoring has not been a formal part of the role of the committees until now (it is planned for the future), the mere fact that the police, army, and judiciary are part of these committees brings them into contact with the rest of the community, provides feedback, and starts to build trust.
Some results are remarkable.
In one workshop, the local military commander came for a couple of hours, as a courtesy, and ended up staying for the whole week.
At the end, he apologized for his violent past and made a commitment to disarm his 2,000-strong private army.
He now visits the Committee offices regularly.
In Iraq, projects such as the Humanitarian Liaison Center in Kirkuk are starting to fulfill a monitoring function by offering the ethnically diverse local population the opportunity to bring grievances and get help in having them resolved.
But, too often, even if a court ruling is made, it is not enforced as a result of intimidation.
Much good work on strengthening civil society has already been done by American and British forces.
We don’t hear about the workshops for women’s empowerment, or the successful organization of small-scale local elections across the country.  
But mobilizing civil society is hugely challenging, particularly when, as in Iraq, it needs to be done quickly and on a large scale.
Military force is still necessary, but so are incentives to disarm, including the prospect of economic opportunities that are more fruitful than crime and extortion.
Fortunately, building the capacity of civil society is as cheap as it is important.
The Humanitarian Liaison Center serves the whole of Kirkuk at an annual cost of just $75,000 a year.
With $10 million, such centers could be replicated 100 times – with plenty of change left over.
The challenge is to commit to this approach, to scale up and to support to the hilt the brave people who take on the challenge of holding power to account.
Otherwise, the Iraqi people are unlikely to get the security that, after so many years of suffering, they so desperately need.
The Mismeasure of Poverty
ROME – In early 2012, outgoing World Bank President Robert Zoellick announced that the Millennium Development Goal of halving the global poverty rate relative to its 1990 level had been achieved in 2010 – five years ahead of schedule.
But many analysts have challenged estimates that rely on the World Bank’s current poverty line, raised in 2008 from $1 to $1.25 per day, in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms.
Critics argue that, for methodological reasons, the PPP-based poverty line misrepresents the prevalence of poverty worldwide.
For example, the three rounds of the World Bank’s International Comparison Program that have been conducted so far have each defined the poverty line differently, underscoring the weakness of the current measure.
In fact, taking into account inflation in the United States, the poverty line should have been raised to $1.45 per day in 2005.
Improving global poverty estimates – the World Bank’s extend over three decades, beginning in 1981 – requires overcoming three major problems: insufficient survey data, flawed survey execution, and faulty PPP conversions.
Unfortunately, the World Bank’s approach has evaded these issues or addressed them inadequately.
First, many countries lack survey data showing how income and consumption are distributed among their citizens.
The World Bank avoids this problem by assuming that the poverty rate of any country without such data matches the region’s average.
But this approach has led to North Korea being assigned essentially the same poverty rate as China, even though the former regularly receives food aid from the latter.
Second, the World Bank accepts survey data uncritically – even when it conflicts with data from other sources.
The third major challenge is using PPP estimates, measured in national currencies, to convert survey data into global poverty estimates that account for cost-of-living differences between countries.
Given that the conversions that the World Bank currently uses are based on an international exercise that was conducted for 2005, they fail to account for recent factors that are significantly affecting the poor and vulnerable, such as much higher prices for staple foods.
Furthermore, PPP conversions have little significance for some countries, most notably China.
Rather than permit price surveys in a random sample of locations (required for accuracy), China restricted data collection to a few urban areas.
The resulting data showed Chinese prices to be 40% higher than previously thought; Chinese living standards were then revised downward by roughly the same proportion.
If taken at face value, the survey data on prices, together with China’s growth rates, would suggest that China was almost as poor in 1981 as the world’s poorest country today, with average personal consumption below the current level of Liberia – another country to which China provides significant aid.
While the Bank’s latest PPP-conversion rate puts the number of poor Chinese at 173 million, the previous rate would suggest that only 69 million Chinese were living below the poverty line.
With such a flawed system shaping the world’s understanding of poverty, declarations of success or failure carry little meaning.
An improved poverty indicator – one that addresses, rather than avoids, the three major problems plaguing global estimates – is urgently needed.
Why No Glass-Steagall II?
MANILA – Eighty years ago this month, Ferdinand Pecora, the cigar-chomping former assistant district attorney for New York City, was appointed chief counsel for the US Senate Committee on Banking and Currency.
In subsequent months, the hearings of the Pecora Commission featured many sensational revelations about the practices that led to the 1930’s financial crisis.
More than that, the Commission’s investigation led to far-reaching reform – most famously, the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial and investment banking.
But Glass-Steagall didn’t stop there. It created federal insurance for bank deposits.
With unit banking (in which all operations are carried out in self-standing offices) viewed as unstable, banks were now permitted to branch more widely.
Glass-Steagall also strengthened regulators’ ability to clamp down on lending for real-estate and stock-market speculation.
The hearings also led to passage of the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Securities issuers and traders were required to release more information, and were subjected to higher transparency standards.
The notion that capital markets could self-regulate was decisively rejected.
The contrast with today is striking.
Say what you will about the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, but it is weak soup by the standards of the 1930’s.
In response to what is widely regarded as the most serious financial crisis in 80 years, it does much less to change the structure and regulation of the US financial system.
The explanation is not that the bankers were less well organized in the 1930’s.
The American Bankers Association, worried about the fees that banks would be obliged to pay, vehemently opposed deposit insurance.
The State Bankers Association, to which many unit banks belonged, condemned the provisions designed to facilitate state-wide branching.
Nor is it obvious that the bankers suffered from more adverse publicity.
The Pecora Commission hearings were sensational, but it is difficult to argue that the public anger they whipped up was much greater than that which greeted Wall Street’s titans when they testified before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission in 2010.
In fact, Pecora examined only one commercial bank, National City Bank, prior to the enactment of Glass-Steagall.
The bank’s chairman, Charles Mitchell, danced around the question of conflicts of interest between his bank’s deposit-taking and securities-underwriting activities.
In any case, more attention was paid to the revelation that Mitchell had sold 18,000 bank shares to his wife at a loss to evade taxes.
However damning, the revelations were no more embarrassing than the knowledge that Countrywide Financial provided mortgages on favorable terms to “friends of Angelo” (powerful figures close to Countrywide’s then-chairman and CEO, Angelo Mozilo) like former Fannie Mae CEO Franklin Raines and former Senate Banking Committee member Christopher Dodd.
Another popular argument for the success of 1930’s reform is that Congress had already agreed on a diagnosis of the problem and could build on its own earlier efforts to treat it.
Senator Carter Glass had been pushing for years for more permissive branching laws and centralized supervision of banks.
He had already introduced a bill containing several such measures in January 1932.
Similarly, more than 100 bills for federal deposit insurance had been proposed in the preceding 50 years.
One, co-sponsored by Representative Henry Steagall, had been passed by the House.
The idea, in other words, was already in the air.
But this ignores the fact that Steagall was not enamored of more extensive branching, which disadvantaged small banks.
Glass, for his part, opposed deposit insurance.
The final bill passed only when its sponsors agreed to combine deposit insurance with new banking regulation, creating a package with something for everyone.
In some cases, the reformers were pushing on an open door.
National City Bank and Chase National Bank had already announced that they were liquidating their securities affiliates.
Underwriting had collapsed, and banks were more than ready to get out of the securities business.
The Glass-Steagall separation of commercial and investment banking simply validated a transition that was already underway.
In 2009-2010, by contrast, the big banks were still seeking to maintain their existing range of activities.
This caused the industry to resist strongly efforts to rein in practices like proprietary trading.
Ultimately, the explanation for the passage of far-reaching financial reform can only be the severity of the crisis.
In the 1930’s, the Great Depression brought the entire economy to its knees.
The need for root-and-branch reform was undeniable.
After 2008, by contrast, policymakers succeeded in preventing the worst, which ruled out the sense of urgency that surrounded the Pecora Commission hearings.
The ultimate irony is that this very success led to less reform.
The Egyptian Struggle and Beyond
LONDON – The events that led Egypt’s military to remove President Mohamed Morsi confronted the army with a simple choice: intervention or chaos.
Seventeen million people in the street is not the same thing as an election.
But it is an awesome manifestation of people power.
Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood was unable to shift from being an opposition movement to being a governing party.
Of course, governments govern badly or well or averagely.
But this is different.
Egypt’s economy is tanking.
Ordinary law and order has virtually disappeared.
Services are not functioning properly.
Individual ministers did their best.
A few weeks back, I met the tourism minister, who I thought was excellent and had a sensible plan to revive the sector.
A few days later, he resigned, after Morsi took the mind-boggling step of appointing as Governor of Luxor province (a key tourist destination) someone who was affiliated with the group responsible for the terrorist attack in 1997 – Egypt’s worst ever – in which more than 60 tourists in Luxor were killed.
Now the army is faced with the delicate and arduous task of steering the country back onto a path toward elections and a rapid return to democratic rule.
We must hope that they can do this without further bloodshed.
Meanwhile, however, someone will have to run things and govern. This will mean making some tough, even unpopular decisions.
It will not be easy.
What is happening in Egypt is the latest example of the interplay, visible the world over, between democracy, protest, and government efficacy.
Democracy is a way to decide who the decision-makers will be, not a substitute for making decisions.
I remember an early conversation with some young Egyptians shortly after President Hosni Mubarak’s downfall in 2011.
They believed that with democracy, problems would be solved.
When I asked what the right economic policy for Egypt should be, they simply said that all would be fine, because now they had democracy; and any economic ideas that they did have were well to the old left of anything that had a remote chance of working.
I am a strong supporter of democracy.
But democratic government alone does not guarantee effective government.
Today, efficacy is the challenge.
When governments do not deliver, people protest.
They don’t want to wait for an election.
In fact, as Turkey and Brazil show, people may protest even when, by any objective measure, their countries have made huge progress.
But, as countries move from low- to middle-income status, people’s expectations rise.
They want higher-quality services, better housing, and good infrastructure (especially transport).
And they resent – to the point of mobilizing in the streets – any hint that a clique at the top is barring their way.
This is a sort of free democratic spirit that operates outside the convention that elections decide the government.
It is fueled enormously by social media (itself a revolutionary phenomenon).
And it moves very fast in precipitating crisis.
It is not always consistent or rational.
A protest is not a policy; and a placard is not a program for government.
But, if governments lack clear arguments with which to rebut protesters, they are in trouble.
In Egypt, the government’s problems were compounded by resentment of the Muslim Brotherhood’s ideology and intolerance.
People came to believe that the Brotherhood was steadily imposing its own doctrines on everyday life.
Across the Middle East, for the first time, there is open debate about the role of religion in politics.
Despite the Muslim Brotherhood’s superior organization, those who support an intrinsically secular approach to government – and this is true in most of the region – are probably in the majority.
Society can be deeply imbued with religious observance; but people are starting to recognize that democracy works only as a pluralistic concept, requiring equal respect for different faiths and allowing a voice, but not a veto, for religion.
For a country like Egypt, with its immense and varied civilization, which includes around eight million Christians and a young population that needs to be connected to the world, there is no future as an Islamic state that aspires to be part of a regional caliphate.
So what should the West do?
Egypt is the latest reminder that the region is in turmoil and won’t leave us alone, however much we may wish it would.
Disengagement is not an option, because the status quo is not an option.
Any decision not to act is itself a decision of vast consequence.
At its crudest, the West cannot afford Egypt’s collapse.
So it should engage with the new de facto power and help the new government make the changes necessary, especially with respect to the economy, so that it can deliver adequate performance for Egypt’s citizens.
In that way, it can also help shape a path back to the ballot box that is designed by and for Egyptians.&#160;
Engagement is demanded elsewhere in the region as well.
As for Syria, the worst that can happen is unacceptable: effective partition of the country, with a poor, extremist-led Sunni state in the east, shut out from the sea and the country’s wealth.
In that case, Lebanon would be totally destabilized, Iraq further destabilized, and Jordan placed under even greater pressure (which only the king’s courageous leadership is managing to contain, on behalf of us all).
And what would be left for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to govern would depend on Hezbollah, a terrorist organization, and Iran.
As for the Islamic Republic, incoming President Hassan Rowhani may want to reach an agreement with the world on the country’s nuclear ambition – or he may not.
Either way, ultimate power in Iran still rests with Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
The world cannot afford a nuclear-armed Iran.
And I haven’t even mentioned the challenges of Libya, Yemen, or, further afield, Pakistan, or the plague of extremism now coursing through the northern part of Sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Central Asia.
The West’s interests demand that we remain engaged.
We have to make decisions for the long-term, because, in the short term, there are no simple solutions.
US Secretary of State John Kerry’s current dedication and drive on the Israeli-Palestinian issue is exemplary: If it matters, act on it, however difficult.
A long transition in the Middle East is underway.
It is difficult, time-consuming, and expensive.
Many in the West believe that it should be someone else’s job to help sort it out.
But it is our job.
This struggle matters to everyone.
The good news is that there are millions of modern and open-minded people in the Middle East.
They need to know that we are on their side, that we are their allies – and that we are prepared to pay the price to be there with them.
Will Programmers Rule?
NEW DELHI – Marc Andreessen made his first fortune writing the code that became Netscape Navigator, the Internet browser.
He is now a venture capitalist who evangelizes about the growing importance of software in business today.
Indeed, he proclaims that software is taking over the world – that it will be the primary source of added value – and offers the following prediction: the global economy will one day be divided between people who tell computers what to do and people who are told by computers what to do.
Andreessen’s aim is to shock his listeners – not just for effect, but to get them to do something about it.
To stop the world from being divided between a few alpha programmers and many drones, he wants the potential drones to stop taking easy liberal arts courses in college.
Instead, he wants them to focus on courses in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM), where the good jobs will be.
But will this solve the problem that he poses?
Perhaps not.
Two attributes of software creation allow a few talented programmers to corner the market and take all the associated profits.
First, software with a slight edge tends to get a significantly greater share of the available market; and, second, the available market is global, because it costs so little to make an extra copy and send it anywhere in the world.
As a result, those who are creative and competent enough to write that slightly better search engine will capture the global market.
In this winner-take-all environment, only a small number of those who have taken programming courses will reap a majority of the rents.
Completing the right preparatory courses is no guarantee of receiving a share of the software jackpot.
Differences in luck and talent among those equally prepared will ensure that the quality of software firms’ products lies on a bell curve, with only a few Googles and Facebooks and many more bored, moderately paid computer technicians helping the average confused person deal with malware.
Put differently, in a winner-take-all world, raising the average level of skills or education does nothing to alter the skewed distribution of income.
So, will anything prevent inequality from widening?
The obvious answer is yes.
But how society responds will mean the difference between a prosperous world and a world torn apart by slow growth and resentment.
Property rights are ultimately sanctioned by society, and, to the extent that they seem to be unfair, society has an incentive to change them.
But will society see the software billionaire as having acquired her wealth unfairly, or will it see that wealth as a fair reward for cleverness?
The more that everyone has access to the same educational opportunities, the more society will tend to accept some receiving disproportionate rewards.
After all, they themselves have a chance to be winners.
Interestingly, software may itself reduce the cost of expanding educational access – witness the massive open online courses (MOOCs) offered by companies like Coursera.
But equal access is probably an unlikely ideal.
The other extreme is very unequal access, made more unequal because the wealthy have the time to help their kids with homework and the money to arrange for tuitions, while the poor leave their children watching TV while they work a second job.
Will the resentful workers who must follow a computer’s instructions – say, in assembling an order in Amazon’s fulfillment centers – vote to tax the programmers who put them there until the software creators lose the incentive to innovate, leaving society poorer?
Or will the rich programmers all migrate to Monaco or Switzerland, taking the brains and rents with them, as society falls apart into barricaded and mutually resentful enclaves and ghettoes?
In reality, many intermediate possibilities exist.
One is that cultural norms may develop that encourage billionaires to share their wealth, even if they are spared taxation.
For example, the Giving Pledge is a commitment by some of the world’s richest people, Warren Buffett and Bill Gates among them, to devote the majority of their wealth to philanthropy.
Economic competition may also play a role – if billions are to be made by innovators, more of the most talented get into innovation, so that, even in a winner-take-all world, the winner captures the market for a fleeting moment before someone else takes it away from him.
The billions to be made today may only be millions tomorrow.
And values also adjust.
While a quartz watch keeps time more accurately than the most finely crafted handmade mechanical Swiss watch, the value of a quartz watch has plummeted, while Swiss watches’ value has climbed into the stratosphere.
Even though they are virtually indistinguishable in appearance, people seem to cherish the knowledge that someone has lovingly crafted their watch.
So it may well be that the demand for discussing, say, medieval French church music in small classes at a university will grow even as the demand for MOOCs grows.
Not everyone should heed Andreessen’s exhortation to quit liberal arts programs!
That is not to say that his basic concerns are unwarranted.
Better access for all to fundamental needs like quality education is necessary to make the winner-take-all character of markets more tolerable. But societies may also have to change.
If we are lucky, the changes will take place spontaneously.
The Wobbly West
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA – Early in the financial crisis, a major emerging-market investor told me: “This is not a global, but a semi-global financial crisis.”
He was right: it really was a crisis of the United States, Europe, and Japan.
Among emerging markets, only Eastern Europe was badly hit.
Indeed, the crisis marks the emerging economies’ overtaking of the major Western countries, with huge consequences for global power, finance, politics, and economics.
The eurozone sovereign-debt crisis appears to have been the worst-managed financial crisis since Argentina’s default in 2001.
The European Union and eurozone leaders have seriously discredited themselves.
Europe requires institutional changes that are much more fundamental than anything discussed so far.
The International Monetary Fund has never bet such huge sums on a single country as it has on Greece.
As a result, the IMF, a custodian of some of the international reserves held by the world’s central banks, risks losing tens of billions of dollars.
Is this a responsible use of international taxpayers’ money?
Would the IMF not have insisted on a much tougher program, with less financing, for any country outside the eurozone?
The apparent explanation for the IMF’s extraordinary gamble is that the managing director who made the decision to support Greece so heavily hailed from the eurozone and, at the time, was barely disguising his ambitions to run for the French presidency – that is, before his arrest in New York on charges of rape.
Europeans, moreover, dominate the Fund’s leadership.
It is a discomforting conflict of interest that debtors dominate an international institution that lends them vast sums.
This mismanagement should disqualify any eurozone policymaker from the IMF’s managing directorship, and yet Christine Lagarde, French finance minister, was named to succeed her compatriot Dominique Strauss-Kahn after his resignation.
Who would seriously have suggested a Russian to lead the IMF after its financial crash in 1998, or an Argentine after its default in 2001?
Today, the eurozone is equally toxic.
The EU, the United States, and Japan are in fiscal jeopardy, and several countries – Japan, Greece, Italy, and Belgium – have public debts exceeding their GDP.
Increasingly, people recognize that loose fiscal policy was poor economic policy, with serious implications for macroeconomic thinking, politics, and constitutions.
In macroeconomic theory, Keynesianism is due for its second demise.
Milton Friedman’s monetarism delivered the first death blow in the 1980’s, but it did not generate useful policy rules or predictions.
During the crisis, prevailing macroeconomic theory counseled massive fiscal stimulus, thereby aggravating the public-debt crisis.
The question today is whether macroeconomic theory will render itself as irrelevant as the political economy of socialism, or make useful contributions to economic policy.
For the time being, elementary fiscal and monetary rules appear more appropriate.
How could people and governments accept these enormous debts and even recommend further fiscal stimulus?
Many public expenditures and budget deficits have no justification other than populism, and the big political loser of the crisis has been European social democracy, Keynesian economics’ political counterpart.
All too often, social democracy has amounted to populism, opposing any cuts in public expenditures and even deregulation, which would have enhanced productivity.
European voters are now punishing social-democratic parties, which have become weaker than at any time since World War I. Instead, a fiscally responsible center-right alignment of political forces has taken power in all but three of the 27 EU countries.
Western democracies have prided themselves on institutional checks and balances, but obviously these mechanisms did not work during the crisis or the preceding boom.
And they have been a recipe for policy paralysis in America’s long debate about raising the ceiling on its national debt.
So, when Chinese and Russians officials attack democracy as such, old questions about democracy’s efficacy and stability are raised anew.
There is no denying that advanced democracies largely failed to preempt the financial and sovereign-debt crises, while most emerging economies pursued better economic policies.
How can modern Western democracies impose strict fiscal discipline?
Has the independence of central banks given unelected officials license to print money?
How can accountability be imposed?
How can unrepresentative vested interests be contained?
Such questions have triggered a wide-ranging constitutional debate.
After the Second World War, many European countries enshrined extensive social guarantees in their constitutions.
Now many of these guarantees will need to be thrown out.
Instead, a number of European countries are discussing the introduction of stringent fiscal rules into their constitutions, and are contemplating even more far-reaching changes.
Excessive fiscal deficits in many Western countries must be reduced.
The average public debt in the eurozone has soared to 85% of GDP.
Some European countries can reduce their debt through continuous budget surpluses, as Bulgaria, Finland, Russia, and Sweden have done in the last decade.
Privatization of public corporations and property is another possibility.
My Petersen Institute colleague Carmen Reinhardt suspects that financial repression will be the main debt-reduction method: governments will rely on regulation and manipulation to force savers to pay down public debt through negative real returns on their bond investments.
Meanwhile, central bankers everywhere ask themselves: why keep ever-larger international reserves in two of the world’s most mismanaged currencies, the US dollar and the euro?
However rare changes in reserve currencies have been historically, the current situation is no longer tenable; but a switch could further destabilize the world economy.
The West’s economic mismanagement will also reduce its military power.
At present, the US accounts for half of all global military expenditures, but cuts are due.
Relative US military power is not likely to be this great ever again, and China’s military rise looks as inevitable as its economic success.
The predicament of the West remains lamentable.
Even so, some economists still advocate more fiscal stimulus.
Instead, Western leaders need to focus on fixing their state budgets in order to salvage what they can.
The Workd Bank\u0027s Anti-Corruption Fight Continues
The recent turbulence surrounding the resignation of Paul Wolfowitz from the Presidency of the World Bank has underscored the need to push ahead with the Bank’s good governance and anti-corruption agenda.
This is necessary not only for the sake of the Bank itself, but, more fundamentally, for the sake of the poor in developing countries, whose access to public services and opportunities for a better life are undermined by weak governance and graft.
Some have suggested that the president’s departure is the result of his making too many waves with his anti-corruption agenda.
This is simply not true.
The leadership crisis did not reflect a weakening commitment to the governance agenda either by the Bank’s professionals or by the countries and shareholders with whom we work.
On the contrary, that anti-corruption/good governance agenda precedes and outlives the person at the helm of the institution.
The Bank began focusing its efforts on improving governance and combating graft ten years ago.
Breaking the taboo of never mentioning corruption, in 1996 the Bank’s then president, James Wolfensohn, identified the “cancer of corruption” as a major burden for the poor in developing countries.
Over the last decade, improving governance and fighting corruption has been seen as a high priority by governments, civil society, the private sector, and the international community.
This is reflected in the World Bank’s lending.
The Bank’s loans targeting governance and related areas now amount to roughly $4.5 billion, or almost 20% of total lending.
Corruption is a major obstacle to economic development, costing billions of dollars a year that could otherwise be used to reduce poverty and promote economic growth.
For example, the Bank’s recent study The Many Faces of Corruption estimates, that illegal logging causes annual losses of about $10 billion in the forestry sector.
And teacher absenteeism, a major aspect of corruption in education, can lead to direct losses of up to a quarter of a country’s public spending on primary education.
Improving governance and fighting corruption helps countries deliver basic services better and create growth and employment opportunities for the benefit of the poor.
That is why we are strengthening citizen and watchdog oversight of public resources in countries like Tanzania, as well as supporting poor people, including indigenous women, in efforts to gain greater access to the judicial system through mobile courts, as we are doing in Guatemala.
From enhancing audit institutions in Africa to strengthening procurement procedures in Asia, the Bank’s work to combat corruption is an everyday reality.
On March 20, 2006, the Bank’s Board – representing virtually every country – unanimously approved a new Governance and Anticorruption Strategy that will push the frontiers of Bank work in this area.
The strategy was the outcome of intensive consultations with governments, civil society, private sector, and development partners in 47 countries, reflecting an unprecedented global consensus on the critical impact of good governance on poverty reduction.
The consultations on the strategy and its endorsement have raised expectations that the Bank will intensify its assistance to countries to help them strengthen their good governance efforts.
The strategy was poised for implementation when the Bank’s leadership crisis struck.
On April 26, 2007, the entire network of governance professionals in the Bank wrote in an open letter to the Board and the President that the leadership crisis was eroding the Bank’s credibility and hampering implementation of this vital agenda.
Now, the resolution of the crisis has reassured many that the Bank can practice what it preaches.
The next president of the World Bank will, of course, need to rebuild credibility and deliver on the Bank’s promises to work vigorously with our country partners in the fight for good governance.
In fact, there will be no greater challenge than driving the governance and anti-corruption agenda forward.
The next president of the World Bank will have many allies in this fight, not only within the institution, but also among the two billion poor who still survive on under $2 dollars a day.
The World According to Trump
PARIS – The word “trump,” according to the dictionary, is an alteration of the word triumph.
And because Donald Trump, the US presidential candidate, appears likely to become the nominee of the Grand Old Party of Abraham Lincoln and Ronald Reagan, we owe it to ourselves to ask in what sense and for whom he represents a triumph.
One thinks of a segment of the American population angered by the eight years of Barack Obama’s presidency, a group that is now feeling vengeful.
And one also thinks of the white supremacist, segregationist, nativist strain represented by former Ku Klux Klan leader, David Duke, whose noisy support Trump was so hesitant to reject last week and for whose constituency Trump may be a make-or-break candidate.
One easily gets the sense, when trying to take seriously what little is known about the Trump platform, of a country turning in on itself, walling itself off, and ultimately impoverishing itself by chasing away the Chinese, Muslims, Mexicans, and others who have contributed to the vast melting pot that the most globalized country on the planet has alchemized, in Silicon Valley and elsewhere, into prodigious wealth.
But, as is so often the case with the United States, there is in the Trump phenomenon an element that extends beyond the American national scene.
So one is tempted to ask whether Trumpism might not also be the harbinger – or perhaps even the apotheosis – of a truly new episode in world politics.
I watch the head of this Las Vegas croupier, this kitschy carnival performer, coiffed and botoxed, drifting from one television camera to another with his fleshy mouth perpetually half-open: you never know whether those exposed teeth are signs of having drunk or eaten too much, or whether they might indicate that he means to eat you next.
I listen to his swearing, his vulgar rhetoric, his pathetic hatred of women, whom he describes, depending on his mood, as bitches, pigs, or disgusting animals.
I hear his smutty jokes in which the careful language of politics has been pushed aside in favor of supposedly authentic popular speech at its most elemental – the language, apparently, of the genitals.
ISIS?
We’re not going to make war against it, we’re going to “kick its ass.”
Marco Rubio’s remark about Trump’s small hands?
The rest is not so small, “I guarantee you.”
Then there is the worship of money and the contempt for others that accompanies it.
In the mouth of this serially bankrupt billionaire and con artist with possible mafia ties, they have become the bottom line of the American creed – so much mental junk food full of fatty thoughts, overwhelming the lighter cosmopolitan flavors of the myriad traditions that have formed the great American pastoral.
In the sequence about small hands, even an ear untuned to the subtleties of that pastoral might have caught (though in a version perverted by the abjectly low level of the exchange) the famous line from e.e. cummings, the American Apollinaire: “Nobody, not even the rain, has such small hands.”
Confronted with this leap forward into coarseness and pettiness, one thinks of Silvio Berlusconi, Vladimir Putin, and the Le Pens, father and daughter.
One thinks of a new International, not of communism, but of vulgarity and bling, in which the political landscape shrinks to the dimensions of a television stage.
The art of debate collapses into catch phrases; people’s dreams become bombastic illusions; the economy takes the form of the grotesquely physical contortions of verbally deficient Scrooges who despise anyone who thinks; and striving for self-fulfillment deteriorates into the petty swindles taught in the now-defunct Trump University.
That’s right: an International with a capital I: Globalized corruption in the mutual admiration society of Putin, Berlusconi, and Trump.
In them we see the face of a cartoon humanity, one that has chosen the low, the elemental, the pre-linguistic in order to ensure its triumph.
Here is a universe of fakery in which one consigns to the oblivion of a now-obsolete history the precariousness of the exiles, migrants, and other voyagers who, on both sides of the Atlantic, have built the true human aristocracy.
In the United States, it is that great people composed of Latinos, Eastern European Jews, Italians, Asians, Irish, and, yes, Anglos still dreaming of Oxford-Cambridge sculls now cleaving the waters of the Charles River.
Berlusconi invented this cartoon world.
Putin intensified its macho element.
Other European demagogues are hitching it to the foulest forms of racism.
As for Trump, he gave us his tower, one of the ugliest in Manhattan, with its clunky, derivative architecture, its gigantic atrium, its 25-meter waterfall to impress the tourists – a Tower of Babel in glass and steel built by a Don Corleone from the dregs in which all of the world’s languages will indeed be fused into one.
Careful, though.
The new language is no longer that of the America we dreamed would be eternal, the America that has sometimes breathed life back into exhausted cultures.
It is the language of a country with balls that has said its goodbyes to books and beauty, that confuses Michelangelo with an Italian designer brand, and that has forgotten that nobody, not even the rain, has such small hands.
The Importance of Doing Business
MADRID – This month, an independent review panel is expected to release its findings regarding the World Bank’s Doing Business report.
Speculation abounds that the panel might recommend outsourcing Doing Business, removing its rankings of countries for the ease of doing business in them, or even eliminating the report altogether.
This challenge is not a new one, as powerful World Bank shareholders have been trying to sink the project since its inception in 2002.
Now China, the world’s second-largest economy and increasingly influential within the Bank, is seeking to water down the report by eliminating, among other things, its country rankings.
(This year, Doing Business ranked China 91st out of the 185 national economies it examined.)
But gutting or cutting Doing Business would be a grave error and would essentially result in throwing a healthy baby out with the bathwater.
Its methodology is largely sound, its purposes are valid, and its findings are useful.
The 2013 report includes quantitative data grouped in 11 sets of indicators, ranging from the ease of starting a business to the availability of credit.
The data are compared across economies and over time to rank 185 countries in ten categories of business regulation, such as “Resolving Insolvency” and “Trading Across Borders.”
Input from respondents around the world – more than 9,600 this year – influences the report’s conclusions.
Doing Business is not intended to be a comprehensive review of each country’s economy.
Rather, it seeks to provide policymakers with benchmarks that can serve as a starting point for discussion of beneficial reforms.
In fact, the report’s simplicity is the key to its effectiveness.
Doing Business has been a leader in synthesizing subjective and quantitative data to create understandable metrics.
By limiting the total number of indicators studied and producing clear benchmarks, it helps policymakers to define their objectives and to improve the efficiency of regulation in crucial areas.
Moreover, Doing Business helps to break down barriers – particularly in developing countries – that can discourage the establishment of small and medium-size enterprises, provide opportunities for corruption, and drive small business owners to the informal sector.
For example, the data that Doing Business provides can help to generate the political will and public support needed to overcome opposition to competition-boosting measures from entrenched actors that have an interest in maintaining high entry barriers or procedural bottlenecks.
The project has been a rare World Bank success, recording almost 2,000 reforms over the past decade, and has proved to be a valuable tool for policymakers in developing economies to spur reform and enhance investment.
Rwanda, for example, has skyrocketed in the rankings, from 143rd in 2009 to 52nd in 2013.
Similarly, as Georgia has climbed to ninth in the rankings, its GDP has risen by more than 200% and foreign investment inflows have increased by nearly 300% since 2003.
Of all of the economies included in the report, only Zimbabwe and Venezuela have failed to maintain or improve their indicators since 2005.
But such success stories have not deterred the project’s critics.
Early criticism came from France, which vigorously objected to the 2004 and 2006 editions’ endorsement of the “legal origins” theory, which suggests that common-law countries benefit from greater regulatory efficiency than civil-law countries.
China, like France in the past, objects to the perceived Anglo-American bias of Doing Business.
Others criticize the report’s methodology, claiming that the indicators are not inclusive or that they improperly measure countries’ regulatory environments.
Still others have argued that Doing Business contains built-in biases against regulation and taxation, which may create incentives for countries to enact reforms that game the system rather than produce meaningful results.
To be sure, not all of these objections are without merit; there is certainly room for methodological improvement.
That is why Doing Business adjusts its indicators every year based on feedback and review.
For example, following criticism of the “Employing Workers” indicator, the International Finance Corporation (the World Bank’s private-sector lending arm) conducted a review and removed it as a contributing factor to the rankings.
A similar review should be carried out on other indicators, such as “Paying Taxes,” with any changes tailored to enable continued comparison across time, one of the project’s main benefits.
Given that the project’s methodological flaws can be addressed with targeted review and reform, doing away with Doing Business altogether would be extreme and unnecessary.
Countries like France, China, and India, dissatisfied with their low rankings, should not be allowed to eliminate or cripple the project.
Indeed, outsourcing or cutting Doing Business could damage the World Bank’s standing.
Just last month, US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew trumpeted Doing Business in congressional testimony justifying American support for multilateral development banks.
More broadly, backing away from such a project would undermine the Bank’s promotion of rule-based systems and legal certainty – and would weaken the reformers in developing and emerging economies who seek to transform clientilist and patronage-based economies.
Finally, while Doing Business focuses on helping the poorest countries to improve their economic performance, it also influences advanced-country policymaking and business practices.
The World Bank’s Wrong Choice
NEW YORK – The selection of the American nominee Jim Yong Kim as President of the World Bank, over Nigeria’s finance minister, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, who was overwhelmingly regarded as a vastly superior candidate, is impossible to condone but easy to explain.
It also points to serious dangers for the unfinished task of development.
The selection process suffered from several inequities and non-transparent features that undermined the United States’ claim to the contrary.
Indeed, those claims were of a piece with the linguistic obfuscations that dominate American public debate: just as carpet bombing was called “pacification” during the Vietnam War, today illegal immigrants are called “undocumented aliens.”
Thus, the rollout of the American propaganda machine for Kim, who traveled to many capitals worldwide with US Treasury support and promises of American largesse, surely biased the vote against Okonjo-Iweala.
And, after all, the World Bank is a donor institution.
So potential borrowers like India and Mexico, which should have voted for Okonjo-Iweala, acted prudently and voted for Kim instead.
Her human capital was no match for his financial capital.
In a genuinely open, merit-based contest, the 25-member Executive Board’s deliberations should have been preceded by debates between the candidates.
I suspect that Okonjo-Iweala, with her enormous competence and renowned wit, would have gotten the better of Kim.
The world would also have seen why so many of us were rooting for her.
Again, the worldwide influence of the powerful liberal media in the US should not be underestimated.
While The Economist backed Okonjo-Iweala, The New York Times endorsed Kim.
This is an election year in the US: if President Barack Obama had nominated a lamppost, America’s “newspaper of record” would have found it to be possessed of excellent credentials.
Moreover, just as Ralph Nader’s candidacy (and the US Supreme Court) prevented Al Gore from defeating George W. Bush in 2000, one must recognize that Okonjo-Iweala was undercut by the candidacy of José Antonio Ocampo, a former finance minister of Colombia, who was backed by Brazil.
His candidacy made Okonjo-Iweala look like a regional “African candidate,” while Ocampo was the “Latin American” candidate.
Brazil should have worked with India, Mexico, and South Africa instead, to produce unified support for Okonjo-Iweala.
When Brazil did move in that direction, it was too late to make any difference.
And now one cannot suppress the thought that Kim’s election could turn into a disaster for the cause of development.
His tirade in 2000 against the liberal reforms that have transformed countries like India and China into global growth engines, reduced poverty, and benefited marginalized groups shows that he lacked good judgment on fundamental issues.
No one recalls any expression of regret by him, which suggests that he persists in such folly – and would use conditionality to turn the clock back on decades of progress in development economics.
But my fear is that Kim would be a disaster even on health-care issues – an area where he has rightly earned credit for his work on AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis.
Thanks to the economic growth that resulted from the reforms that he denounced, countries like India and Brazil now have higher revenues to spend on health care for the poor, among other public goods.
As a result, the public-health questions that Kim will face at the World Bank are very different from the “big” diseases with which he dealt in the past.
India, for example, is struggling with the balance between public and private provisions of medical care for routine health problems, and with questions of medical training and availability (that is, should India have “barefoot doctors,” or aim for only fully qualified practitioners?).
Can Kim lead on these and other issues that are beyond his experience?
Foreboding is in order.
The World Cup and African Women
NAIROBI – When I was born, 25 years ago, it would have been rare – even taboo – to find African women discussing soccer.
But that is what my girlfriends and I now do.
I grew up in Kenya, where my compatriots follow the English Premier League zealously, perhaps because of our colonial connection to England. Kenyans are so passionate about the Premier League that last year an Arsenal fan, Suleiman Omondi, hanged himself after his team lost to Manchester United.
This year, another Arsenal fan in the coastal town of Lamu stabbed a Manchester United fan in the stomach.
Kenyan women love soccer, too.
I’m a Chelsea fan, and so are most of my girlfriends. We rarely disagree.
We console each other when Chelsea loses, and worry together when our team plays big clubs, like recently when they played Liverpool, the only major contender that stood between Chelsea and the English title. Fortunately, Chelsea won.
But, as the World Cup moves into its quarter and semi-final matches, my girlfriends have started to argue.
Although we don’t exchange blows like men, we are just as passionate, especially since the world’s most famous tournament is being played on our continent.
Sometimes it seems like we spend more time arguing about soccer than we do chatting about men.
At the tournament’s start, my girlfriends and I could not seem to agree on which team to support. Should we pick from Algeria, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, and South Africa, the countries representing Africa?
We were torn between the natural instinct to root for our brothers and the urge to side with the likes of Argentina, Brazil, Italy, Germany, and others who seemed more likely to win.
Initially, I supported France, because I like Chelsea’s Nicolas Anelka, though as an African woman I also could not resist the dream of chanting with joy those times when an African team won.
That we, young African women, are talking more about the sport is a sign of hope for women’s soccer on the continent.
A senior sports writer with a Kenyan daily paper recently told me that this time women seem to be interested in learning the rules of the game and knowing more about players and their positions.
They want to enjoy the game, rather than sit in the company of their male relatives, oblivious to what’s happening on the pitch.
But will the 2010 World Cup bring African women more than just fodder for gossip?
Holding the 1994 World Cup in the United States increased soccer’s popularity there and led to the creation of Major League Soccer in 1996.
And, in 1999, the US hosted and won its second women’s World Cup, leading to a women’s soccer revolution in the country.
The label “soccer mom” has become common in the US, as more women enroll their children in soccer camps.
Will holding the world’s greatest single sporting event in Africa spark similar interest for the continent’s women?
I was encouraged recently to read about Simphiwe Dludlu, a female player who has become one of South Africa’s top sports personalities.
FIFA has invited her to assist at the official World Cup opening ceremony.
Dludlu has been playing since the age of 10, and currently plies her trade at Tuks FC in Pretoria, where she is also studying at university.
In 2006 Dludlu got her first call to join the Banyana Banyana, as the South African women’s team is called, and has 33 caps.
Her success clearly shows that African women football players can reach great heights. But for most African young women and girls, it’s not that simple.
Although women’s soccer in Africa is as old as the republics themselves (the first teams appeared in West Africa in early 1960), soccer on the continent is still a man’s sport. Most African wives dread the season.
They become soccer widows, as their husbands flock to bars. Every day at dinner, mothers are left alone to answer when children ask if daddy still lives in the house.  
Even wives of men who watch the game at home have got other issues to deal with.
For instance, Joyce, my former workmate, has a husband who is a diehard Manchester United fan. Every season, he breaks at least one piece of furniture when his team loses.
Couches are stained with beer, and kicked as he cheers his favorite teams. She has changed her furniture at least twice since she got married four years ago.
Given male dominance in African politics and soccer, any chance to improve the state of the sport that might arise from the 2010 World Cup will most likely benefit men.
That is because in most African countries, even men’s national teams are struggling. Male youth soccer camps and leagues are either nonexistent or mediocre.
Until brought to a level where they can compete in international tournaments beyond Africa, women’s soccer teams will continue to struggle.
And, considering the rampant corruption that plagues our continent, it might take a century to see male soccer teams managed and funded sufficiently.
American women improved their game because soccer moms do not heavily rely on husbands to fund their daughters’ training.
As more African women continue to be educated, I dream of the day when we, too, will be able to decide for ourselves.
I was, however, encouraged to learn that in South Africa, women of my mother’s generation have been playing in a soccer league for five years.
After the World Cup, Vakhegula Vakhegula (The Grannies), a team of women between 50 and 84 years old, will travel to the US to play in the Veteran’s Cup.
Our boys may not win in South Africa, but maybe The Grannies can show how it is done.
Systems at Risk
GENEVA – Failure to adapt to climate change, persistent extreme weather, and major systemic financial failure are just three of 50 major risks monitored every year in the World Economic Forum’s Global Risks Report.
It seems natural to draw connections among them, especially after a “superstorm” shut down Wall Street this past October.
Indeed, the report reminds us of the many ways in which systems inevitably affect one another in our interdependent world.
More important, the report warns of the dangers of multiple systems failing.
Two of the world’s most fundamental systems, for example, are the economy and the environment; their interplay underpins the first of three case studies of risk in this year’s report.
The 1,000 experts who responded to the WEF’s annual Global Risks Perception Survey, on which the report is based, ranked climate-change adaptation as their top environmental concern in the coming decade.
This reflects a wider shift in thinking about the climate, with growing acceptance that we are now locked in to some degree of global temperature change and need to adapt locally – for example, by strengthening our critical infrastructure systems in order to boost their resilience to extreme weather events.
But we face these environmental challenges at a time of persistent economic weakness.