But the entitlement stops at the border: though they regard greater redistribution within individual countries as an absolute imperative, people who live in emerging markets or developing countries are left out.
If current concerns about inequality were cast entirely in political terms, this inward-looking focus would be understandable; after all, citizens of poor countries cannot vote in rich ones.
But the rhetoric of the inequality debate in rich countries betrays a moral certitude that conveniently ignores the billions of people elsewhere who are far worse off.
One must not forget that even after a period of stagnation, the middle class in rich countries remains an upper class from a global perspective.
Only about 15% of the world’s population lives in developed economies.
Yet advanced countries still account for more than 40% of global consumption and resource depletion.
Yes, higher taxes on the wealthy make sense as a way to alleviate inequality within a country. But that will not solve the problem of deep poverty in the developing world.
Nor will it do to appeal to moral superiority to justify why someone born in the West enjoys so many advantages.
Yes, sound political and social institutions are the bedrock of sustained economic growth; indeed, they are the sine qua non of all cases of successful development.
But Europe’s long history of exploitative colonialism makes it hard to guess how Asian and African institutions would have evolved in a parallel universe where Europeans came only to trade, not to conquer.
Many broad policy issues are distorted when viewed through a lens that focuses only on domestic inequality and ignores global inequality.
Thomas Piketty’s Marxian claim that capitalism is failing because domestic inequality is rising has it exactly backwards.
When one weights all of the world’s citizens equally, things look very different.
In particular, the same forces of globalization that have contributed to stagnant middle-class wages in rich countries have lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty elsewhere.
By many measures, global inequality has been reduced significantly over the past three decades, implying that capitalism has succeeded spectacularly.
Capitalism has perhaps eroded rents that workers in advanced countries enjoy by virtue of where they were born.
But it has done even more to help the world’s true middle-income workers in Asia and emerging markets.
Allowing freer flows of people across borders would equalize opportunities even faster than trade, but resistance is fierce.
Anti-immigration political parties have made large inroads in countries like France and the United Kingdom, and are a major force in many other countries as well.
Of course, millions of desperate people who live in war zones and failed states have little choice but to seek asylum in rich countries, whatever the risk.
Wars in Syria, Eritrea, Libya, and Mali have been a huge factor in driving the current surge of refugees seeking to reach Europe.
Even if these countries were to stabilize, instability in other regions would most likely take their place.
Economic pressures are another potent force for migration.
Workers from poor countries welcome the opportunity to work in advanced countries, even at what seem like rock-bottom wages.
Unfortunately, most of the debate in rich countries today, on both the left and the right, centers on how to keep other people out.
That may be practical, but it certainly is not morally defensible.
And migration pressure will increase markedly if global warming unfolds according to climatologists’ baseline predictions.
As equatorial regions become too hot and arid to sustain agriculture, rising temperatures in the north will make agriculture more productive.
Shifting weather patterns could then fuel migration to richer countries at levels that make today’s immigration crisis seem trivial, particularly given that poor countries and emerging markets typically are closer to the equator and in more vulnerable climates.
With most rich countries’ capacity and tolerance for immigration already limited, it is hard to see how a new equilibrium for global population distribution will be reached peacefully.
Resentment against the advanced economies, which account for a vastly disproportionate share of global pollution and commodity consumption, could boil over.
As the world becomes richer, inequality inevitably will loom as a much larger issue relative to poverty, a point I first argued more than a decade ago.
Regrettably, however, the inequality debate has focused so intensely on domestic inequality that the far larger issue of global inequality has been overshadowed.
That is a pity, because there are many ways rich countries can make a difference.
They can provide free online medical and education support, more development aid, debt write-downs, market access, and greater contributions to global security.
The arrival of desperate boat people on Europe’s shores is a symptom of their failure to do so.
Europe in Reverse
BERLIN – The legendary American investor Warren Buffet once said, “It’s when the tide goes out that you find out who has been swimming naked.”
That particular piece of wisdom referred to the situation of companies in an economic crisis. But it can also be applied to countries and economies.
In Europe, the situation is cause for growing concern, because the global economic crisis is relentlessly laying bare the European Union’s flaws and limitations.
Indeed, what Europe lost, first and foremost, with the rejection of the constitutional treaty is now obvious: its faith in itself and its common future.
Amid this worst crisis since 1929, America has opted for a truly new beginning with the election of Barack Obama, and is now in the process of reinventing itself.
By contrast, each passing day seems to drive EU members further apart.
Rather than reinventing itself, Europe, under the pressure of the crisis and its own internal contradictions, threatens to revert to the national egoism and protectionism of the past.
Europe today has a common currency and the European Central Bank (ECB), which have proven to be bulwarks in defending monetary stability during the financial crisis.
Any weakening of these two institutions would cause severe damage to common European interests.
But EU member governments’ behavior during the past few months raises grave doubts about whether they see things this way.
The longer the crisis continues, the more obvious it becomes that the common currency and the ECB alone are not enough to defend the Common Market and European integration.
Without common economic and financial policies, coordinated at least between the members of the euro zone, the cohesion of the common currency and the EU – indeed, their very existence – are in unprecedented danger.
To be sure, the crisis has placed a stranglehold on countries worldwide.
But there are significant differences and economic imbalances within the EU and the euro zone, reflected, for example, by increasingly divergent interest rates.
Confidence in Italy, Spain, Ireland, Portugal, and Greece is rapidly evaporating, while the stronger economies in northern Europe are doing better, although they are struggling, too.
Should this continue, perhaps bringing a de facto end to the Maastricht criteria and rising national protectionism in the form of industrial subsidies, the euro will be seriously jeopardized.
It is easy to imagine what the euro’s failure would mean for the EU as a whole: a disaster of historic proportions.
 Moreover, the new EU member states in Eastern Europe, which have neither the economic strength nor the political stability of long-term members, are now beginning to take a nosedive.
Given the exposure of some euro-zone states such as Austria, this crisis will also affect the euro area directly.
To wait and see is, therefore, the wrong strategy.
There is no reason to believe that the current global economic crisis has bottomed out.
So, assuming that it intensifies further, Europe will rapidly face a grim alternative: either the richer and more stable economies in the North – first and foremost Europe’s largest economy, Germany – will use their greater financial resources to help the weaker euro-zone economies, or the euro will be endangered, and with it the whole project of European integration.
Why not, then, quickly introduce new instruments such as Eurobonds, or create an EU mechanism comparable to the IMF?
Each would certainly be costly – particularly for Germany – and therefore would be anything but popular, but the alternatives are much costlier; indeed, they are not serious political options.
Institutionally, there is no way around a “European economic government” or “enhanced economic coordination” (or whatever you want to call it), which in fact would be possible informally and thus without any treaty change.
Unfortunately, it has become clear that the Franco-German engine, which is crucial to the EU acting in unison, is momentarily blocked.
Their rhetoric suggests that France and Germany have a great deal in common, but the facts speak a completely different language.
In nearly all strategic aspects of EU crisis management, Germany and France are blocking each other – although ironically, both are doing virtually the same thing.
They are thinking first and foremost of themselves, not of Europe, which is thus effectively without leadership.
The EU was and is institutionalized compromise, and must remain so now, in the midst of a global economic crisis.
If Germany and France don’t quickly resolve their differences and find a joint strategic answer to the crisis, they will damage themselves and Europe as a whole.
It must never be forgotten that the EU is a project designed for mutual economic progress.
If this economic bond disappears, national interests will reassert themselves and rip the project apart.
Europe today does not lack economic strength, but rather the political will to act in unison.
Here is where Germany and France must lead the way.
Europe Has Lost its Way
WASHINGTON, DC – Europe’s response to the strategic challenges it is facing – Russian aggression in Ukraine, refugees fleeing violence in the Middle East, disorder in North Africa – leaves the impression that its leaders have no idea what to do.
And indeed, they may not – a reality that needs to be acknowledged, not papered over.
Simply put, the European Union’s stagnant economy is conditioning its response to the external pressures it confronts; internal crisis has left EU leaders little room for maneuver.
Fortunately, Europe has the means to address this crisis, if it can summon the wisdom and the political will.
The origins of the EU’s problems lie in its response to the 2008 global financial crisis: two years of large-scale fiscal stimulus.
While this did little for growth, it resulted in crippling public debt.
Seven years later, EU output per person is no higher than it was at the start of the crisis.
Meanwhile, average public debt has soared to 87% of GDP, leaving little space for policy flexibility or innovation.
In hindsight, it is all too obvious what should have been done.
Greece, which carried out the biggest fiscal stimulus, is the country whose economy has suffered the most damage.
Its depression continues, whereas countries like Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia, which carried out early, radical fiscal adjustments and liberalized their economies, are enjoying strong growth.
Furthermore, the slow pace of European decision-making has compounded Greece’s troubles.
When it comes to economic policy, a fast, faulty decision is often better than inaction.
Instead of resolving the Greek financial crisis quickly, EU leaders allowed it to crowd out discussion of other issues for five long years.
Meanwhile, Greece limped along, never taking the decisive measures that might have restored confidence.
With its attention focused on macroeconomics, the EU neglected to take the measures that would have put economic growth back on track: freeing up markets, cutting spending (rather than raising taxes), and, above all, further developing its greatest asset, the single European market.
Little has changed since Italian economists Alberto Alesina and Francesco Giavazzi noted, nearly a decade ago, that, “Without serious, deep, and comprehensive reforms, Europe will inexorably decline, both economically and politically.”
They warned that, “Absent profound change, in 20 or 30 years the share of Europe [in world output] will be significantly lower than it is today, and, perhaps more important, its political influence will be much trimmed.”
Indeed, a World Bank report on European growth in 2012 summed up the situation as follows: “Aging Europeans are being squeezed between innovative Americans and efficient Asians.”
The chief culprits for Europe’s underperformance are well known: high taxes, too many and bad regulations, the absence of key markets, and high public expenditures.
Across the continent, but especially in southern Europe, taxes and strict labor-market regulations keep unemployment high, at 11% of the labor force, and dissuade Europeans from investing in their education.
The natural consequences are too little employment, too little investment in sophisticated education, too little innovation, and minimal increases in productivity.
Most striking is European backwardness in high-tech development and innovation.
By almost any measure, most of Europe looks pitiable.
Of the 50 best universities in the world, according to the Shanghai list and the Times Higher Education Supplement list, some 30 are American, six or seven are British, and only a handful are to be found in continental Europe.
A half-dozen northern European countries can compete with the US when it comes to research and development spending and patents granted, but the south and east of Europe lag far behind.
Meanwhile, the EU has yet to open its markets for business services and digital trade, on which the American economy thrives, even though services account for about 70% of GDP in most EU countries.
In 2006, the European Commission issued a directive on the liberalization of trade in services, but major countries – particularly Germany – have refused to implement it.
The absence of services and digital markets harms the development of a modern economy in Europe. It is not by chance that American giants like Apple, Amazon, and Google rule the world of high-tech.
There is nothing inevitable about Europe’s malaise, just as there is nothing quintessentially European about having excessive social transfers.
Serious European governments – from Ireland to Poland – have successfully addressed the problem.
The rest of the EU should not only follow suit; they should also cut income and payroll taxes and liberalize their labor markets.
Fundamental economic reforms are usually implemented only after a severe crisis, as was the case in Britain in the late 1970s, in Sweden and Finland in the early 1990s, and in Eastern Europe after the collapse of communism in 1989.
The EU has wasted the opportunities afforded by the 2008 global financial crisis and the subsequent euro crisis.
Rather than making the difficult changes that would enable strong recovery, Europe’s policymakers have weighed down the economy with more spending and debt.
The EU will continue to flounder until it recognizes its mistakes and begins to carry out the reforms its economy needs.
Only by putting the continent firmly back on the path of growth will Europe’s leaders be able to address the external challenges they now confront.
Europe is Not the United States
CAMBRIDGE – Europe is now struggling with the inevitable adverse consequences of imposing a single currency on a very heterogeneous collection of countries.
But the budget crisis in Greece and the risk of insolvency in Italy and Spain are just part of the problem caused by the single currency.
The fragility of the major European banks, high unemployment rates, and the large intra-European trade imbalance (Germany’s $200 billion current-account surplus versus the combined $300 billion current-account deficit in the rest of the eurozone) also reflect the use of the euro.
European politicians who insisted on introducing the euro in 1999 ignored the warnings of economists who predicted that a single currency for all of Europe would create serious problems.
The euro’s advocates were focused on the goal of European political integration, and saw the single currency as part of the process of creating a sense of political community in Europe.
They rallied popular support with the slogan “One Market, One Money,” arguing that the free-trade area created by the European Union would succeed only with a single currency.
Neither history nor economic logic supported that view.
Indeed, EU trade functions well, despite the fact that only 17 of the Union’s 27 members use the euro.
But the key argument made by European officials and other defenders of the euro has been that, because a single currency works well in the United States, it should also work well in Europe.
After all, both are large, continental, and diverse economies.
But that argument overlooks three important differences between the US and Europe.
First, the US is effectively a single labor market, with workers moving from areas of high and rising unemployment to places where jobs are more plentiful.
In Europe, national labor markets are effectively separated by barriers of language, culture, religion, union membership, and social-insurance systems.
To be sure, some workers in Europe do migrate. In the absence of the high degree of mobility seen in the US, however, overall unemployment can be lowered only if high-unemployment countries can ease monetary policy, an option precluded by the single currency.
A second important difference is that the US has a centralized fiscal system.
Individuals and businesses pay the majority of their taxes to the federal government in Washington, rather than to their state (or local) authorities.
When a US state’s economic activity slows relative to the rest of the country, the taxes that its individuals and businesses pay to the federal government decline, and the funds that it receives from the federal government (for unemployment benefits and other transfer programs) increase.
Roughly speaking, each dollar of GDP decline in a state like Massachusetts or Ohio triggers changes in taxes and transfers that offset about 40 cents of that drop, providing a substantial fiscal stimulus.
There is no comparable offset in Europe, where taxes are almost exclusively paid to, and transfers received from, national governments.
The EU’s Maastricht Treaty specifically reserves this tax-and-transfer authority to the member states, a reflection of Europeans’ unwillingness to transfer funds to other countries’ people in the way that Americans are willing to do among people in different states.
The third important difference is that all US states are required by their constitutions to balance their annual operating budgets.
While “rainy day” funds that accumulate in boom years are used to deal with temporary revenue shortfalls, the states’ “general obligation” borrowing is limited to capital projects like roads and schools.
Even a state like California, seen by many as a poster child for fiscal profligacy, now has an annual budget deficit of just 1% of its GDP and a general obligation debt of just 4% of GDP.
These limits on state-level budget deficits are a logical implication of the fact that US states cannot create money to fill fiscal gaps.
These constitutional rules prevent the kind of deficit and debt problems that have beset the eurozone, where capital markets ignored individual countries’ lack of monetary independence.
None of these features of the US economy would develop in Europe even if the eurozone evolved into a more explicitly political union.
Although the form of political union advocated by Germany and others remains vague, it would not involve centralized revenue collection, as in the US, because that would place a greater burden on German taxpayers to finance government programs in other countries.
Nor would political union enhance labor mobility within the eurozone, overcome the problems caused by imposing a common monetary policy on countries with different cyclical conditions, or improve the trade performance of countries that cannot devalue their exchange rates to regain competitiveness.
The most likely effect of strengthening political union in the eurozone would be to give Germany the power to control the other members’ budgets and prescribe changes in their taxes and spending.
This formal transfer of sovereignty would only increase the tensions and conflicts that already exist between Germany and other EU countries.
A European Role in Palestine?
LONDON – The international community’s attention in the Middle East nowadays is inevitably focused on the Islamic State’s military advances in Syria and Iraq, the failed states of Yemen and Libya, the activities of Islamic extremists everywhere, and the continuing efforts to complete a deal to contain Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Meanwhile, the oldest dispute in the region – the subject of a decades-long peace process that moves nowhere – continues to fester and worsen in Palestine and Israel.
A report submitted earlier this month by the NGO Defense for Children International – Palestine (DCIP) to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon on the Palestine-Israel conflict’s toll on children in 2014 underscores some of the most damaging consequences of this state of affairs.
Its reception also serves as a reminder of why we have made no progress toward peace.
Last year, according to the DCIP report, 561 children were killed – 557 of them Palestinian, most as a result of Israel’s Operation Protective Edge in Gaza during the summer.
In addition, almost 3,000 Palestinian children were injured during that 50-day conflict, with about 1,000 permanently disabled.
The report also details the destruction of schools, the post-conflict mental health problems faced by the young, and the imprisonment of children.
According to Ban, the number of Palestinian children killed in 2014 was higher than the numbers of child deaths in Syria and Darfur, and was exceeded only in Afghanistan and Iraq.
The number of schools destroyed in Palestinian areas was the highest recorded anywhere.
Not surprisingly, the UN’s special representative for children and armed conflict, Leila Zerrougui, recommended that Israel and its adversary in Gaza, Hamas (which has a grim record, too), should be placed on the UN’s annual list of states and groups that gravely violate children’s rights.
But the United States put pressure on the Secretary-General to leave Israel off the list; Ban acceded, and decided to leave Hamas off the list as well.
Israel, frequently lauded in the US Congress as America’s most dependable ally in the region, is a signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
It is difficult to imagine that US Ambassador to the UN Samantha Power, who has a fine record on human-rights protection, had her heart in lobbying to whitewash Israel.
Many Europeans will conclude that this is further evidence (if any was needed) that the US will always – and disastrously – protect Israel from the international and reputational consequences of its actions.
But this is not enough.
Israel and Palestine are trapped in a bloody cul-de-sac, which is catastrophic for Palestinians and increasingly dangerous for Israel’s prospects.
As a group of eminent European politicians recently noted, a two-state peace deal could be lost, leaving Israel to face a stark choice: become a non-Jewish democracy or a Jewish non-democracy.
This group, which included former presidents, prime ministers, foreign ministers, European Union commissioners and senior diplomats, sent a set of proposals to EU leaders in May.
Europe, according to the group, should offset America’s evident withdrawal from the diplomatic process and play a serious role in reviving prospects for peace.
At the heart of the proposals is EU support in the UN Security Council for a resolution that “either (1) calls for new negotiations and sets a mandatory deadline for the completion of an agreement to establish a two-state solution, or (2) creates a greater equivalence between the Israeli and Palestinian parties, including through recognition of a Palestinian state and strong support for Palestine accession to international treaties and organizations.”
The call for such a resolution reflects the impact of Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s obnoxious behavior and the extremist views of several of his ministers, which have increased European countries’ sympathy for Palestinian statehood.
There is also a growing clamor in the EU to enforce the correct labeling of products made in Israel’s West Bank settlements.
These products are exported to Europe under bilateral trade agreements between the EU and Israel.
But the settlements are not part of Israel under international law.
Sooner or later, someone will take EU countries to court over this.
The response to these sorts of proposals from Israel’s government has been depressingly predictable.
First, Israeli spokesmen accuse Europeans of anti-Semitism – that hateful blot on Europe’s history.
But there is a real danger in conflating criticism of Israeli intransigence and extremism with anti-Semitism.
To say that it is anti-Semitic to condemn the killing and maiming of children in Gaza is to make a mockery of acts that really are anti-Semitic and that deserve to be condemned by every civilized person.
Second, Israel repeats its claim that it has no potential partner for peace.
In fact, Israel is in deep denial, which was reflected in Netanyahu’s contemptuous rejection of a two-state solution in his successful re-election campaign.
The fact is that every situation in which a dominant power confronts those it condemns as terrorists sooner or later ends in negotiations.
In Algeria, South Africa, and Northern Ireland, those in power invariably claimed that they had no partner for peace – until they made peace with the very “terrorists” they had spent decades vilifying.
To put off talking makes violence increasingly difficult to end, which means that the sentiments that violence breeds become increasingly difficult to change.
To secure peace, Israel will one day have to talk seriously to Hamas as well as Fatah and the PLO.
There is no alternative.
Until that happens, the children – the overwhelming majority of them Palestinian –will continue to suffer.
How long will the rest of the world look the other way?
Europe is Working Longer
France’s decision effectively abolishing its 35-hour workweek by allowing employers to increase working hours – and pay – marks a reversal of a decades-old trend.
In the 1980’s and 1990’s, most European countries reduced working hours: Germany went from more than 40 to 38 per week, the UK from 40 to 37, Denmark from 39 to 37, and France from 40 to 35.
Today, however, as Europeans struggle with high unemployment and stagnating living standards, they may have to work longer to cope with globalization.
The French actions follow changes in Germany, where some recent wage settlements resulted in longer working times.
The difference between the two countries is that, in Germany, working times were increased without compensating pay increases.
Siemens was the forerunner, going from 35 to 40 hours per week.
Bavaria’s government increased the workweek from 38.5 to 40 hours for older employees and to 42 hours for younger employees.
When Daimler-Chrysler increased work hours from 35 to 40 hours in its research and development center, the dam broke and other bargaining agreements fell into line.
Germany primarily reacted to low-wage competition from ex-communist countries.
Currently, the average wage of the ten countries that joined the EU in May 2004 is about one-seventh of the West German wage level, and the Chinese wage is one twenty-fifth.
Those differences are so huge that some people consider efforts to compete futile.
But, as productivity is much higher in Germany, an effective reduction of hourly labor costs by uncompensated increases in working hours seems worth trying.
This could be an example for other European countries.
The next step for France could be unpaid increases in working times.
Trade union opposition to extending working hours is based on the “lump-of-labor” theory.
According to this view, there are no economic advantages of such a policy, because the total amount of labor in the economy is fixed.
As a result, a 10% increase in working time will merely reduce employment by 10% percent.
Despite its seeming plausibility, this view is wrong.
Working longer for the same pay is a useful way of making Europe more competitive, and, when compared to reducing wages, it imposes a much lighter burden on workers and employees.
Working longer will boost economic growth, for if people work longer, then so does capital.
Except for where all 24 hours of the day are filled with shift work, increasing the daily working time of people extends daily capital utilization.
Thus, a 10% increase in working time is the same as if the economy’s stock of productive capital were increased by 10%.
There is a jump in wealth and an immediate production boom.
The lump-of-labor theory assumes that working longer and employing more people is the same thing.
But they are very different.
Longer working time can be achieved nearly instantaneously, whereas employing more people is time consuming and expensive, as it typically requires new physical investment. Working longer is thus the ideal way to achieve growth and competitiveness.
In fact, extending daily working times will, in the medium term, also result in higher employment, because it will increase productivity while labor costs remain constant.
Some workers whose productivity was too low to cover their cost will now be hired, as firms will find it worthwhile to expand output above the level resulting from the increased working time itself by investing more capital and hiring more workers.
Some fear that extending the workday will not produce more jobs because the resulting expansion of hours worked will reduce the capital-labor ratio.
This would lower the marginal productivity of hours worked sufficiently to offset the positive effects of increasing the number of hours per worker.
But, again, capital would also work longer.
Because of the “capital utilization effect,” the capital-labor ratio would not, in fact, decline, and hence there would be no significant effect on the marginal productivity of hours worked.
The theoretical effect on employment is unambiguously positive, because marginal workers will be more productive as they work longer.
Would there be enough demand to absorb the additional output resulting from increasing the workday?
Advocates of the lump-of-labor view say no.
But as more goods are produced while the wage per worker is fixed, profits increase by exactly the same amount as the value of output does.
Thus, in principle, the purchasing power for the extra output would be available.
The entrepreneur might buy his wife a new fur coat or his workers a new production plant.
If all firms work longer, most will experience more demand, and the average firm will face as much extra demand as it provides extra supply.
True, some extra demand will go abroad, but so will some of the extra supply.
A slight devaluation would solve any remaining problem with export demand.
This could be an explicit devaluation or an implicit one due to a price reduction, made possible by the reduction in unit production costs resulting from the extra working time at constant pay.
The argument that working longer destroys jobs and that we need technological progress in order to become more competitive and maintain employment is inherently inconsistent, because working longer is nearly the same as technological progress that makes capital and labor more productive.
Either one or the other view is correct, but both cannot be true simultaneously.
In any case, only the second interpretation is correct.
The fear that extending the workday will damage employment is unfounded. It is a tried and true path towards growth, competitiveness and employment.
Resolving Europe’s Banking Crisis in Italy
LONDON – The European banking sector is crippled and highly fragmented.
Though its problems are more acute for some countries and financial institutions, the sector runs on a level of profitability that is, on average, lower than its cost of equity and maintains a stock of non-performing loans and hard-to-value assets large enough to undermine its capitalization for years to come.
Italy is a case in point.
Not only is its dysfunctional banking sector undermining economic recovery and inhibiting investment; the sector’s troubles are the sharp end of a problem that affects the entire eurozone.
By the spring of 2012, it had become clear that the European banking system was a critical weak point in the euro’s architecture.
Common banking supervision, a centralized resolution framework, and a mutualized deposit-guarantee scheme were understood to be necessary pillars of the eurozone.
It was thought that these measures would help in the short term to accelerate bank repair, and that they would end financial fragmentation, establish a level playing field, reduce the risk of future banking crises, and ultimately contain and share the costs of banking failures.
But the road to hell is paved with good intentions.
The European banking union, in its current state, is not only incomplete; its design flaws have made it a source of inaction and instability potentially worse than the ills it was intended to cure.
The deposit-guarantee scheme, for example, shows no sign of progress, and the debates on the single resolution fund and its lack of a public backstop to deal with large-scale banking distress are going nowhere.
Finally, the bail-in rules were introduced before banks could issue enough bail-in-able debt.
These sequencing issues can and should be addressed over time.
But there are far more troubling problems with the conceptual foundation of the banking union itself, in particular with its resolution framework.
Since 2007, EU countries have provided in excess of €675 billion ($757 billion) in capital and repayable loans, along with €1.3 trillion in guarantees, to financial institutions in distress, so the desire to limit bailouts is understandable.
This concern is all the more legitimate, given that bailouts have often hampered restructuring, resolution, and consolidation to preserve existing banking interests and practices, thereby delaying the necessary repair of balance sheets and zombifying the European banking system.
To be sure, international experience shows that public resources are sometimes necessary to minimize costs and hasten consolidation.
But the logic of isolated intervention ignores the interconnectedness of the system, whereby distress in one large institution often creates spillover effects that feed destabilizing system-wide runs.
That is why successful interventions in Spain and Ireland were comprehensive and required large amounts of national and European resources to establish a “bad bank” and ensure a system-wide subsequent triage of assets, recapitalization, and consolidation.
Although these programs’ comprehensive nature explains their success, neither the Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive nor the Single Resolution Board (SRB) are designed to put in place such systemic responses.
In fact, the SRB even lacks the executive authority to implement its decisions, which are carried out by national authorities.
It also lacks the ability to ensure that bank resolutions are accompanied by the necessary preventive steps in the rest of the banking system.
In short, the European banking resolution framework has confiscated the tools for intervention from national authorities (which was the right thing to do), without recreating them at the European level.
As a result, neither national governments nor European authorities are empowered to act.
This leaves the Italian authorities with a limited set of options.
A unilateral blanket bailout would stress the banking union, stretch public finances, and leave the Italian banking system with its structural weakness.
Alternatively, they could also maintain the current piecemeal approach, which has essentially committed small amounts of public resources and forced the stronger banks to support the weaker ones.
But this strategy cannot work for large institutions.
A third option would be to confront the European banking union’s shortcomings by setting out a comprehensive plan to restructure, recapitalize, and consolidate the Italian banking system, thereby ending decades of poor governance and bad supervisory practices.
This new approach would require, first, a substantial increase in the size of Atlante, the fund set up to recapitalize some of the weaker Italian banks, to enable it to play the standard role of asset triage of a “bad bank” for the entire banking sector.
The need for further Italian public resources could be acceptable if the European Commission’s competition authority were to play a role in the governance of Atlante.
Second, once freed of their non-performing loans, banks would need to undertake precautionary recapitalizations, including the bail-in of subordinated bondholders and the immediate compensation of retail investors.
Then, all banks should be given a tight schedule to raise capital privately, in accordance with the single supervisor’s instructions, to levels that create a sufficient buffer to ensure their viability; banks that fail to meet this schedule should be resolved.
Finally, and most important, deep reforms should be undertaken to facilitate a real shift in banks’ business models in order to restore their profitability.
Such reforms should include dedicated redundancy schemes for bank employees (to facilitate consolidation), an overhaul of solvency law and court procedures (to redress repossession delays), and profound changes in corporate governance, particularly in the cooperative banking system.
European authorities are unable to design such a plan, owing to the banking union’s fragmented and incomplete competencies.
It is up to Italy to break the vicious cycle of inaction and take the bold steps needed to repair Italian banks (and avert a real crisis), which would also provide a blueprint for redressing the inadequacies of the European resolution framework.
Italy needs to show that one can be both a firefighter and a builder.
The ECB’s Illusory Independence
ATHENS – A commitment to the independence of central banks is a vital part of the creed that “serious” policymakers are expected to uphold (privatization, labor-market “flexibility,” and so on).
But what are central banks meant to be independent of?
The answer seems obvious: governments.
In this sense, the European Central Bank is the quintessentially independent central bank: No single government stands behind it, and it is expressly prohibited from standing behind any of the national governments whose central bank it is.
And yet the ECB is the least independent central bank in the developed world.
The key difficulty is the ECB’s “no bailout” clause – the ban on aiding an insolvent member-state government.
Because commercial banks are an essential source of funding for member governments, the ECB is forced to refuse liquidity to banks domiciled in insolvent members.
Thus, the ECB is founded on rules that prevent it from serving as lender of last resort.
A truly independent ECB, adhering to its own rules, should have refused to accept as collateral all debt liabilities guaranteed by the Greek state – government bonds, treasury bills, and the more than €50 billion ($56 billion) of IOUs that Greece’s banks have issued to remain afloat.
Of course, such a refusal would close down Greek banks and lead immediately to Greece’s exit from the eurozone, because the government would be forced to issue its own liquidity.
The only alternative would be a meaningful debt restructuring to end Greece’s insolvency.
Alas, Europe’s political establishment, unwilling to adopt either option, has chosen to extend Greece’s insolvency – which it pretends has been resolved through new loan tranches.
The ECB’s ongoing acquiescence in the extend-and-pretend charade demanded by Greece’s creditors has demolished its claim to be independent.
To keep Greece’s banks open, and accept their government-guaranteed collateral, the ECB is obliged to grant Greek debt an exemption from its no-insolvency rule.
And, to keep the noose firmly around Greece’s neck, Germany insists that this exemption is conditional on its approval – or, in euro-speak, that the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers confirms that “Greece’s fiscal consolidation and reform program are on track.”
So, in effect, it is politicians that tell the ECB when to cut off liquidity to an entire banking system.
While the ECB can claim independence vis-à-vis insolvent, peripheral governments, it is entirely at the mercy of the governments of Europe’s creditor countries.
To illustrate the ECB’s conundrum, it is worthwhile revisiting the creditors’ treatment of the Greek government elected in January 2015.
By December 2014, it had become clear that the previous government was on its last legs and that the leftist Syriza party was on its way to power.
The governor of Greece’s central bank, an arm of the ECB, “predicted” that markets were facing a liquidity squeeze, implying that a Syriza victory would render the banking system unsafe – a statement that would be inane were it not calculated to start a bank run.
By the time I became Finance Minister that February, after Syriza’s electoral victory, the bank run was in full swing and stocks were in free fall.
The reason, of course, was the common knowledge that Germany, vehemently opposed to our government, was about to switch off the green light required by the ECB to maintain the exemptions allowing it to accept Greek collateral.
To stabilize the situation, I flew to London to address financiers with a message of moderation and sensible policies regarding both reforms and debt restructuring.
The following morning, the stock exchange rebounded 13%, bank shares rose by more than 20%, and the bank run ceased.
On that day, the ECB, pressured by Germany, rescinded an important part of its exemption, thereby cutting off Greek banks’ direct access to the ECB and diverting them to pricier financing from Greece’s central bank (so-called emergency liquidity assistance).
Unsurprisingly, stock prices plummeted and the bank run returned with a vengeance, bleeding €45 billion of deposits out of the system over the next few months.
Meanwhile, Germany and other creditors began to push Greece to accept new austerity measures as the price of reversing the “ECB’s” decision.
This was not the ECB’s only politically driven intervention.
Equally aggressive was its decision to curtail Greek banks’ spending on government treasuries, by instructing them to refuse debt rollovers.
This diminished my ministry’s capacity to repay the International Monetary Fund, which was insisting on drastic pension cuts and on the removal of the last protections for Greek workers.
For five months, as the ECB’s noose tightened, we resisted German and IMF demands for further austerity.
Finally, the complete cessation of all liquidity to Greece’s banks in June 2015 forced their closure.
This was followed by the final push to divide our government and force the prime minister to capitulate – as he did, accepting the latest extend-and-pretend loan of €85 billion.
Almost a year later, Greece’s creditors were pushing for even greater austerity in exchange for more loan tranches.
At this point, Greece’s central-bank governor (who had triggered the original bank run in December 2014) publicly alleged that our government’s stance until June 2015 caused the loss of €45 billion worth of deposits, the ensuing bank closures, and the new extend-and-pretend loans.
The bully was blaming the victim, and the ECB was openly embracing its role as enforcer for its political masters: the creditors.
The eurozone’s current design makes ECB independence impossible.
Worse, the pretense of independence serves as a fig leaf for interventions that are not only politically driven, but that are also utterly inconsistent with the principles of liberal democracy.
Europe’s Roadblocks to Long-Term Investment
AMSTERDAM – One of the major challenges facing the European economy is the lack of liquidity in its capital markets.
Since the 2008 global financial crisis, an enormous number of new rules have been put in place.
In order to facilitate the long-term investment that Europe desperately needs, it would be wise to reassess the broader regulatory environment that has emerged over the past six years.
With banks reluctant to make new loans, institutions such as pension funds are well placed to meet the desperate demand for capital.
Indeed, the savings of workers who may not be retiring for several decades are particularly well suited for long-term investments.
The trouble is that in many cases, rules and regulations intended to ensure financial markets’ stability impede the ability of pension funds and others to allocate savings smoothly and efficiently.
The importance of proper regulations cannot be understated.
When properly drafted and applied, they ensure financial stability, maintain (and, if necessary, restore) confidence in the markets, and facilitate long-term investment, helping citizens meet their future financial needs.
But if regulations are not well tailored to the various types of market participants and to how markets actually work, they can choke off opportunities that would otherwise benefit investors and the economy.
The new margin requirements for derivatives, introduced in order to reduce systemic risk, are one example of such a chokepoint.
It might make sense to apply them to banks or hedge funds, but pension funds are highly creditworthy institutions that pose little or no systemic risk to financial markets.
Forcing them to set aside assets for collateral purposes only drains capital that could be used for long-term-investment.
Such investment involves a variety of products, market players, and jurisdictions, and, as a result, the effect of regulations can be difficult to see, much less quantify.
For starters, the impact of rules and regulations can be direct or indirect.
Rules that apply specifically to long-term-investment products or strategies can be classified as having a direct impact.
Rules that apply to investors or their counterparts, competitive products, or complementary parts of the market can be described as having an indirect effect.
A well-crafted regulatory framework minimizes the adverse consequences for long-term investment, while maximizing the positive effects.
New regulations are constantly being introduced.
It is important to analyze carefully whether the new regulations are actually needed and, if yes, to foresee and fill regulatory gaps with rules that ensure the smooth flow of savings to new and existing projects.
For example, standardizing regulations relating to covered bonds, green bonds, and cross-border investment through real-estate trusts could encourage more long-term investment.
In a more indirect way, a general regulatory push that increased the availability of projects suitable for long-term-investment and harmonized local insolvency regimes could also have a positive effect.
Prominent examples of regulations with a direct negative impact include existing rules on securitization and proposed rules on asset-based capital charges.
The indirect negative effects of such regulations on long-term investment are, by nature, more difficult to discern, but they can be just as harmful as the direct effects – especially if they leave investors with fewer funds available for long-term investment.
Margin requirements for derivatives transactions have this effect, as do regulations that increase banking costs.
These types of indirect negative effects have not been central to policy discussions concerning how to boost long-term investment.
But they deserve careful consideration.
It is crucial that we identify the full scope and scale of their impact on the allocation of capital.
Otherwise, they risk offsetting the positive impact of investment-enhancing reforms.
As legislators and regulators continue to shape the investment environment, it is important not only to monitor and evaluate the impact of each piece of additional regulation; the way rules interact with one another – and with new rules as they are introduced – must also be understood.
Unnecessarily broad regulations should be avoided in favor of rules that are specifically tailored to the various participants in the market.
Allowing long-term investors such as pension funds to provide the European economy with much-needed capital has the potential to provide huge benefits to future retirees, as well as to the broader economy.
But that will not be possible unless, and until, the right regulatory environment is created.
Europe Means Fair Play
As Ukraine’s agonizing struggle for democracy continues, Europeans wonder if the politics of principle can ever eclipse the politics of power.
Is it naive to believe that the world amounts to more than zero-sum thinking?
Can Europe promote fair play in international affairs, or must it accept a new game of great power rivalry as inevitable and throw itself into the fray?
Many Europeans see themselves as champions of global fair play. But Europe’s opinion of its integrity is not always shared.
One example is Russia, which is skeptical about the EU’s intentions, most recently over Ukraine.
That should not surprise us.
The EU has expanded from six members to 25, with Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, and Turkey waiting in the wings.
Russia wants to know where the Union will stop.
Does it plan to swallow Ukraine, Belarus, and the Caucasus?
Most EU members view these as open questions, unlikely to be resolved soon.
The Kremlin, however, seems to see in such vagueness a smokescreen hiding the Union’s true intentions, though the recent EU-Russia summit provided an opportunity to clear the air.
In a sense, critics of the EU are right: the Union may be on a quest to reshape the world in its image.
Nowadays, when the EU concludes agreements with non-EU countries, it includes all sorts of stiff requirements in areas like human rights, non-proliferation, readmission of migrants, and terrorism.
To countries on the receiving end, these conditions can seem like a subtle form of power politics, with Europe trying to impose its values on the world.
Indeed, for the EU some issues are non-negotiable, because they are pillars of the European model that we seek to share with the world.
These issues include democracy and the rule of law, respect for human rights and the environment, non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the campaign against terrorism.
Countries cannot expect economic and other benefits from the Union unless they meet its political standards.
But are those standards really an imposition?
It looks as if the principles of fair play are increasingly embraced outside of Europe.
Consider Africa, where the African Union is taking a leading role in resolving conflicts on the continent and is increasingly determined to intervene to halt aggression and assure fair play for African minorities.
Even if the results on the ground in Africa don’t yet look spectacular to outsiders, the change in attitude is real.
Instead of playing the “Great Power Game” in Africa, the EU can support Africans’ own efforts and allow them to benefit from the Union’s experience.
Europe’s belief in fair play for all reflects its self-interest, at least in some ways, because the world’s balance of power is changing.
Consider the rise of China and India.
The investment bank Goldman Sachs predicts that the dollar size of the Chinese economy will overtake that of Britain and Germany by 2007.
India will pull ahead of France by 2020 and surpass Germany by 2023.
As Asia’s economies race forward, so do its political ambitions.
Asians want to assume greater responsibility in the world, and it is in Europe’s interest that they do, as long as they, too, respect the rules of fair play.
A sense of fair play also matters within the Union.
The larger the EU gets, the greater its need for coordinated and coherent policies, and the harder it becomes to rally all members around a common position.
Call this the “paradox of enlargement.”
The three largest member states – Britain, France, and Germany – have tended to respond to this paradox by pursuing closer trilateral cooperation.
Of course, there’s nothing wrong with vanguard groups of members forging ahead – the recent diplomatic initiative concerning Iran’s nuclear program is a case in point.
Indeed, every member state can be expected to cling to its right to pursue an independent foreign policy for the foreseeable future.
However, to ensure that the European whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and to guarantee fairness to all Union members, all EU states must work within the parameters of EU policy, as they have in the case of Ukraine.
When they do, their efforts strengthen the legitimacy and authority of both the member states and the Union.
In a world of fair play, the flip side of rule making is compliance, and compliance may require enforcement, through economic sanctions and other non-military measures.
As a last resort, the EU must even be prepared to rise to the military defense of the values and principles it believes are worth protecting.
If Europe is not prepared to take up arms when it must, then its appeals for fair play will sound to the rest of the world like mere posturing.
But if fair play is to be made global, European initiatives should be part of broader international efforts, involving both like-minded partners such as the United States and multilateral institutions.
A divisive transatlantic rivalry offers no ethical or political basis for an enlightened European approach.
On the contrary, fair play requires American power to back it up.
The Migration Opportunity
LONDON – In the last year, more than 4,000 men, women, and children have lost their lives attempting to cross the Mediterranean Sea from Africa to Europe.
Their tragic deaths have done nothing to slow the human tide, which is swelling by the week, as smugglers on the coast become increasingly brazen and cruel.
Thousands of migrants have been rescued from the frigid waters since the beginning of this year alone.
Against this backdrop – and that of the fear sown by the terrorist attacks in Paris and Copenhagen – the European Union is set to develop a new – and critically important – agenda on migration.
When EU commissioners gather to debate how to proceed, they must overcome the temptation to grasp at short-term, knee-jerk solutions, and instead develop a truly creative, comprehensive plan of action both at home and abroad.
The last time Europe faced such a turning point on migration was in 2011, when the Arab Spring triggered a flood of new arrivals fleeing violence and chaos in North Africa.
But the moment for bold actions – the creation of a Mediterranean Marshall Plan, for instance, or massive investments into immigrant integration – passed without being seized.
Instead, the EU made a few bureaucratic tweaks to its asylum system and consumed itself with debates about non-issues, such as migrant “welfare cheats."
In 2014, the EU's emergency funding for migration and asylum totaled a mere €25 million ($28 million) – a pathetic exercise in collective action, albeit one supplemented by funds from member states.
Last fall, Italy's bold Mare Nostrum sea-rescue operation, which had saved thousands of lives, was replaced by a far feebler EU initiative that has struggled to carry out its mission.
Adding to the problem is an imbalance of commitment and compassion within the EU itself.
Sweden and Germany have taken in the majority of asylum seekers from Syria and elsewhere, while most other EU member states have admitted few or none.
The UK, for example, offered just 90 resettlement spots for Syrian refugees last year.
(By contrast, Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan are spending billions of dollars to host nearly four million refugees.)
Greece, Italy, and Malta have borne the brunt of the impact of accommodating new arrivals, with all of the financial, social, and political costs this entails.
As a result, the ongoing tragedy in the Mediterranean is placing EU solidarity under serious strain.
Continued inaction will not make the problem go away, nor will it benefit European leaders in their next domestic elections.
“Cracking down on smugglers," the go-to solution for many in the EU, will take many years to have an impact, given the instability of many North African governments.
Meanwhile, further destabilization of the Middle East – a very real prospect – could compromise the security of tens of millions of people who, under international law, would have a legitimate right to claim asylum.
A better, more active approach is needed.
The immediate necessary response is resource-intensive but operationally viable: a robust joint EU sea operation with an explicit rescue mandate.
When asylum seekers reach European shores, the EU should take collective financial and administrative responsibility for processing and accommodating them, regardless of where they disembark.
And it should take solidarity a step further when it comes to Syrians, equitably distributing the responsibility to host them across all member states.
Meanwhile, in order to lighten smugglers' boats, the EU should commit to resettling many more than the 30,000 Syrian refugees it has pledged to accept thus far.
A number closer to 250,000, at least, would seem fair – given the millions being sheltered by Lebanon, Turkey, and Jordan.
Meanwhile, EU foreign ministers should intensify talks with African countries in order to establish new, legal, and safe means for those at risk who want to cross the Mediterranean.
This could entail extending humanitarian, labor, and family-reunification visas, with applications processed overseas.
The EU should consider longer-term goals, like creating a common Mediterranean market to allow North African economies to grow, eventually transforming the region into a destination for migrants rather than a transit zone.
Most important, Europe needs to strengthen itself from the inside out.
The continent is in desperate need of a dramatically different approach to diversity.
The countries of the EU have two options: They can either make a vain attempt to revert to outdated, mono-ethnic models of statehood, or they can accept diversity with the realization that their national cultures will not only survive, but flourish.
Doing so would in no way entail compromising any core European values.
But it would require a commitment to respect all who adopt those values, regardless of their race or religion.
Some see the Mediterranean as Europe's soft underbelly.
But it is the failure to build stable, diverse societies that is the continent's true Achilles heel.
The Judgment of Aleppo
PARIS – We must halt the massacre in Aleppo.
Whatever the cost, we must stop the massive, random, indiscriminate bombings – and, worst of all, the discriminate ones aimed chiefly at civilians, humanitarian convoys, and hospitals – that the forces of Bashar al-Assad and Russia have resumed with a vengeance in and around what was once Syria’s most populous city.
We must smother the columns of fire and smoke.
We must dispel the clouds of flaming gas streaming from the murderers’ unprecedentedly sophisticated weapons.
We must act because we can act.
And we can act because those who are responsible for this carnage, for these war crimes, for an urbicide in which probable crimes against humanity are compounded by the destruction of sites of memory and culture that counted among the world’s vital heritage, are not hiding.
They are standing in plain sight as they destroy Syria’s most cosmopolitan, wondrously alive city, doing nothing to hide their acts.
We know who they are.
I mean, of course, the regime in Damascus, which years ago we should have begun to deal with as we dealt with Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime.
I mean, too, the regime’s Iranian and, above all, Russian sponsors.
For five years, they have systematically blocked every attempt at a resolution emanating from the United Nations.
Russian planes have, in several well-documented instances, openly participated in Assad’s massive campaign against civilians.
Indeed, the Kremlin appears increasingly determined to apply to Syria the policy practiced in Chechnya, namely to “kick into the crapper” those whom Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov is again mendaciously labeling “terrorists.”
Given these facts, there is no dilemma about whether it is necessary to act.
But, because the United States adopted the position it did three years ago, after President Barack Obama chose not to punish Assad for using chemical weapons (a red line that Obama himself had drawn), I fear that the responsibility falls chiefly, if not exclusively, on Europe.
It’s our choice.
We in Europe can draw our own red line, warning Russia that, if the line is crossed, we will increase sanctions against it as a state henceforth held to be responsible for the crimes of its Syrian vassal.
We can also immediately take the initiative to establish a forum for negotiation and pressure akin to the “Normandy format” that President François Hollande and Chancellor Angela Merkel successfully conceived two years ago to contain the war in Ukraine.
In so acting, we can force the aggressor to come to terms.
Or we can do nothing and acquiesce in another Sarajevo, as François Delattre, France’s ambassador to the United Nations, put it; we can run the risk of an Arab Guernica, with Russian aircraft in the role of the German Condor Legion over the skies of Republican Spain in 1936.
In that case, we would not only reap dishonor, but also, to paraphrase Winston Churchill, raise to extreme levels all of our present dangers, starting with a dramatic increase in the tide of refugees, most of whom have fled Syria as a direct consequence of the world’s nonintervention.
This is where we stand: Aleppo, besieged and in ruins, exhausted and abandoned by the world, yet defiant – dying with its boots on – is our shame, our crime of omission, our self-abasement, our capitulation in the face of brute force, our acceptance of the worst in humanity.
Aleppo, which no longer cries out, is dying and cursing the West.
And Europe, on the front line, risks its future and a part of its identity as the people it could not protect press at its borders, asking to be let in.
Will Europe surrender, in Aleppo, what remains of its soul, or will it pull itself together, hold up its head, and do what it must?
If Europe can’t or won’t answer that question, all of the other questions and crises it is facing may well become irrelevant.
New Europe’s Old Ghosts
NEW YORK – The past stalked Europe in 2014.
When the year started, the centennial of the Great War’s outbreak attracted much commemorative energy.
But, as it progressed, disturbing parallels appeared – not to 1914, but to some of the nastier features of the interwar years.
From Scotland and Catalonia to the borders of Ukraine, the politics of nationality flared, while Europe’s economy stagnated – hostage to a German inflation phobia that dates back to 1923.
And, as the year unfolded, a new geopolitical tug of war between the continent’s two early-twentieth-century giants, Germany and Russia, became apparent, while Europe’s amnesiac political elite seemed to be fumbling on one front after another.
To anyone who recalls Danzig and the Sudetenland – the endless nationality claims and counter-claims that triggered World War II in the borderlands of Eastern Europe – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s revanchism in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region in 2014 has a disturbingly familiar ring to it.
His rhetoric of humiliation and encirclement, the instrumental talk of minority rights, and the Kremlin’s use of local proxies, with all of the uncertainties that accompany reliance on such actors – all of this was reminiscent of nothing so much as interwar Germany’s own irredentist policies.
The politics of nationality is not confined to Eastern Europe.
Scotland’s independence referendum in September threatened to split the United Kingdom.
The same month, up to two million pro-independence Catalans marched through Barcelona, in what may have been the largest demonstration ever seen in Europe.
Ask most Catalans what independence will bring, aside from freedom from Spain, and you won’t get much of an answer: resentment at past wrongs overshadows any serious calculations about the future.
But perhaps the purest reversion to interwar nationalist ideology is occurring just beyond Europe’s borders – in Israel, of all places.
There, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s government has proposed a law enshrining the collective primacy of the country’s Jews – legislation that destroys in spirit and form what little is left of Israel’s founding commitment to equality under the law.
Could there be any sadder demonstration of the cunning of history?
Europe’s past was equally present in the realm of economics in 2014.
Thanks to the European Union’s austerity policies, the eurozone faces the prospect of a Japan-style era of stagnation, and chronic high unemployment on its southern fringe.
The irony is that Germany’s anxieties about price stability, which underlie the EU’s embrace of austerity, are entirely misplaced: German inflation could scarcely be lower.
With German unemployment, too, hitting record lows, while joblessness hits record highs in Italy and remains at obscene levels in Greece and Spain, what has emerged is a two-tier Europe, with German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government calling the shots.
For now, the periphery countries calculate that the eventual benefits to be gained from remaining within the eurozone will outweigh the current pain of austerity.
For its part, Germany exacts austerity as the price of its participation in the single currency.
It is on this uneasy basis that its hegemony in Europe rests.
Though depoliticization and apathy have held back serious challenges to German dominance, such challenges are emerging.
German policymakers have discounted the rise of extremism in relatively small countries such as Hungary and Greece.
But one wonders how they might respond to spectacular results for Marine Le Pen’s National Front in next year’s French regional elections or in the presidential election in 2017.
And of course the big mystery is Germany itself, seemingly lifted from history by its own economic buoyancy.
Can German politicians abandon Weimar-style economics before they are hit by Weimar-style political disintegration?
And even if they manage this eventually, will Germany have lost much of Europe in the meantime?
This brings us to the nascent but unmistakable signs of a Russo-German rift.
If Franco-German rivalry shaped the era between 1870 and 1920, it was the conflict with Russia that defined the next 70 years.
That conflict was forgotten for two decades after the end of the Cold War, because Russia’s internal travails and Germany’s desire to demonstrate its post-unification harmlessness kept both powers from flexing their muscles.
Now that Putin has made muscle-flexing his main form of diplomacy – not merely in Ukraine and the Baltic states, but also in the Balkans and the North Sea – it has fallen to Germany to shape Europe’s response.
The motive today is not to defend ethnic Germans abroad – their expulsion in the millions in the 1940s ended that particular concern – so much as the more laudable desire to preserve the values of a democratic EU against the new authoritarianism from the East.
Whether Germany can continue to perform this role, however, will depend on what kind of EU emerges over the next few years.
In particular, if Europe is to succeed with Germany at the helm, Germans and everyone else will have to break more decisively with the past than they have managed to do so far.
Europe Needs a Plan B
NEW YORK – The European Union was brought into existence by what Karl Popper called piecemeal social engineering.
A group of farsighted statesmen, inspired by the vision of a United States of Europe, recognized that this ideal could be approached only gradually, by setting limited objectives, mobilizing the political will needed to achieve them, and concluding treaties that required states to surrender only as much sovereignty as they could bear politically.
That is how the post-war Coal and Steel Community was transformed into the EU – one step at a time, understanding that each step was incomplete and would require further steps in due course.
The EU’s architects generated the necessary political will by drawing on the memory of World War II, the threat posed by the Soviet Union, and the economic benefits of greater integration.
The process fed on its own success, and, as the Soviet Union crumbled, it received a powerful boost from the prospect of German reunification.
Germany recognized that it could be reunified only in the context of greater European unification, and it was willing to pay the price.
With the Germans helping to reconcile conflicting national interests by putting a little extra on the table, the process of European integration reached its apogee with the Maastricht Treaty and the introduction of the euro.
But the euro was an incomplete currency: it had a central bank but no central treasury.
Its architects were fully aware of this deficiency, but believed that when the need arose, the political will could be summoned to take the next step forward.
That is not what happened, because the euro had other deficiencies of which its architects were unaware.
They labored under the misconception that financial markets can correct their own excesses, so the rules were designed to rein in only public-sector excesses.
And, even there, they relied too heavily on self-policing by sovereign states.
But the excesses were mainly in the private sector, as interest-rate convergence generated economic divergence: lower interest rates in the weaker countries fueled housing bubbles, while the strongest country, Germany, had to tighten its belt in order to cope with the burden of reunification.
Meanwhile, the financial sector was thoroughly compromised by the spread of unsound financial instruments and poor lending practices.
With Germany’s reunification, the main impetus behind the integration process was removed, the financial crisis unleashed a process of disintegration.
The decisive moment came after Lehman Brothers collapsed, and authorities had to guarantee that no other systemically important financial institution would be allowed to fail.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel insisted that there should be no joint EU guarantee; each country would have to take care of its own institutions.
That was the root cause of today’s euro crisis.
The financial crisis forced sovereign states to substitute their own credit for the credit that had collapsed, and in Europe each state had to do so on its own, calling into question the creditworthiness of European government bonds.
Risk premiums widened, and the eurozone was divided into creditor and debtor countries.
Germany had changed course 180 degrees from the main driver of integration was to the main opponent of a “transfer union.”