This tension is at the root of some of the most threatening problems facing the world economy today.
The Fed has global responsibilities for two closely related reasons, neither of which has much to do with the need to avoid the “currency wars” that so concerned former Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega.
First, despite the birth of the euro and talk of the Chinese renminbi’s ascendancy, the dollar remains the currency of choice for borrowing and lending around the world.
When a bank or corporation in Kuala Lumpur, São Paulo, or Johannesburg borrows abroad, the loan is more likely to be denominated in dollars than in any other currency.
If local banks suffer a run, or if corporations have trouble rolling over their debt, they need to be able to borrow dollars from the local central bank, which in turn may have no choice but to get those dollars from the Fed.
When the Fed in 2007-2008 entered into swap agreements with 14 central banks, including those of four emerging economies (Brazil, Mexico, Singapore, and South Korea), it de facto acknowledged that it is the world’s lender of last resort in dollars.
Yet the Fed, its governors argue, cannot be expected to do that on a regular basis.
In a 2015 speech, Stanley Fischer, one of the most internationally-minded of the Fed’s governors, acknowledged that world financial stability could be supported by a global central bank, yet concluded: “I should be clear that the US Federal Reserve is not that bank.”
The second reason why the Fed has global responsibilities is that its policies affect monetary conditions worldwide.
There is mounting evidence that monetary-policy shocks affect risk premia, and that this channel operates internationally as well as domestically, with sizeable effects.
In the 2013 episode known as the “taper tantrum,” the mere hint that the Fed might slow the pace of its bond-buying program triggered large capital outflows and asset-price drops in most emerging economies.
The traditional Fed response, expressed eloquently by former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke at the 2015 IMF Research Conference, is simple: Float your currency.
The standard trilemma of international monetary policy holds that countries cannot have fixed exchange rates, monetary independence, and free capital movement simultaneously, but they can have two of the three.
Countries that float their currencies can be free to set interest rates and determine financial conditions at home, even with substantial international capital mobility.
If they don’t float – because they have targets for exports or the real exchange rate �� that is their problem.
The Fed, Bernanke argued, cannot be expected to help them.
But Bernanke’s argument is not entirely convincing.
As London Business School’s Hélène Rey has argued, the “risk-taking” channel of monetary policy is so powerful internationally that Fed policy helps determine credit conditions in many countries quite independently of their exchange-rate regimes.
When the Fed loosens policy, credit grows all over the world, and vice versa.
So it is not a policy trilemma but a dilemma: capital-account restrictions –not just flexible exchange rates – may be necessary for central banks to exercise effective control over domestic credit conditions.
The Fed’s reluctance to serve as the world’s lender of last resort, or to acknowledge that exchange-rate movements cannot undo its actions abroad, would seem to condemn it to being a parochial and inward-looking institution.
But Donald Trump should not start applauding yet.
The Fed’s domestic mandate requires it to recognize, in Fischer’s words, that “the US economy and the economies of the rest of the world have important feedback effects on each other.”
And those effects are getting larger.
When justifying its interest-rate decisions, the Fed has historically paid little attention to the effect of international conditions on the US economy.
But it broke with tradition in September 2015.
Both the official minutes of the rate-setting meeting and Chairman Janet Yellen in her press conference mentioned heightened uncertainties abroad, including weakness in the Chinese economy, as key reasons to delay the Fed’s increase in interest rates.
Other international linkages are also receiving greater attention.
As the US economy becomes more open to international trade and capital movements, the dollar’s value matters more because of its effect on inflation and on domestic financial conditions.
In the current debate about what the Fed should do next, Governor Lael Brainard has been arguing that real dollar appreciation of 20% in 2014 and 2015 reduces the need for further monetary-policy tightening.
Of course, caring about how the world affects the US is not the same as concern about the economic health of the rest of the world.
And yet these small steps are significant.
Berkeley’s Barry Eichengreen has shown that international considerations have long played a key role in the conduct of Fed policy, and that the last three decades, in which the Fed turned mostly inward, were something of an aberration.
So perhaps the 102-year-old Fed is returning to its original tradition.
Or perhaps its outlook already is quite internationalist – as its actions during the financial crisis suggest – and it is only domestic political constraints that prevent this from being acknowledged openly.
Either way, even incremental movement in this direction is welcome, for the last thing the world needs is a parochial Fed.
Recent financial history suggests that the next liquidity crisis is just around the corner, and that such crises can impose enormous economic and social costs.
And in a largely dollarized world economy, the only certain tool for avoiding such crises is a lender of last resort in dollars.
The IMF could have been that lender, but it is not.
The Fed is.
The sooner the US and the rest of the world fully recognize this, the safer the world economy will be.
The Fed’s Communication Breakdown
CAMBRIDGE – Nothing describes the United States Federal Reserve’s current communication policy better than the old saying that a camel is a horse designed by committee.
Various members of the Fed’s policy-setting Federal Open Markets Committee (FOMC) have called the decision to keep the base rate unchanged “data-dependent.”
That sounds helpful until you realize that each of them seems to have a different interpretation of “data-dependent,” to the point that its meaning seems to be “gut personal instinct.”
In other words, the Fed’s communication strategy is a mess, and cleaning it up is far more important than the exact timing of the FOMC’s decision to exit near-zero interest rates.
After all, even after the Fed does finally make the “gigantic” leap from an effective federal funds rate of 0.13% (where it is now) to 0.25% (where is likely headed soon), the market will still want to know what the strategy is after that.
And I fear that we will continue to have no idea.
To be fair, deciding what to do is a very tough call, and economists are deeply divided on the matter.
The International Monetary Fund has weighed in forcefully, calling on the Fed to wait longer before raising rates.
And yet central bankers in the very emerging markets that the IMF is supposedly protecting have been sending an equally forceful message: Get on with it; the uncertainty is killing us.
Personally, I would probably err on the side of waiting longer and accept the very high risk that, when inflation does rise, it will do so briskly, requiring a steeper path of interest-rate hikes later.
But if the Fed goes that route, it needs to say clearly that it is deliberately risking an inflation overshoot.
The case for waiting is that we really have no idea of what the equilibrium real (inflation-adjusted) policy interest rate is right now, and as such, need a clear signal on price growth before moving.
But only a foaming polemicist would deny that there is also a case for hiking rates sooner, as long as the Fed doesn’t throw random noise into the market by continuing to send spectacularly mixed signals about its beliefs and objectives.
After all, the US economy is at or near full employment, and domestic demand is growing solidly.
While the Fed tries to look past transitory fluctuations in commodity prices, it will be hard to ignore rising consumer inflation as the huge drop of the past year – particularly in energy prices – stabilizes or even reverses.
Indeed, any standard decision rule used by central banks by now dictates that a hike is long overdue.
But let’s not make the basic mistake of equating “higher interest rate” with “high interest.”
To say that 0.25%, or even 1%, is high in this environment is pure hyperbole.
And while one shouldn’t overstate the risks of sustained ultra-low rates to financial stability, it is also wrong to dismiss them entirely.
With the decision about raising rates such a close call, one would think that the Fed would be inclined to do it this year, given that the chair and vice chair have pretty much told the market for months that this will happen. The real reason for not hiking by the end of the year is public relations.
Let’s suppose the Fed raises interest rates to 0.25 basis points at its December meeting, trying its best to send a soothing message to markets.
The most likely outcome is that all will be fine, and the Fed doesn’t really care if a modest equity-price correction ensues.
No, the real risk is that, if the Fed starts hiking, it will be blamed for absolutely every bad thing that happens in the economy for the next six months to a year, which will happen to coincide with the heart of a US presidential election campaign.
One small hike and the Fed owns every bad outcome, no matter what the real cause.
The Fed of course understands that pretty much everyone dislikes interest-rate hikes and almost always likes rate cuts.
Any central banker will tell you that he or she gets 99 requests for interest-rate cuts for every request for a hike, almost regardless of the situation.
The best defense against these pressures is to operate according to utterly unambiguous criteria.
Instead, however good its intentions, the net effect of too much Fed speak has been vagueness and uncertainty.
So what should the Fed do?
My choice would be to have it explain the case for waiting more forthrightly: “Getting off the zero bound is hard, we want to see inflation over 3% to be absolutely sure, and then we will move with reasonable speed to normalize.”
But I also could live with, “We are worried that if we wait too long, we will have to tighten too hard and too fast.”
Throwing out the rulebook made sense in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. It doesn’t anymore.
And today’s lack of clarity has become a major contributor to market volatility – the last place the Fed should want to be.
It’s wrong to vilify the Fed for hiking, and it’s wrong to vilify it for not hiking; if it is such a close call, it probably doesn’t matter so much.
But, at this critical point, it is fair to ask the Fed for a much clearer message about what its strategy is, and what this implies for the future.
If Fed Chair Janet Yellen has to assert her will over the FOMC for a while, so be it.
Somebody on the committee has to lead the camel to water.
Macro Malpractice
NEW HAVEN – The wrong medicine is being applied to America’s economy.
Having misdiagnosed the ailment, policymakers have prescribed untested experimental medicine with potentially grave side effects.
The patient is the American consumer – the world’s biggest by far, but now in the throes of the worst funk since the Great Depression.
Recent data on consumer spending in the United States have been terrible.
Growth in inflation-adjusted US personal consumption expenditures has just been revised down to 1.5% in the second quarter of 2012, and appears to be on track for a similarly anemic increase in the third quarter.
Just as they wrote the script for the first of Japan’s lost decades, their counterparts are now doing the same for the US economy.
Two bubbles – property and credit – enabled a decade of excessive consumption.
Since their collapse in 2007, US households have understandably become fixated on repairing the damage.
That means paying down debt and rebuilding savings, leaving consumer demand mired in protracted weakness.
Yet the treatment prescribed for this malady has compounded the problem.
Steeped in denial, the Federal Reserve is treating the disease as a cyclical problem – deploying the full force of monetary accommodation to compensate for what it believes to be a temporary shortfall in aggregate demand.
The convoluted logic behind this strategy is quite disturbing – not only for the US, but also for the global economy.
There is nothing cyclical about the lasting aftershocks of a balance-sheet recession that have now been evident for nearly five years.
Indeed, balance-sheet repair has barely begun for US households.
The personal-saving rate stood at just 3.7% in August 2012 – up from the 1.5% low of 2005, but half the 7.5% average recorded in the last three decades of the twentieth century.
Moreover, the debt overhang remains massive.
The overall level of household indebtedness stood at 113% of disposable personal income in mid-2012 – down 21 percentage points from its pre-crisis peak of 134% in 2007, but still well above the 1970-1999 norm of around 75%.
In other words, Americans have much farther to go on the road to balance-sheet repair – which hardly suggests a temporary, or cyclical, shortfall in consumer demand.
Moreover, the Fed’s approach is severely compromised by the so-called zero bound on interest rates.
Having run out of basis points to cut from interest rates, the Fed has turned to the quantity dimension of the credit cycle – injecting massive doses of liquidity into the collapsed veins of zombie consumers.
To rationalize the efficacy of this approach, the Fed has rewritten the script on the transmission mechanism of discretionary monetary policy.
Unlike the days of yore, when cutting the price of credit could boost borrowing, “quantitative easing” purportedly works by stimulating asset and credit markets.
The wealth effects generated by frothy financial markets are then presumed to rejuvenate long-dormant “animal spirits” and get consumers spending again, irrespective of lingering balance-sheet strains.
There is more: Once the demand problem is cured, according to this argument, companies will start hiring again.
And then, presto – an unconventional fix magically satisfies the Fed’s long-neglected mandate to fight unemployment.
But the Fed’s policy gambit has taken the US down the wrong road.
Indeed, the Fed has doubled down on an approach aimed at recreating the madness of an asset- and credit-dependent consumption model – precisely the mistake that pushed the US economy toward the abyss in 2003-2006.
Just as two previous rounds of quantitative easing failed to accelerate US households’ balance-sheet repair, there is little reason to believe that “QE3” will do the trick.
Quantitative easing is a blunt instrument, at best, and operates through highly circuitous – and thus dubious – channels.
Significantly, it does next to nothing to alleviate the twin problems of excess leverage and inadequate saving.
Policies aimed directly at debt forgiveness and enhanced saving incentives – contentious, to be sure – would at least address zombie consumers’ balance-sheet problems.
Moreover, the side effects of quantitative easing are significant.
Many worry about an upsurge in inflation, though, given the outsize slack in the global economy – and the likelihood that it will persist for years to come – that is not high on my watch list.
Far more disconcerting is the willingness of major central banks – not just the Fed, but also the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan – to inject massive amounts of excess liquidity into asset markets – excesses that cannot be absorbed by sluggish real economies.
That puts central banks in the destabilizing position of abdicating control over financial markets.
For a world beset by seemingly endemic financial instability, this could prove to be the most destructive development of all.
The developing world is up in arms over the major central banks’ reckless tactics.
Emerging economies’ leaders fear spillover effects in commodity markets and distortions of exchange rates and capital flows that may compromise their own focus on financial stability.
While it is difficult to track the cross-border flows fueled by quantitative easing in the so-called advanced world, these fears are far from groundless. Liquidity injections into a zero-interest-rate developed world send return-starved investors scrambling for growth opportunities elsewhere.
As the global economy has gone from crisis to crisis in recent years, the cure has become part of the disease.
In an era of zero interest rates and quantitative easing, macroeconomic policy has become unhinged from a tough post-crisis reality.
Untested medicine is being used to treat the wrong ailment – and the chronically ill patient continues to be neglected.
The Federal Reserve’s Escape from New York
WASHINGTON, DC – The US Federal Reserve System is the world’s most important central bank.
Its decisions about interest rates and financial regulation reverberate through global markets and affect millions of lives.
Yet its governance structure is of another age – antiquated, increasingly problematic, and urgently in need of sensible reform.
The Fed made major mistakes in the run-up to the global economic crisis of 2007-08, most notably by adopting a lax approach to the supervision of key financial institutions, and by allowing some very large banks to become extremely fragile.
In one of the great ironies of modern American politics, the post-crisis Dodd-Frank financial reforms of 2010 actually gave more power to the Fed, mostly because other US regulatory agencies were regarded as having done a worse job.
In view of the Fed’s decidedly mixed track record since the Dodd-Frank reforms, some officials evidently regarded that default by Congress as a mandate to conduct business as usual.
Recent press reports have highlighted lapses in supervision, particularly in and around the Federal Reserve Bank of New York – one of 12 regional banks in the Fed System, which also has a Board of Governors in Washington, DC.
This regional structure is the result of legislative compromise in 1913, when the Fed was created, and again in the mid-1930s, when its governance was last overhauled.
Whereas members of the Fed’s Washington-based Board of Governors are nominated by the US president, subject to Senate confirmation, the presidents of the regional Federal Reserve banks are appointed by local boards.
In reality, the New York Fed has always had disproportionate sway; not all regional Fed presidents are created equal.
The president of the New York Fed is a permanent voting member and vice chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets interest rates, whereas other regional Fed presidents are voting members only on a rotating basis.
The New York Fed also has a particularly important role in bank supervision – most of America’s “too big to fail” banks are located in its jurisdiction (and most global banks have a presence there).
And the New York Fed has long been the Fed System’s eyes and ears on Wall Street.
Or perhaps it has become the other way around.
At least over the past decade, senior New York Fed officials have consistently sided with the interests of very large banks.
(To be clear, I also know many Fed officials who are outstanding public servants).
Though Wall Street interests have long been well represented on the board of the New York Fed, under Timothy Geithner, its president from 2003 to 2009, the big players became even more powerful – with some rather unfortunate consequences for the rest of us.
In his recent memoir, Stress Test, Geithner says, “I basically restored the New York Fed board to its historic roots as an elite roster of the local financial establishment.”
His choices included Dick Fuld, CEO of Lehman Brothers, which failed spectacularly in September 2008, and Stephen Friedman, a Goldman Sachs board member, who resigned as chair of the New York Fed’s board after being accused of inappropriately trading Goldman stock during the financial crisis.
Geithner also established a tangled web of connections between the New York Fed and JPMorgan Chase, some of which linger to this day.
Some senior Fed officials become angry when pressed about this reality.
But the Fed’s legitimacy – and its ability to make sensible policy – is not boosted by having major banks represented, directly or indirectly, on a board that chooses and oversees a key policymaker.
Now, finally, US politicians on both the left and the right are focusing their attention on a long-overdue reform of the Fed’s governance.
One important proposal comes from Senator Jack Reed, a Democrat from Rhode Island, who proposes, quite reasonably, that the president of the New York Fed should be nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate, just like members of the Board of Governors – or any other important economic policymaker.
The president of the New York Fed would also be required to testify before Congress on a regular basis.
The Fed’s defenders will respond that it would be dangerous to alter the status quo.
But it is the Fed’s current governance that has become dangerous.
Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Joe Manchin of West Virginia argue, entirely convincingly, that the composition of the Fed’s Board of Governors should be tilted away from people who are connected with big Wall Street firms.
Meanwhile, House Republicans are preparing their own Fed governance reforms, which would be even more radical – and would likely constrain monetary policy unwisely.
In any case, it is time for change at the Fed.
And, as is often the case with finance, the place to start is New York.
The Fed’s Gamble on Surplus Labor
LONDON – In recent weeks, the US Federal Reserve has buoyed markets by adopting a more gradual approach to policy normalization.
Fed Chair Janet Yellen’s most recent public remarks, in late March, were more dovish than anticipated.
And, at its last meeting, the Fed suggested that it would pursue two, rather than four, quarter-point interest-rate hikes in 2016.
In response, investors have sold the US dollar and bid up equity prices and US Treasuries, and commodities and emerging-market assets have surged.
At first glance, these developments are curious.
For one thing, the Fed’s decision appears to be at odds with signs that US inflation is accelerating.
If, as some have suggested, the Fed is responding to fears about global growth, it would not make sense that risk assets – above all commodities and emerging markets – are rallying.
But there is a logical thread that explains these apparent inconsistencies, one that centers on a potentially high-stakes Fed gamble.
Before we get to that wager, it is worth considering other proposed explanations for the market rally.
The first centers on monetary easing by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan.
But negative interest rates and flat yield curves harm banks’ earnings; links between extraordinary monetary policies and growth or inflation remain tenuous; and surely monetary policy is subject to diminishing returns by now.
Another view focuses on OPEC countries’ oil-supply restraint, claiming that it is helping to support oil prices and thus high-cost producers in North America.
But this logic rests more on correlation than causation.
OPEC has not decided to cut production, and only a handful of its members have agreed to freeze output.
A genuine reduction in global excess supply awaits a decline in output, as existing wells, deprived of capital investment, run dry.
A more plausible explanation for improved market performance is waning pessimism.
Fears of recession in the United States, the United Kingdom, or Germany – countries with full employment and rising real household incomes – were always a bit odd.
So was the notion that financial-market gyrations would have the atypical impact of significantly denting household or corporate spending.
And in China – a country that may be experiencing slowing GDP growth, but is nowhere near recession – rising household income and consumption are helping to offset the decline in fixed-asset investment.
This brings us back to the Fed and its gamble.
Policymakers’ change of heart likely arose from a re-think about slack in the US economy, especially in the labor market.
Indeed, in her recent remarks, Yellen noted that the labor-force participation rate had “turned up” and that “room for improvement” remained.
If the Fed now believes that the economy has greater capacity for above-trend expansion without generating much inflation, it can, to paraphrase John Lennon, “give growth a chance.”
Faster growth and slower policy tightening are great news for asset prices.
A gentler Fed also means less risk of dollar appreciation – an unambiguous benefit for commodity markets and dollar-indebted emerging economies.
Finally, a stable dollar takes pressure off the renminbi, which should slow outflows of “hot” capital from China, removing another source of risk from the global financial system.
Given these implication, it is little wonder that markets turned up.
But with US core inflation on the rise, the Fed is taking a big risk.
PCE goods prices are still falling, and services prices are rising just 2.1%, roughly unchanged over the past year.
But the focal point for the Fed is the labor market.
According to a March report, the civilian participation rate has increased by half a percentage point from its September 2015 lows, and now stands at 63%.
The same survey indicates that nearly six million Americans, who are not currently in the labor force, want to work.
Another six million are working part-time for economic reasons.
In part, low levels of US labor-force participation reflect structural factors.
Nearly every sub-category – by gender, education level, age cohort, or race – has been declining in the US since 2000.
Yet labor supply is typically also cyclical, picking up as the economy improves and job opportunities arise.
Until now, that cyclical pattern has been absent in the post-crisis “new normal.”
What might an increasingly elastic labor supply mean for Fed policy?
The answer depends on how much surplus labor is available.
Suppose it is 1.5 million workers – a conservative figure that would still leave the civilian employment-to-population ratio well below its post-war peak.
At plausible rates of US job creation, it would take 12-18 months to absorb those new entrants.
That labor influx would dampen wage and price pressures, allowing the Fed to proceed gradually with interest-rate normalization.
The bigger the pool of available labor, the longer the Fed can go slow.
This recalls former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan’s experiment in the late 1990s, when he let the US economy boom, on the hunch – which proved to be right – that productivity was accelerating.
Might Yellen be willing to make a similar wager on labor supply?
For now, the politics of populist discontent – from Donald Trump’s presidential campaign to the potential of a British exit from the European Union – are capturing the world’s attention.
But the US employment and inflation reports are the real sources of clues about the future.
It is there that one should look for the factors most likely to drive the biggest wagers – for policy and for markets alike.
The Fed Versus Price Stability
SAN FRANCISCO – There is a big difference between the Federal Reserve’s mandate to maintain “stable prices” – as enunciated in the Federal Reserve Act – and the Fed’s self-selected target of 2% annual inflation.
So how is it that policymakers have managed to substitute the latter for the former?
The term “stable prices” is self-explanatory: a bundle of goods will cost the same ten, 50, or even 100 years from now.
By contrast, if a country experiences 2% inflation over a ten-year period, the same items that $100 can buy today will cost $122 at the end of the decade.
After 100 years, the price tag will be a whopping $724.
In her recent Congressional testimony, Fed Chair Janet Yellen referred several times to the mandate of maintaining “stable prices”; but she mentioned the Fed’s 2% inflation objective twice as often.
“US inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2% objective,” she said, and the current “high degree of policy accommodation remains appropriate to foster further improvement in labor market conditions and to promote a return of inflation toward 2% over the medium term.”
Does the Fed really want to increase annual inflation to 2%, such that the price level of the country will increase by more than 700% over the next century?
Is that what Congress had in mind when it tasked the Fed with achieving “stable prices”?
Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan knew that it did not.
On July 2, 1996, at a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), which was devoted to extensive discussion of the appropriate inflation target for the Fed, Greenspan posed a simple question: “Are we talking about price stability or are we talking about zero inflation?” he asked.
“As we all know, those are two separate things.”
The discussion quickly turned to the difficulty of measuring inflation accurately and the need to build in a “safety cushion” to avoid deflation.
According to Greenspan, “Price stability is that state in which expected changes in the general price level do not effectively alter business and household decisions.”
Yellen, then a Fed governor, was not satisfied: “Could you please put a number on that?” she asked.
Greenspan did: “I would say that number is zero, if inflation is properly measured,” he replied.
At the time of that FOMC meeting, the consumer price index was increasing at about 3% per year.
Most of the discussion focused on whether the Fed should slow annual price growth to 2% or even lower, thereby consolidating the gains made in the difficult fight against inflation that policymakers had waged for the previous 15 years.
Greenspan summarized the consensus: “...we have now all agreed on 2%...”
Thus, the Fed’s 2% inflation objective was born.
During the ensuing discussion, several FOMC members argued that the inflation rate might be reduced to less than 2%, but nobody argued that inflation should be pushed higher if a lower, but still positive, rate was achieved.
Following the discussion, Greenspan exhorted the FOMC members to keep the discussion of the inflation target secret.
“I will tell you that if the 2% inflation figure gets out of this room,” he warned, “it is going to create more problems for us than I think any of you might anticipate.”
The official minutes of the meeting make no reference to the entire discussion of the inflation target, which took up several hours, and the FOMC never formally announced its 2% target for annual inflation until Chairman Ben Bernanke, Yellen’s predecessor, finally did so in 2012.
The 2% inflation target now is at the forefront of FOMC decision-making.
For example, while annual inflation stood at 0.8% in December 2014, the minutes of the January 2015 FOMC meeting refer several times to the Committee’s need to make “progress toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2% inflation” by maintaining a highly accommodative policy stance.
Increasing the rate of inflation is now the stated objective of Fed policy.
Congress did not give the Fed a mandate to pursue that goal.
The Federal Reserve Act is explicit: the Fed should achieve “price stability” for the US currency, along with moderate interest rates and maximum employment.
As long as inflation is somewhere between zero and 2%, the Fed should declare victory and leave it at that.
The Wrong War for Central Banking
BEIJING – Fixated on inflation targeting in a world without inflation, central banks have lost their way.
With benchmark interest rates stuck at the dreaded zero bound, monetary policy has been transformed from an agent of price stability into an engine of financial instability.
A new approach is desperately needed.
The US Federal Reserve exemplifies this policy dilemma.
After the Federal Open Market Committee decided in September to defer yet again the start of its long-awaited normalization of monetary policy, its inflation doves are openly campaigning for another delay.
For the inflation-targeting purists, the argument seems impeccable.
The headline consumer-price index (CPI) is near zero, and “core” or underlying inflation – the Fed’s favorite indicator – remains significantly below the seemingly sacrosanct 2% target.
With a long-anemic recovery looking shaky again, the doves contend that there is no reason to rush ahead with interest-rate hikes.
Of course, there is more to it than that.
Because monetary policy operates with lags, central banks must avoid fixating on the here and now, and instead use imperfect forecasts to anticipate the future effects of their decisions.
In the Fed’s case, the presumption that the US will soon approach full employment has caused the so-called dual mandate to collapse into one target: getting inflation back to 2%.
Here, the Fed is making a fatal mistake, as it relies heavily on a timeworn inflation-forecasting methodology that filters out the “special factors” driving the often volatile prices of goods like food and energy.
The logic is that the price fluctuations will eventually subside, and headline price indicators will converge on the core rate of inflation.
This approach failed spectacularly when it was adopted in the 1970s, causing the Fed to underestimate virulent inflation.
And it is failing today, leading the Fed consistently to overestimate underlying inflation.
Indeed, with oil prices having plunged by 50% over the past year, the Fed stubbornly maintains that faster price growth – and the precious inflation rate of 2% – is just around the corner.
Missing from this logic is an appreciation of the new and powerful global forces that are bearing down on inflation.
According to the International Monetary Fund’s latest outlook, the price deflator for all advanced economies should increase by just 1.5% annually, on average, from now to 2020 – not much higher than the crisis-depressed 1.1% pace of the last six years.
Moreover, most wholesale prices around the world remain in outright deflation.
But, rather than recognize the likely drivers of these developments – namely, a seemingly chronic shortfall of global aggregate demand amid a supply glut and a deflationary profusion of technological innovations and new supply chains – the Fed continues to minimize the deflationary impact of global forces.
It would rather attribute low inflation to successful inflation targeting, and the Great Moderation that it presumably spawned.
This prideful interpretation amounted to the siren song of an extremely accommodative monetary policy.
Unable to disentangle the global and domestic pressures suppressing inflation, a price-targeting Fed has erred consistently on the side of easy money.
This is apparent in the fact that, over the last 15 years, the real federal funds rate – the Fed’s benchmark policy rate, adjusted for inflation – has been in negative territory more than 60% of the time, averaging -0.6% since May 2001.
From 1990 to 2000, by contrast, the real federal funds rate averaged 2.2%.
In short, over the last decade and a half, the Fed has gone well beyond a powerful disinflation in setting its policy interest rate.
The consequences have been problematic, to say the least.
Over the same 15-year period, financial markets have become unhinged, with a profusion of asset and credit bubbles leading to a series of crises that almost pushed the world economy into the abyss in 2008-2009.
But rather than recognize, let alone respond to, pre-crisis excesses, the Fed has remained agnostic about them, pointing out that bubble-spotting is, at best, an imperfect science.
That is hardly a convincing reason for central banks to remain fixated on inflation targeting.
Not only have they failed repeatedly to get the inflation forecast right; they now risk fueling renewed financial instability and sparking another crisis.
Just as a few of us warned of impending crisis in the 2003-2006 period, some – including the Bank of International Settlements and the IMF– are sounding the alarm today, but to no avail.
To be sure, inflation targeting was once essential to limit runaway price growth.
In today’s inflationless world, however, it is counterproductive.
Yet the inflation targeters who dominate today’s major central banks insist on fighting yesterday’s war.
In this sense, modern central bankers resemble the British army in the Battle of Singapore in 1942.
Convinced that the Japanese would attack from the sea, the British defenses were encased in impenetrable concrete bunkers, with fixed artillery that could fire only to the south.
So when the Japanese emerged from the jungle and mangrove swamps of the Malay Peninsula in the north, the British were powerless to stop them.
Singapore quickly fell, in what is widely considered Prime Minister Winston Churchill’s most ignominious military defeat.
Central bankers, like the British army in Singapore, are aiming their weapons in the wrong direction.
It is time for them to turn their policy arsenal toward today’s enemy: financial instability.
On that basis alone, the case for monetary-policy normalization has never been more compelling.
Emerging Markets After the Fed Hikes Rates
NEW YORK – The prospect that the US Federal Reserve will start exiting zero policy rates later this year has fueled growing fear of renewed volatility in emerging economies’ currency, bond, and stock markets.
The concern is understandable: When the Fed signaled in 2013 that the end of its quantitative-easing (QE) policy was forthcoming, the resulting “taper tantrum” sent shock waves through many emerging countries’ financial markets and economies.
Indeed, rising interest rates in the United States and the ensuing likely rise in the value of the dollar could, it is feared, wreak havoc among emerging markets’ governments, financial institutions, corporations, and even households.
Because all have borrowed trillions of dollars in the last few years, they will now face an increase in the real local-currency value of these debts, while rising US rates will push emerging markets’ domestic interest rates higher, thus increasing debt-service costs further.
But, although the prospect of the Fed raising interest rates is likely to create significant turbulence in emerging countries’ financial markets, the risk of outright crises and distress is more limited.
For starters, whereas the 2013 taper tantrum caught markets by surprise, the Fed’s intention to hike rates this year, clearly stated over many months, will not.
Moreover, the Fed is likely to start raising rates later and more slowly than in previous cycles, responding gradually to signs that US economic growth is robust enough to sustain higher borrowing costs.
This stronger growth will benefit emerging markets that export goods and services to the US.
Another reason not to panic is that, compared to 2013, when policy rates were low in many fragile emerging economies, central banks already have tightened their monetary policy significantly.
With policy rates at or close to double-digit levels in many of those economies, the authorities are not behind the curve the way they were in 2013.
Loose fiscal and credit policies have been tightened as well, reducing large current-account and fiscal deficits.
And, compared to 2013, when currencies, equities, commodity, and bond prices were too high, a correction has already occurred in most emerging markets, limiting the need for further major adjustment when the Fed moves.
Above all, most emerging markets are financially more sound today than they were a decade or two ago, when financial fragilities led to currency, banking, and sovereign-debt crises.
Most now have flexible exchange rates, which leave them less vulnerable to a disruptive collapse of currency pegs, as well as ample reserves to shield them against a run on their currencies, government debt, and bank deposits.
Most also have a relatively smaller share of dollar debt relative to local-currency debt than they did a decade ago, which will limit the increase in their debt burden when the currency depreciates.
Their financial systems are typically more sound as well, with more capital and liquidity than when they experienced banking crises.
And, with a few exceptions, most do not suffer from solvency problems; although private and public debts have been rising rapidly in recent years, they have done so from relatively low levels.
In fact, serious financial problems in several emerging economies – particularly oil and commodity producers exposed to the slowdown in China – are unrelated to what the Fed does.
Brazil, which will experience recession and high inflation this year, complained when the Fed launched QE and then when it stopped QE. Its problems are mostly self-inflicted – the result of loose monetary, fiscal, and credit policies, all of which must now be tightened, during President Dilma Roussef’s first administration.
Russia’s troubles, too, do not reflect the impact of Fed policies.
Its economy is suffering as a result of the fall in oil prices and international sanctions imposed following its invasion of Ukraine – a war that will now force Ukraine to restructure its foreign debt, which the war, severe recession, and currency depreciation have rendered unsustainable.
Likewise, Venezuela was running large fiscal deficits and tolerating high inflation even when oil prices were above $100 a barrel; at current prices, it may have to default on its public debt, unless China decides to bail out the country.
Similarly, some of the economic and financial stresses faced by South Africa, Argentina, and Turkey are the result of poor policies and domestic political uncertainties, not Fed action.
In short, the Fed’s exit from zero policy rates will cause serious problems for those emerging market economies that have large internal and external borrowing needs, large stocks of dollar-denominated debt, and macroeconomic and policy fragilities.
China’s economic slowdown, together with the end of the commodity super-cycle, will create additional headwinds for emerging economies, most of which have not implemented the structural reforms needed to boost their potential growth.
But, again, these problems are self-inflicted, and many emerging economies do have stronger macro and structural fundamentals, which will give them greater resilience when the Fed starts hiking rates.
When it does, some will suffer more than others; but, with a few exceptions lacking systemic importance, widespread distress and crises need not occur.
The Fed’s Dollar Distraction
CAMBRIDGE – In its September policy statement, the US Federal Reserve took into consideration – in a major way – the impact of global economic developments on the United States, and thus on US monetary policy.
Indeed, the Fed decided to delay raising interest rates partly because US policymakers expect dollar appreciation, by lowering import prices, to undermine their ability to meet their 2% inflation target.
In reality, while currency movements can have a significant impact on inflation in other countries, dollar movements have rarely had a meaningful or durable impact on prices in the US.
The difference, of course, lies in the US dollar’s dominant role in the invoicing of international trade: prices are set in dollars.
Just as the dollar is often the unit of account in debt contracts, even when neither the borrower nor the lender is a US entity, the dollar’s share in invoicing for international trade is around 4.5 times America’s share of world imports, and three times its share of world exports.
The prices of some 93% of US imports are set in dollars.
In this environment, the pass-through of dollar movements into non-fuel US import prices is one of the lowest in the world, in both the short term (one quarter out) and the longer term (two years out), for three key reasons.
First, international trade contracts are renegotiated infrequently, which means that dollar prices are “sticky” for an extended period – around ten months – despite fluctuations in the exchange rate.
Second, because most exporters also import intermediate inputs that are priced in dollars, exchange-rate fluctuations have a limited impact on their costs and thus on their incentive to change dollar prices.
And, third, exporters who wish to preserve their share in world markets – where prices are largely denominated in dollars – choose to keep their dollar prices stable, to avoid falling victim to idiosyncratic exchange-rate movements.
What little impact import price shocks have on US inflation is highly transitory, with most of the effect tapering off after just two quarters.
A sharp 10% appreciation of the US dollar, for example, would reduce inflation for non-fuel imports by 4.4% cumulatively over the next 2-3 quarters, but would have only a negligible impact on inflation after that point.
If one accounts for consumer goods expenditure on imports, that 10% appreciation would lower inflation, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), by just 0.5 percentage points in the first two quarters.
And that is likely to be an upper bound, because it assumes that US retailers will pass through to consumers the full amount of any increase in import prices.
In practice, they are more likely to increase retail markups and lower cost pass-through.
The estimated price pass-through for imported manufactured goods, which would better represent what enters the consumption bundle, is even lower than that for all non-fuel imports.
Although these factors insulate the US from the inflationary pressures stemming from exchange-rate fluctuations, they increase the vulnerability of other countries, especially emerging economies.
Because the dollar prices of most of these countries’ imports are not very responsive to exchange-rate movements, the pass-through of those movements into import prices denominated in their home currencies is close to 100%.
In deciding when to normalize interest rates, the Fed has placed considerable weight on the weakness of inflation, and its global underpinnings.
But while it is true that some global developments – especially falling commodity prices, and perhaps also slowing emerging-economy growth and rising financial volatility – may push down inflation, dollar appreciation will not, at least not in any meaningful way.
A stronger dollar thus is not a legitimate reason to delay the normalization of US interest rates.
Will Fed Tightening Choke Emerging Markets?
CAMBRIDGE – As the Federal Reserve moves closer to initiating one of the most long-awaited and widely predicted periods of rising short-term interest rates in the United States, many are asking how emerging markets will be affected.
Indeed, the question has been asked at least since May 2013, when then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke famously announced that quantitative easing would be “tapered” later that year, causing long-term US interest rates to rise and prompting a reversal of capital flows to emerging markets.
The fear, as IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde has reminded us, is of a repeat of previous episodes, notably in 1982 and 1994, when the Fed’s policy tightening helped precipitate financial crises in developing countries.
If the Fed decides to raise interest rates this year, which emerging markets are most vulnerable to a capital-flow reversal?
There is no question that emerging markets are highly sensitive to global market conditions, including not only changes in short-term US interest rates, but also other financial risks, as measured, for example, by the volatility index VIX.
Capital-flow bonanzas, often spurred by low US interest rates and calm global financial markets, end abruptly when these conditions reverse.
By the end of the currency crises in East Asia and elsewhere in the late 1990s, emerging-market governments had learned some important lessons.
Five reforms were particularly effective: more flexible exchange rates, larger foreign-currency holdings, less pro-cyclical fiscal policy, stronger current accounts, and less debt denominated in dollars or other foreign currencies.
Many, but not all, developing and emerging-market countries took steps to implement these desirable policies.
Their choice was put to the test during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
Countries that had adopted such reforms were, on average, less adversely affected.
Those that had not, particularly middle-income countries in Central Europe and the continent’s periphery, tended to be hit the hardest.
In particular, after 2001, many developing countries overcame their historic pattern of using periods of capital inflows to finance large fiscal and current-account deficits.
As a result of reduced debt and enhanced reserves, their creditworthiness improved during the 2003-2007 boom.
By 2008, they were in a strong enough position to respond to the financial crisis by allowing larger budget deficits and thus mitigating the downturn in 2009.
Chile was the star reformer, but other countries – including Botswana, China, Costa Rica, Malaysia, the Philippines, and South Korea – also avoided pro-cyclical fiscal policies.
Unfortunately, policy backsliding is jeopardizing this historic “graduation” from pro-cyclicality.
Countries like Brazil did not take advantage of the recovery from 2010 to 2014 to strengthen their budgets, and are now in a difficult position.
Some of these countries used the renewed capital inflows to run large current-account deficits after 2010 as well.
Such deficits, together with high inflation rates, earned Brazil, Turkey, and South Africa their membership on the Fragile Five list of countries that were hit particularly hard by Bernanke’s announcement in 2013.
India and Indonesia were on this list as well, though they have begun to move in the right direction since then (thanks in part to new governments).
Then there are the countries – including Venezuela, Argentina, and Russia – that never moved in the reform direction in the first place.
They were temporarily bailed out by strong world prices for their export commodities, but that ended last year.
A less visible threat is the denomination of debt in dollars and other foreign currencies.
The currency crises of the 1980s and 1990s were particularly devastating because devaluations so often hit countries that had borrowed in dollars.
This resulted in a “currency mismatch” between dollar liabilities and revenues that were often denominated in local currencies.
When the cost of dollars doubled in terms of pesos or rupiah, otherwise-solvent local banks and manufacturers could no longer service their dollar debts.
Owing to this adverse balance-sheet effect, devaluation turned out to be contractionary, leading to severe recessions.
Most emerging-market borrowers had learned their lesson by the turn of the century, as exchange-rate volatility had made the risks of currency mismatch more tangible.
When international investors came knocking again in 2003, many emerging markets declined to borrow in dollars or other foreign currencies.
Instead, they took the inflows in the form of direct investment, equity, or debt denominated in local currency.
The relative absence of mismatch was one of the reasons why emerging markets did much better when their currencies depreciated in 2008-2009 than in past crises.
Exceptions like Hungary, where homeowners had foolishly borrowed in seemingly cheap euros and Swiss francs, proved the rule.
Unfortunately, in the last five years, many emerging markets have reverted to borrowing in foreign currency.
Though, for the most part, governments have continued the shift away from dollar debt, the corporate sector, as the Bank for International Settlements has warned, has been tempted by ultra-low interest rates.
The Chinese private sector may have the biggest problem.
Much of its recent borrowing violates key tenets of hard-earned wisdom gained in past crises: it is foreign exchange-denominated, short-term, shadow-bank-intermediated, and housing-backed.
Even though the Fed has not yet started raising interest rates, the well-established US economic recovery and the prospect of monetary tightening have, over the last year, caused the dollar to appreciate sharply against most currencies, those of emerging markets and advanced countries alike.
If the Fed tightens as early as the middle of this year, further dollar appreciation is likely.
Those who have been playing with mismatches may be about to get burned.
The Fed Sets Another Trap
NEW HAVEN – America’s Federal Reserve is headed down a familiar – and highly dangerous – path.
Steeped in denial of its past mistakes, the Fed is pursuing the same incremental approach that helped set the stage for the financial crisis of 2008-2009.
The consequences could be similarly catastrophic.
Consider the December meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), where discussions of raising the benchmark federal funds rate were couched in adjectives, rather than explicit actions.
In line with prior forward guidance that the policy rate would be kept near zero for a “considerable” amount of time after the Fed stopped purchasing long-term assets in October, the FOMC declared that it can now afford to be “patient” in waiting for the right conditions to raise the rate.
Add to that Fed Chair Janet Yellen’s declaration that at least a couple more FOMC meetings would need to take place before any such “lift-off” occurs, and the Fed seems to be telegraphing a protracted journey on the road to policy normalization.
This bears an eerie resemblance to the script of 2004-2006, when the Fed’s incremental approach led to the near-fatal mistake of condoning mounting excesses in financial markets and the real economy.
After pushing the federal funds rate to a 45-year low of 1% following the collapse of the equity bubble of the early 2000s, the Fed delayed policy normalization for an inordinately long period.
And when it finally began to raise the benchmark rate, it did so excruciatingly slowly.
In the 24 months from June 2004, the FOMC raised the federal funds rate from 1% to 5.25% in 17 increments of 25 basis points each.
Meanwhile, housing and credit bubbles were rapidly expanding, fueling excessive household consumption, a sharp drop in personal savings, and a record current-account deficit – imbalances that set the stage for the meltdown that was soon to follow.
The Fed, of course, has absolved itself of any blame in setting up the US and the global economy for the Great Crisis.
It was not monetary policy’s fault, argued both former Fed Chairmen Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke; if anything, they insisted, a lack of regulatory oversight was the culprit.
This argument has proved convincing in policy and political circles, leading officials to focus on a new approach centered on so-called macro-prudential tools, including capital requirements and leverage ratios, to curb excessive risk-taking by banks.
While this approach has some merit, it is incomplete, as it fails to address the egregious mispricing of risk brought about by an overly accommodative monetary policy and the historically low interest rates that it generated.
In this sense, the Fed’s incrementalism of 2004-2006 was a policy blunder of epic proportions.
The Fed seems poised to make a similar – and possibly even more serious – misstep in the current environment.
For starters, given ongoing concerns about post-crisis vulnerabilities and deflation risk, today’s Fed seems likely to find any excuse to prolong its incremental normalization, taking a slower pace than it adopted a decade ago.
More important, the Fed’s $4.5 trillion balance sheet has since grown more than fivefold.
Though the Fed has stopped purchasing new assets, it has shown no inclination to scale back its outsize holdings.
Meanwhile it has passed the quantitative-easing baton to the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank, both of which will create even more liquidity at a time of record-low interest rates.
In these days of froth, the persistence of extraordinary policy accommodation in a financial system flooded with liquidity poses a great danger.
Indeed, that could well be the lesson of recent equity- and currency-market volatility and, of course, plummeting oil prices.
With so much dry kindling, it will not take much to spark the next conflagration.
Central banking has lost its way.
Trapped in a post-crisis quagmire of zero interest rates and swollen balance sheets, the world’s major central banks do not have an effective strategy for regaining control over financial markets or the real economies that they are supposed to manage.
Policy levers – both benchmark interest rates and central banks’ balance sheets – remain at their emergency settings, even though the emergency ended long ago.
While this approach has succeeded in boosting financial markets, it has failed to cure bruised and battered developed economies, which remain mired in subpar recoveries and plagued with deflationary risks.
Moreover, the longer central banks promote financial-market froth, the more dependent their economies become on these precarious markets and the weaker the incentives for politicians and fiscal authorities to address the need for balance-sheet repair and structural reform.
A new approach is needed.
Central banks should normalize crisis-induced policies as soon as possible.
Financial markets will, of course, object loudly.
But what do independent central banks stand for if they are not prepared to face up to the markets and make the tough and disciplined choices that responsible economic stewardship demands?
The unprecedented financial engineering by central banks over the last six years has been decisive in setting asset prices in major markets worldwide.
But now it is time for the Fed and its counterparts elsewhere to abandon financial engineering and begin marshaling the tools they will need to cope with the inevitable next crisis.
With zero interest rates and outsize balance sheets, that is exactly what they are lacking.
America’s Risky Recovery
CAMBRIDGE – The United States’ economy is approaching full employment and may already be there.
But America’s favorable employment trend is accompanied by a substantial increase in financial-sector risks, owing to the excessively easy monetary policy that was used to achieve the current economic recovery.
The overall unemployment rate is down to just 5.5%, and the unemployment rate among college graduates is just 2.5%.
The increase in inflation that usually occurs when the economy reaches such employment levels has been temporarily postponed by the decline in the price of oil and by the 20% rise in the value of the dollar.
The stronger dollar not only lowers the cost of imports, but also puts downward pressure on the prices of domestic products that compete with imports.
Inflation is likely to begin rising in the year ahead.
The return to full employment reflects the Federal Reserve’s strategy of “unconventional monetary policy” – the combination of massive purchases of long-term assets known as quantitative easing and its promise to keep short-term interest rates close to zero.
The low level of all interest rates that resulted from this policy drove investors to buy equities and to increase the prices of owner-occupied homes.
As a result, the net worth of American households rose by $10 trillion in 2013, leading to increases in consumer spending and business investment.
After a very slow initial recovery, real GDP began growing at annual rates of more than 4% in the second half of 2013.
Consumer spending and business investment continued at that rate in 2014 (except for the first quarter, owing to the weather-related effects of an exceptionally harsh winter).
That strong growth raised employment and brought the economy to full employment.
But the Fed’s unconventional monetary policies have also created dangerous risks to the financial sector and the economy as a whole.
The very low interest rates that now prevail have driven investors to take excessive risks in order to achieve a higher current yield on their portfolios, often to meet return obligations set by pension and insurance contracts.
This reaching for yield has driven up the prices of all long-term bonds to unsustainable levels, narrowed credit spreads on corporate bonds and emerging-market debt, raised the relative prices of commercial real estate, and pushed up the stock market’s price-earnings ratio to more than 25% higher than its historic average.
The low-interest-rate environment has also caused lenders to take extra risks in order to sustain profits.
Banks and other lenders are extending credit to lower-quality borrowers, to borrowers with large quantities of existing debt, and as loans with fewer conditions on borrowers (so-called “covenant-lite loans”).
Moreover, low interest rates have created a new problem: liquidity mismatch.
Favorable borrowing costs have fueled an enormous increase in the issuance of corporate bonds, many of which are held in bond mutual funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
These funds’ investors believe – correctly – that they have complete liquidity.
They can demand cash on a day’s notice.
But, in that case, the mutual funds and ETFs have to sell those corporate bonds.
It is not clear who the buyers will be, especially since the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation restricted what banks can do and increased their capital requirements, which has raised the cost of holding bonds.
Although there is talk about offsetting these risks with macroprudential policies, no such policies exist in the US, except for the increased capital requirements that have been imposed on commercial banks.
There are no policies to reduce risks in shadow banks, insurance companies, or mutual funds.
So that is the situation that the Fed now faces as it considers “normalizing” monetary policy.
Some members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, the Fed’s policymaking body) therefore fear that raising the short-term federal funds rate will trigger a substantial rise in longer-term rates, creating losses for investors and lenders, with adverse effects on the economy.
Others fear that, even without such financial shocks, the economy’s current strong performance will not continue when interest rates are raised.
And still other FOMC members want to hold down interest rates in order to drive the unemployment rate even lower, despite the prospects of accelerating inflation and further financial-sector risks.
But, in the end, the FOMC members must recognize that they cannot postpone the increase in interest rates indefinitely, and that once they begin to raise the rates, they must get the real (inflation-adjusted) federal funds rate to 2% relatively quickly.
My own best guess is that they will start to raise rates in September, and that the federal funds rate will reach 3% by some point in 2017.
How the Fed Just Reduced Inequality
NEW YORK – The US Federal Reserve has finally done it, raising interest rates for the first time in almost a decade.
The ramifications for interest-rate spreads, emerging-market equities, and housing demand, among much else, are the subject of widespread debate.
But, as markets learn to cope with a less accommodative monetary policy, there could be an important silver lining, which most people have ignored.
Income and wealth inequality in the United States has grown steadily since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, but monetary-policy normalization could mark the beginning of the end of this trend.
Indeed, it should serve to accelerate its reversal.
Consider a few dismal statistics reflecting the current state of affairs.
Real (inflation-adjusted) median household income in the US is about the same as in 1979.
A recent study by the Pew Research Center noted that Americans earned 4% less income in 2014 than they did in 2000, and for the first time in more than 40 years, middle-class Americans no longer constitute a majority of the population.
America’s 20 wealthiest people now own more wealth than the bottom half of the entire population The wealth gap between America’s high-income group and everyone else has never been more extreme; rich households account for more than one in five of the entire US population.
Strikingly, one hour north of Wall Street, in Bridgeport, Connecticut, the Gini coefficient – a standard measurement of income distribution and inequality – is worse than in Zimbabwe.
Ironically, this trend was exacerbated by the policy response to the financial crisis.
While the recession of 2007-2008 caused higher-income groups to suffer more than lower-income groups (because the former tend to derive relatively more of their income from more volatile sources of capital income, as opposed to labor income), the opposite has been true since 2009.
Since then, about 95% of all income gains have gone to the top 1%.
The causes of rising income and wealth inequality are multiple and nuanced; but the unintended consequences of the recent unprecedented period of ultra-loose monetary policy deserves a chunk of the blame.
Negative real interest rates and quantitative easing have enforced financial repression on holders of cash, hurting savers, while broadly boosting prices of riskier financial assets, most commonly held by the rich.
When there is no yield in fixed income, even the most conservative pension funds pile into risk assets, driving prices higher and higher.
Corporations have benefited massively from these stimulus measures, but at the expense of the working population.
Profit margins have expanded to record highs as companies have cut costs, delayed infrastructure investments, borrowed at ultra-low rates, and taken advantage of weak labor markets to avoid raising wages.
But are we now on the verge of a trend reversal?
The S&P 500 has rallied 150% since its 2009 lows, and valuations look rich given weakening growth dynamics (the Shiller price/earnings ratio stands at 26, compared to 15 in 2009).
Against this backdrop, the wealthiest Americans are unlikely to enjoy substantial further profits from their financial investments in the near term.
At the same time, we should see meaningful upward pressure on wages for the first time in many years.
The unemployment rate has dropped to 5%, just above the Fed’s current median estimate for the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU).
While the true NAIRU level is probably lower, and we are likely witnessing a secular decline in the workforce participation rate, the US labor market should still tighten in 2016.
Indeed, the number of those “not in the labor force, currently want a job” category dropped 416,000, to just above 5.6 million, in November; historically, this kind of change has been closely associated with rising wage pressure.
And the average hourly wages for all employees on private non-farm payrolls posted an annual increase of 2.5% in October, the biggest since 2009.
As the Fed slowly raises interest rates, those middle-class families holding their hard-earned savings at the bank will finally start realizing some return on their deposits.
The long-term effects should not be underestimated, given the helpful impact of compound savings.
During the last tightening cycle between 2004 and 2006, households’ interest income rose 29%.
Although this time, the gains presumably will be smaller and slower to arrive, owing to the likely pace and extent of Fed tightening, interest paid on savings will move household income in the right direction: up.
Of course, a multitude of political reforms, each with potential positive implications for welfare, could reduce the extent of inequality further.
But the barriers to such measures – say, to make the tax system more progressive – are well known, especially against the backdrop of a presidential election campaign.
This means that an increase in real wages for workers will have the most immediate impact, even if the downside is lower profit margins for corporate America.
The Fed’s decision to raise rates is a historic moment for financial markets and is already ushering in a period of increased volatility for asset prices worldwide.
Although this may be challenging for investors, we should take comfort in the implications for the real economy.
The social contract in the US has frayed badly, and this is likely to play an important role in the upcoming presidential election, as voters express anger that the American Dream is increasingly out of reach.
No economic recovery can sustain itself without rising wages and higher consumer spending power.
The Fed may have just signaled that the beginning of this necessary dynamic, perhaps the key inflection point of the inequality trend, is finally here.
And it may also have done its part to speed its arrival.
A Cautionary History of US Monetary Tightening
BERKELEY – The US Federal Reserve has embarked on an effort to tighten monetary policy four times in the past four decades.
On every one of these occasions, the effort triggered processes that reduced employment and output far more than the Fed’s staff had anticipated.
As the Fed prepares to tighten monetary policy once again, an examination of this history – and of the current state of the economy – suggests that the United States is about to enter dangerous territory.
Between 1979 and 1982, then-Fed Chair Paul Volcker changed the authorities’ approach to monetary policy.
His expectation was that by controlling the amount of money in circulation, the Fed could bring about larger reductions in inflation with smaller increases in idle capacity and unemployment than what traditional Keynesian models predicted.
Unfortunately for the Fed – and for the American economy – the Keynesian models turned out to be accurate; their forecasts of the costs of disinflation were dead on.
Furthermore, this period of monetary tightening had unexpected consequences; financial institutions like Citicorp found that only regulatory forbearance saved them from having to declare bankruptcy, and much of Latin America was plunged into a depression that lasted more than five years.
Then, between 1988 and 1990, another round of monetary tightening under Alan Greenspan ravaged the balance sheets of the country’s savings and loan associations, which were overleveraged, undercapitalized, and already struggling to survive.
To prevent the subsequent recession from worsening, the federal government was forced to bail out insolvent institutions.
State governments were on the hook, too: Texas spent the equivalent of three months of total state income to rescue its S&Ls and their depositors.
Between 1993 and 1994, Greenspan once again reined in monetary policy, only to be surprised by the impact that small amounts of tightening could have on the prices of long-term assets and companies’ borrowing costs.
Fortunately, he was willing to reverse his decision and cut the tightening cycle short (over the protests of many on the policy-setting Federal Open Markets Committee) – a move that prevented the US economy from slipping back into recession.
The most recent episode – between 2004 and 2007 – was the most devastating of the four.
Neither Greenspan nor his successor, Ben Bernanke, understood how fragile the housing market and the financial system had become after a long period of under-regulation.
These twin mistakes – deregulation, followed by misguided monetary-policy tightening – continue to gnaw at the US economy today.
The tightening cycle upon which the Fed now seems set to embark comes at a delicate time for the economy.
The US unemployment rate may seem to hint at the risk of rising inflation, but the employment-to-population ratio continues to signal an economy in deep distress.
Indeed, wage patterns suggest that this ratio, not the unemployment rate, is the better indicator of slack in the economy – and nobody ten years ago would have interpreted today’s employment-to-population ratio as a justification for monetary tightening.
Indeed, not even the Fed seems convinced that the economy faces imminent danger of overheating.
Inflation in the US is not just lower than the Fed’s long-term target; it is expected to stay that way for at least the next three years.
And the Fed’s change in policy comes at a time when its own economists believe that US fiscal policy is inappropriately restrictive.
Meanwhile, given the fragility – and interconnectedness – of the global economy, tightening monetary policy in the US could have negative impacts abroad (with consequent blowback at home), especially given the instability in China and economic malaise in Europe.