As a result, the European liberal left lost its sympathy for Israel, and the country acquired a new set of friends among the right – even the far right.
European right-wing populists, including some who represent parties with a strong anti-Semitic past, now proudly proclaim their support for Israeli settlers on Palestinian land.
And, in the US, a peculiar alliance of Jewish hardliners and evangelical Christians, who believe that all Jews must eventually return to the Holy Land and convert to Christianity, has become the main base of support for Israel.
This has created a very odd situation.
Right-wing politicians from the American South, together with Austrian, German, French, and Dutch populists, are accusing liberals of appeasing “Islamofascism.”
These political heirs of deeply racist traditions are the new champions of a Jewish state, whose policies now owe more to nineteenth-century ethnic chauvinism than to Zionism’s socialist roots.
Pandering to Israel’s uncompromising policies may be the easiest way for America’s Democratic president to avoid trouble in an election year.
Obama certainly needs all the friends he can get.
But the price will be high.
Forced to back Israel, right or wrong, the US is quickly losing credibility and influence in a turbulent Middle East.
Putting pressure on Israel to stop building settlements and come to terms with a viable Palestinian state will be very difficult.
But it is the only way to break the constant cycle of violence.
Standing up to Israel, and its new fanatical friends, is not anti-Jewish. On the contrary, it is to uphold the liberal tradition in which many Jews continue to believe.
Obama’s Middle East Malady
PARIS – No sooner did US President Barack Obama welcome home American troops from Iraq and laud that country’s stability and democracy than an unprecedented wave of violence – across Baghdad and elsewhere – revealed the severity of Iraq’s political crisis.
Is that crisis an unfortunate exception, or, rather, a symptom of the failure of Obama’s Middle East diplomacy, from Egypt to Afghanistan?
Kurdistan has embarked on a path toward increased autonomy, while the Sunnis are increasingly marginalized by a sectarian and authoritarian Shia-dominated central government.
This has implications for the regional balance of power, because Iraq is growing closer to Iran in order to offset Turkey, which is seen as protecting the Sunnis.
Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s remark during a recent trip to Washington that he was more concerned about Turkey than Iran exposed the huge gulf between Iraq and the US, which now appears to have lost all significant political influence on Iraqi affairs.
Indeed, in a disturbing development, the US decided not to play its last remaining card in dealing with al-Maliki: arms sales.
There can no longer be any doubt that the occupation of Iraq was a huge strategic defeat for the US, because it ultimately served only to strengthen Iran.
Yet Obama lacks a medium-term vision to deal with the seriousness of the situation – an oversight that, sooner or later, will cost the US dearly.
One of two things will happen: either tighter containment of Iran through sanctions on oil exports will produce positive results and weaken Iran, or containment will fail, leading the US inexorably toward a new war in the Middle East.
It is not unlikely that some in US foreign-policy circles regard the deepening Iraqi crisis as a building block in constructing the case for military intervention in Iran.
But Obama is nobody’s fool.
He has registered the US Congress’s hostility toward Iran and the desire to confront the Islamic Republic militarily.
He believes, however, that he can avoid extreme solutions; in diplomacy, anything can happen, and the worst-case scenario is never guaranteed.
The problem is that Obama has a strong tendency to overestimate America’s ability to influence weaker actors.
What is true for Iraq is also true for Afghanistan: Obama can pride himself on having eliminated Osama bin Laden, which was undoubtedly a success, but one that failed to address the root of the problem.
Despite a 10-year military presence, involving the deployment of more than 100,000 troops at a cost of $550 billion, the US still has not succeeded in creating a credible alternative to the Taliban. Worse, its political alliance with Pakistan has frayed.
Indeed, US-Pakistan relations have regressed to their level before September 11, 2001, a time marked by deep mutual distrust.
Pakistani leaders obviously bear a heavy responsibility for this state of affairs.
But if the US has been unable to involve Pakistan in resolving the Afghanistan conflict, that failure simply reflects America’s refusal to give the Pakistanis what they wanted: a shift in the regional balance of power at the expense of India.
Pakistan, accordingly, froze cooperation with the US, because its leaders no longer saw much to gain in fighting the Taliban.
The risk is that when the American withdrawal from Afghanistan begins – a process that has just been brought forward to next year, from 2014 – the US will again seek to impose sanctions on Pakistan, an unreliable nuclear state that will react by strengthening ties with China and deploying Islamist terrorism.
Obama also sought to use America’s influence to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as part of his strategy for the broader Middle East.
He initially thought that by pressuring Netanyahu to freeze settlements, he would succeed in reviving the peace process.
But he was quickly and skillfully outmaneuvered by his ally, who knows how important the Israeli issue is to US domestic politics.
By putting Obama at odds with the rest of the US establishment, Netanyahu forced him to retreat.
In 2009, Obama envisioned a settlement of the conflict through the strong commitment of the international community.
In 2011, he asserted that only both sides’ willingness could ensure a successful outcome.
Obama often has a plan A, but never a plan B. When it comes to conducting a successful foreign policy, plan A is never enough.
Obama’s New World Order
As the world digests President Barack Obama’s recent historic speech in Cairo, one conclusion is readily apparent: it will take more than a single speech to effect reconciliation between the United States and the Islamic world, after years of hostility and mistrust. But this was a significant start.
There is a second conclusion to be drawn, less evident but even more important: Obama’s ambition is not confined to cutting the root of Islamic terrorism, or even to bringing peace to the Middle East. It extends to nothing less than a complete reshaping of the global order.
Obama’s dramatic overture to the Islamic world was only the latest in a series of such openings by this remarkable US president.
The economic crisis arguably forced the new American rapprochement with China (the “emerging” power that has now emerged as the big winner from the world’s financial turmoil).
But no such circumstance prompted the move to “re-set” relations with Russia, the journeys to mend fences with Latin America and Turkey, or efforts to reach out to Iran.
These are all products of a deliberate policy.
The unilateral moment has passed. The US had its few short years as a hyper-power, and it did neither America nor the world much good.
Now, before our eyes, Obama is repositioning the US at the centre of a web of global bilateral relationships – the “G-2” economic relationship with China, the nuclear relationship with Russia, and now the search for a relationship of mutual respect and cooperation with the Muslim world.
As in a Venn diagram, Obama is placing the US at that central point where all the different ellipses overlap.
First among equals, and the indispensable nation.
Where, one might wonder, does this leave Europe?
Europeans have grown used to the idea that the transatlantic relationship is the foundation of the international order.
Following the difficult years of the Bush presidency, Obama has duly sought to restore transatlantic harmony as well, visiting Europe in April and extending the hand of partnership there, too.
To be sure, Europe gave Obama very little back for his pains, whether in terms of help in Afghanistan or support in stimulating the global economy.
But if Obama lost sleep over this tepid European response, he showed no signs of it.
In the new Obama world order, transatlantic relations are not the foundation, but just one of the Venn diagram’s ellipses – as significant or insignificant as Europeans choose to make it.
While Europeans chew on that, they should also reflect on what the Cairo speech could mean for their own position in the Middle East.
Europeans have long cherished the belief that centuries of history and the facts of geography, not to mention more recent patterns of immigration, have given them some sort of special relationship with the Islamic world – an often strained and sometimes bloody relationship, but nonetheless one based on deep mutual familiarity.
In European eyes, Americans lack such sophisticated understanding, and often have no interest in acquiring it, seeing the land around and beyond Israel as populated largely by greedy oil sheikhs and dangerous religious fanatics.
Like all caricatures, this European view has had some truth to it.
And, though Europeans have lamented that fate has allocated the real power in the Middle East to their crass cousins, they have nonetheless done pretty well there, not least commercially, simply by not being American.
Now, after listening to Obama in Cairo, they will have to ask themselves whether this is not another aspect of how the world works, and of Europe’s position in it, that is about to change.
It was a fine speech, and Europeans will duly applaud it; but listen for the growing undertone of anxiety that this bold young US president has just helped himself to some more of Europe’s clothes.
Obama’s Nuclear Agenda
CAMBRIDGE – The announcement of a secret uranium enrichment facility located on a military base in Iran has sharpened President Barack Obama’s efforts to place nuclear proliferation issues at the top of the world agenda.
2010 will be a critical year.
In September, both at the United Nations and at the G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh, many countries agreed to work on Obama’s nuclear agenda.
But, in the midst of those meetings, it was revealed that Iran has been secretly building a second enrichment facility with the potential to produce weapons-grade uranium.
In early October, Iranian officials met in Geneva with representatives of the permanent members of the UN Security Council (plus Germany) and agreed to allow the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect the hitherto secret plant.
In addition, the Iranians said that they would export their existing low-enriched uranium to be fabricated into nuclear fuel outside of Iran.
If these measures are implemented, they will represent important steps.
There has been widespread fear that Iran would abrogate the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and use its enrichment facilities to develop a nuclear weapon.
It is not yet clear whether words will be matched with deeds.
Meanwhile, the United States and Russia, whose stockpiles contain more than 90% of the world’s nuclear weapons, are negotiating in Geneva to produce a strategic arms reduction treaty to replace their START I arms-control agreement, which expires in December.
If those talks are successful, they may yield cuts of up to one-third of all strategic nuclear warheads.
The US Senate would then consider the new treaty for ratification next year.
The Obama administration is also consulting with Congress on when to re-submit the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), which was rejected by the Senate 10 years ago.
International agreements regulating the size and composition of national defenses have often been controversial in the Senate.
The new strategic arms-reduction treaty, which is still a work in progress, and the CTBT have already aroused skepticism from opposition legislators and opinion-makers.
If Obama submits both treaties to the Senate in 2010, he will need to convince the public that they serve an integrated strategy for enhancing national and international security.
If he fails and the Senate rejects one or both of the treaties, it could have a strong negative effect on the non-proliferation regime.
In May, 189 member states of the NPT will meet in Vienna to review its status.
When the NPT entered into force in 1970, it was intended to limit the number of nuclear-weapons states to five (the US, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, and China).
Overall, the treaty has been a success.
Many people, including President John F. Kennedy, believed in the 1960’s that there would be dozens of countries with nuclear weapons by now, and that their use would be highly probable.
Fortunately, this has not been the case.
Since 1970, three states that never signed the treaty have acquired nuclear weapons (India, Israel, and Pakistan).
In addition, North Korea violated its treaty obligations and exploded two crude devices.
Iran’s suspected nuclear-weapons program has now raised new fears that the global nonproliferation regime may unravel.
Averting that danger will require multiple, coordinated, and sustained efforts for many years to come, but ratification of post-START and the CTBT would help.
For example, a new arms-reduction agreement would improve the US-Russian relationship, and that, in turn, could translate into a more constructive Russian position on Iran in the Security Council.
Senate approval of the CTBT would also restore America’s credibility in its efforts to get other countries to forgo nuclear testing.
Next March, Obama will host a Global Nuclear Security Summit with the aim of developing new means to combat nuclear smuggling and terrorism.
In addition, his proposed long-term goal of abolishing nuclear weapons will require a great deal of preparatory work before it becomes an operational rather than an aspirational objective.
Obama will need to begin discussions with the Russians, for example, on how to handle the question of short-range nuclear weapons, and how to regulate anti-ballistic missile defenses to maintain stability in a world of fewer offensive weapons.
At some point, he must open discussions with countries like China, France, and Britain to understand better the conditions for transparency and verification that would be necessary for a clearer path toward eventual elimination of nuclear weapons in accordance with Article VI of the NPT.
At the same time, Obama cannot allow these long-term issues to divert his attention from crucial short-term issues.
So long as the world remains a dangerous place with several nuclear weapons states, Obama must reassure its allies about the credibility of American guarantees of extended deterrence.
Otherwise, reductions that create anxieties in other countries could lead them to develop their own weapons and thus increase the number of nuclear weapons states.
Obama will also need to pursue negotiations to persuade North Korea to return to the Six-Party talks with the objective of eventually giving up its nuclear weapons (as South Africa once did).
And, of course, he will need to pursue the negotiations with Iran to persuade them to keep their word and remain in the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state.
How successful Obama is in managing the domestic politics and international diplomacy of his nuclear agenda will be an important factor in his effectiveness as a world leader.
Even more important, his progress in 2010 will say a lot about the world’s ability to maintain the existing 60-year taboo against the use of nuclear weapons.
Obama’s Pacific Pivot
CAMBRIDGE – Asia’s return to the center of world affairs is the great power shift of the twenty-first century.
In 1750, Asia had roughly three-fifths of the world’s population and accounted for three-fifths of global output.
By 1900, after the Industrial Revolution in Europe and America, Asia’s share of global output had shrunk to one-fifth.
By 2050, Asia will be well on its way back to where it was 300 years earlier.
But, rather than keeping an eye on that ball, the United States wasted the first decade of this century mired in wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Now, as US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech, American foreign policy will “pivot” toward East Asia.
President Barack Obama’s decision to rotate 2,500 US Marines through a base in northern Australia is an early sign of that pivot.
In addition, the November Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting, held in Obama’s home state of Hawaii, promoted a new set of trade talks called the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Both events reinforce Obama’s message to the Asia-Pacific region that the US intends to remain an engaged power.
The pivot toward Asia does not mean that other parts of the world are no longer important; on the contrary, Europe, for example, has a much larger and richer economy than China’s.
But, as Obama’s national security adviser, Tom Donilon, recently explained, US foreign policy over the past few years has been buffeted by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, concerns about terrorism, nuclear-proliferation threats in Iran and North Korea, and the recent Arab uprisings.
Obama’s November trip to Asia was an effort to align US foreign-policy priorities with the region’s long-term importance.
In Donilon’s words, “by elevating this dynamic region to one of our top strategic priorities, Obama is showing his determination not to let our ship of state be pushed off course by prevailing crises.”
The Obama administration also announced that, whatever the outcome of the defense-budget debates, “we are going to make sure that we protect the capabilities that we need to maintain our presence in the Asia-Pacific” region.
Obama’s November trip was also a message to China.
After the 2008 financial crisis, many Chinese expressed the mistaken belief that the US was in terminal decline, and that China should be more assertive – particularly in pursuing its maritime claims in the South China Sea – at the expense of America’s allies and friends.
During Obama’s first year in office, his administration placed a high priority on cooperation with China, but Chinese leaders seemed to misread US policy as a sign of weakness.
The administration took a tougher line when Clinton addressed the South China Sea question at the Association of Southeast Asian Nations meeting in Hanoi in July 2010.
Chinese President Hu Jintao’s subsequent official visit to Washington in January 2011 was successful, but many Chinese editorialists complained that the US was trying to “contain” China and prevent its peaceful rise.
China’s anxiety about a supposed US containment policy is on the rise again, now that Clinton is insisting that the country’s maritime disputes with its neighbors be placed on the agenda at next year’s East Asia Summit in Manila, which will be attended by Obama, Hu Jintao, and other regional leaders.
But American policy toward China is different from Cold War containment of the Soviet bloc.
Whereas the US and the Soviet Union had limited trade and social contact, the US is China’s largest overseas market, welcomed and facilitated China’s entry into the World Trade Organization, and opens its universities’ gates to 125,000 Chinese students each year.
If current US policy towards China is supposed to be Cold War-style containment, it seems unusually warm.
The Pentagon’s East Asia Strategy Review, which has guided American policy since 1995, offered China integration into the international system through trade and exchange programs.
Although the US hedged its bet by simultaneously strengthening its alliance with Japan, this does not constitute containment.
After all, China’s leaders cannot predict their successors’ intentions. The US is betting that they will be peaceful, but no one knows.
A hedge expresses caution, not aggression.
American military forces do not aspire to “contain” China in Cold War fashion, but they can help to shape the environment in which future Chinese leaders make their choices.
I stand by my testimony before the US Congress of 1995 in response to those who, even then, wanted a policy of containment rather than engagement: “Only China can contain China.”
If China becomes a bully in the Asia-Pacific region, other countries will join the US to confront it.
Indeed, that is why many of China’s neighbors have strengthened their ties with the US since 2008, when China’s foreign policy became more assertive.
But the last thing the US wants is a Cold War II in Asia.
Whatever the two sides’ competitive positions, Sino-American cooperation on issues like trade, financial stability, energy security, climate change, and pandemics will benefit both countries. The rest of the region stands to gain, too.
The Obama administration’s pivot towards Asia signals recognition of the region’s great potential, not a clarion call for containment.
A Man Without a Plan
NEW HAVEN – During the United States’ recent presidential election campaign, public-opinion polls consistently showed that the economy – and especially unemployment – was voters’ number one concern.
The Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, sought to capitalize on the issue, asserting: “The president’s plans haven’t worked – he doesn’t have a plan to get the economy going.”
Nonetheless, Barack Obama was reelected.
The outcome may reflect the economy’s slight improvement at election time (as happened when Franklin Roosevelt defeated the Republican Alf Landon in 1936, despite the continuing Great Depression).
But Obama’s victory might also be a testament to most US voters’ basic sense of economic reality.
Economic theory does not provide an unambiguous prescription for policymakers.
Professional opinion in macroeconomics is, as always, in disarray.
Because controlled experiments to test policy prescriptions are impossible, we will never have a definitive test of macroeconomic measures.
Romney had no miracle cure, either, but he attempted to tap into voters’ wishful-thinking bias, by promising to reduce the size of the government and cut marginal tax rates.
That would work if it were true that the best way to ensure economic recovery were to leave more money on the table for individuals.
But the electorate did not succumb to wishful thinking.
The idea that Obama lacks a plan is right in a sense: nothing he has proposed has been big enough to boost the US economy’s painfully slow recovery from the 2007-9 recession, nor to insulate it from shocks coming from Europe and from weakening growth in the rest of the world.
What Obama does have is a history of bringing in capable economic advisers.
Is there anything more, really, that one can ask of a president?
And yet US presidential campaigns generally neglect discussion of advisers or intellectual influences.
Although a president’s advisers may change, one would think that candidates would acknowledge them, if only to suggest where their own ideas come from; after all, realistically what they are selling is their ability to judge and manage expertise, not their own ability as economists.
This time, too, however, there was no mention by name of any deep economic thinker, or of any specific economic model.
Obama originally had a wonder team of economic advisers, including Lawrence Summers, Christina Romer, Austan Goolsbee, and Cass Sunstein.
But they are gone now.
Today, the most powerful economic adviser remaining in the White House is Gene Sperling, head of the National Economic Council (NEC), the agency created by President Bill Clinton in 1993 to serve as his main source of economic policy (somewhat shunting aside the Council of Economic Advisers).
Because this position does not require Congressional approval, the president may appoint whomever he wants, without having his choice raked over the coals in the US Senate.
That is why Obama could appoint the highly talented but politically unpopular Summers, the former president of Harvard University.
Sperling is not nearly so well known as Summers.
But his record of influence in government is striking; indeed, he has been at the pinnacle of economic-policymaking power in the US for almost a decade.
He was the NEC’s deputy director from its beginning in 1993 until 1996, and its director from 1996 to 2000.
Obama reappointed him as head of the NEC in January 2011.
His 2005 book The Pro-Growth Progressive contains many ideas about how to make the economy perform better.
None is grandiose, but together they might help substantially.
Some of these ideas found their way into the American Jobs Act, which might have had some real impact had Congress passed it in 2011.
The AJA embodied some of what Sperling describes in his book: subsidies for hiring, wage insurance, and job training, as well as support for education and early learning.
Moreover, the AJA would have offered some balanced-budget stimulus – the kind of stimulus that would boost the level of economic activity without increasing the volume of government debt.
But the public, despite its concern about unemployment, is not very interested in the details of concrete plans to create more jobs.
Sperling is just not very visible to the public.
His book was not a best seller: in commercial terms, it might be better described as a dud.
Sperling is fundamentally different from the typical academic economist, who tends to concentrate on advancing economic theory and statistics.
He concentrates on legislation – that is, practical things that might be accomplished to lift the economy.
He listens to academic economists, but is focused differently.
At one point in his book, Sperling jokes that maybe the US needs a third political party, called the “Humility Party.”
Its members would admit that there are no miraculous solutions to America’s economic problems, and they would focus on the “practical options” that are actually available to make things a little better.
In fact, Americans do not need a new political party: with Obama’s reelection, voters have endorsed precisely that credo of pragmatic idealism.
Looking Back on Barack
BASEL – Any assessment of Barack Obama’s eight-year US presidency should start at the beginning: his first inauguration, on January 20, 2009.
The US economy was in free-fall: financial markets had seized up, GDP was shrinking, and employment was plummeting, with some 800,000 jobs being lost each month. And two ill-conceived and badly executed foreign wars were underway.
In short, upon entering office, Obama confronted conditions more adverse than any incoming president had faced in many decades.
True, Franklin D. Roosevelt inherited the Great Depression and Abraham Lincoln took office as the Civil War erupted. But who else entered the White House facing both an economic and a national-security crisis?
To tackle the economic crisis, Obama launched a fiscal stimulus and rescue programs for the financial system and the auto industry – policies that complemented and reinforced the US Federal Reserve’s aggressive and innovative monetary easing.
Republicans nearly unanimously opposed the stimulus.
And almost everybody was critical of the rescue programs, urging Obama either to nationalize the banks and auto companies or let them collapse.
Against all odds, the Obama administration made the middle path work.
The recession ended in June 2009 – an achievement for which the administration did not get enough credit, despite the clarity of the turnaround.
In the last quarter of 2008, economic output had declined by an astonishing 8.2% per annum.
Yet, almost immediately after the stimulus program was implemented, the output decline and employment losses slowed sharply. The bottom came in June 2009, with output growth turning positive in the next quarter.
One reason was the depth and financial origins of the 2007-2008 crash.
Another was the efforts of the Republicans, who secured a majority in Congress in 2010, to block further stimulus, even though more infrastructure spending and well-designed tax cuts were precisely what the US economy needed in 2011-2014.
Republicans, it seems, support fiscal expansion only when they control the White House.
Obama managed two other major achievements before Republican obstructionism took hold: the Dodd-Frank financial reform bill and the Affordable Care Act (ACA, also known as “Obamacare”).
Despite Republicans’ subsequent steps to weaken Dodd-Frank and the ACA, both reforms did much more good than most people realize.
Dodd-Frank helped make a repeat of the 2007-2008 financial crisis less likely, and the ACA has given more than 20 million Americans access to health insurance while slowing the rise in overall health-care costs.
The two wars that Obama inherited were intractable. But he made the difficult decisions that led to the elimination of the instigator of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Osama bin Laden – a goal that his predecessor, George W. Bush, in his eagerness to invade Iraq, had lost interest in pursuing.
Moreover, in 2015, just as the press began labeling him a lame duck, Obama achieved a string of foreign-policy successes – namely, a much-needed nuclear agreement with Iran, normalization of relations with Cuba, and agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
He also helped to secure a global deal to fight climate change, particularly by first achieving a breakthrough with China.
President-elect Donald Trump, who takes over the presidency this month, faces far easier conditions than Obama.
Nevertheless, he has announced plans to reverse most, if not all, of Obama’s achievements.
The TPP, for example, is dead. And four years from now will probably be too late to revive it, because by then East Asian countries may have been drawn into a China-led trade grouping instead.
In some cases, however, Trump will run into obstacles in translating his crowd-pleasing sound bites into reality.
In repealing Obamacare, for example, Republicans are likely to be stymied by the absence of an alternative that does not take away the health insurance of 20 million Americans or raise health-care costs.
Given this, they may end up making only minor substantive changes to the ACA and then slapping a new name on it – the analog of building a “beautiful” quarter-mile wall along the Mexican border to serve as a backdrop for photo opportunities.
Trump’s promise to tear up the nuclear agreement with Iran is similarly out of touch with reality.
Without the participation of America’s allies, re-imposing sanctions will have little impact, beyond spurring Iran to restart and even accelerate its nuclear program.
That’s what North Korea did when Bush, upon taking office, essentially tore up the “agreed framework” with that country.
With Trump poised to make such imprudent decisions, will US voters hold him accountable?
Bush made serious economic- and foreign-policy mistakes during his presidency, beginning in its early years, with predictable consequences for the economy, the federal budget, and national security.
Although his poll numbers soared in his first term, they were far lower by the time he left office.
Conversely, Obama’s popularity sagged during much of his eight-year presidency.
Yet he leaves office with substantially higher approval ratings than most presidents achieve – and far higher than Trump’s.
The American public does, eventually, recognize the successes and failures of their leaders.
Unfortunately, it sometimes takes a while.
Obama versus Romney on Jobs
BERKELEY – The United States has just completed its third year of economic recovery, but the unemployment rate remains above 8%, and there are worrisome signs of a slowdown.
So it is no surprise that jobs have become a major focus in the presidential campaign – or that the candidates have very different ideas about how to boost employment.
Last autumn, President Barack Obama proposed the American Jobs Act, a $450 billion package of fiscal measures aimed at job creation.
The AJA amounted to about 3% of GDP and was designed to take effect in 2012, providing a timely employment boost and insurance for the US recovery against global headwinds.
Most of its measures had enjoyed bipartisan support in the past; tax cuts comprised about 56% of the total cost; and the package was paid for in Obama’s long-term deficit reduction plan.
Several independent economists concluded that Obama’s plan would provide a significant lift to the job market in 2012-2013.
Indeed, two of the nation’s most respected forecasters predicted that the AJA would add 1.3-1.9 million jobs in 2012 and more than two million jobs by the end of 2013.
The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) also found that most of the AJA’s policies ranked high in budgetary effectiveness, measured by the number of jobs created in 2012-2013 per dollar of budgetary cost.
The AJA was filibustered by Senate Republicans, and the Republican-controlled House of Representatives likewise prevented the bill from coming to a vote.
Mitt Romney, now the Republican presidential candidate, attacked the plan as “mere stimulus” that would “throw a cup of gasoline on the embers” of the recovery.
Ultimately, Obama, bolstered by polls endorsing his plan, won partial passage of two AJA policies: a one-third cut in employees’ payroll taxes (he had proposed one-half), and an extension of unemployment benefits by about 60% of what he had recommended.
But Congress failed to approve a 50% cut in employers’ payroll taxes – a business tax cut that many Republicans favored in the past and that ranks high on budgetary effectiveness.
Nor did Congress approve $30 billion in federal grants to states to enable them to employ about 135,000 teachers, police, and firemen, despite strong voter support.
Such grants between 2009 and 2011, totaling $130 billion, helped states to maintain vital services and retain the public employees providing them.
Romney opposes more federal money for the states, arguing that “it is time to cut back on government and help the American people.”
But teachers, firemen, and police are American people who help other American people.
Government employment is falling at the fastest rate since the 1940’s, and is now at its 2006 level.
If public employment had grown during the last three years at about the same rate as the population, as it did during George W. Bush’s presidency, the unemployment rate would be around 7% rather than 8.2%, owing to about 800,000 additional jobs.
Likewise, Congress failed to approve Obama’s call for $90 billion in additional infrastructure spending, which would have supported about 400,000 jobs, despite the fact that the US has at least $1.1 trillion in unfunded infrastructure needs.
Moreover, infrastructure investment not only creates jobs in the near term, but also promotes long-term competitiveness.
Altogether, Congress left at least one million jobs on the negotiating table, holding unemployed workers hostage to the outcome of November’s election.
Meanwhile, in response to persistent media pressure, Romney has unveiled his policies to boost short-term job creation.
They are not convincing.
Romney says that he would ensure that the US puts more people to work in the energy sector.
But, while the oil and gas industry has grown significantly since 2007, it employs fewer than 200,000 people, implying a negligible effect even if employment in this sector doubled in the short run.
And, while Romney says that he would open new foreign markets, Obama has been doing just that, winning passage of three major trade agreements and increasing federal support for US exports, which have been growing nearly twice as fast as they did during the recovery from the 2001 recession.
Moreover, Romney’s promise to charge China, America’s third-largest export market, with currency manipulation, and to impose large tariffs on Chinese imports, would almost certainly invite retaliation, causing a decline in US exports and jobs.
Romney would also repeal “Obamacare” – the 2010 health-care reform legislation – because it “is scaring small business from hiring.”
But the evidence for this claim is meager and anecdotal. &nbsp;A recent survey found that most small businesses support the reform.
Most businesses, large and small, cite insufficient demand as the primary reason they are not hiring.
Nor is Romney’s promise to enact immediate cuts in federal discretionary spending by an additional 5% likely to boost job growth, as he asserts.
When an economy is suffering from high unemployment and weak aggregate demand, spending cuts are contractionary.
Romney conceded this point recently, acknowledging that the “fiscal cliff” – the expiration of Bush-era tax cuts at the end of this year, combined with large spending cuts already scheduled to take effect – would push the economy back into recession.
Finally, in addition to extending Bush’s tax cuts, Romney promises an across-the-board 20% reduction in marginal personal-income-tax rates and a significant cut in the corporate rate to encourage businesses to hire more workers.
Despite large cuts in marginal income-tax rates at the start of the Bush administration, however, job growth between 2000 and 2007 was half the rate of the previous three decades.
Even if Romney’s new tax cuts strengthened investment and growth in the long run (a debatable proposition that depends on how they are financed), their short-term effect on job creation would be minimal, and they would entail a significant loss of revenue.
Indeed, these cuts perform poorly on the CBO’s measure of budgetary effectiveness.
Obama’s proposals to boost job creation are convincing, whereas Romney’s proposals would have little or no effect – and some could even make matters worse.
Voters need to know the difference.&nbsp;
Transatlantic Trade’s Transformative Potential
NEWPORT BEACH – After instant and seemingly coordinated fanfare in Europe and the United States, the proposal for a European Union-US free-trade area has been generating little media attention.
There are three reasons for this, and all three highlight broader constraints on good national economic policymaking and productive cross-border coordination.
In his “State of the Union” address in February, US President Barack Obama proposed a “comprehensive Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership” with Europe based on trade that is “fair and free.”
His administration regards this as part of a comprehensive approach to generating “good-paying American jobs.”
Obama’s bold proposal received an immediate and enthusiastic reception in Europe.
Taking to the airwaves within hours, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso and European Council President Herman Van Rompuy called the proposal “ground-breaking.”
Arguing that it could increase Europe’s annual economic growth rate by half a percentage point, they declared that formal negotiations would start quickly.
At first, there was quite a bit of general interest, and understandably so.
The proposal involves the world’s two largest economic areas, with national, regional, and global implications.
Yet, despite the realization that an agreement could fundamentally alter the nature of global trade and production networks, it only took a few weeks for interest to drop off.
One reason is rooted in initial conditions that limit direct gains from increased trade while widening the scope for tension and conflict.
Free-trade agreements that promise the greatest benefits are those that link economies characterized by high tariffs, low levels of trade, and little overlap in consumption and production patterns.
This is not the case for the EU and the US.
Average tariff levels are only 3%.
The EU already accounts for almost 20% of US imports, and the US for 11% of EU imports.
And, given similar per capita income levels and cultural orientations, overlaps in production and consumption are considerable.
Having said this, there would be immediate upside potential, owing to better resource allocation, more harmonized investment regimes, stronger standards, and the elimination of outdated non-tariff and regulatory barriers.
Aerospace, auto manufacturing, biotechnology, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals are among the sectors that stand to gain.
There is also the potential for reforming inefficient approaches to food and agriculture, particularly in Europe.
The second reason for waning attention to the proposed partnership speaks to a broader issue: A seemingly endless stream of short-term political dramas has made it extremely difficult for both Europe and the US to focus for long on any secular and structural initiative.
In Europe, broad-based discussion was undermined by the outcome of the Italian election – just the latest sign of how frustrated citizens in a growing number of countries are rejecting conventional political parties and the political status quo.
With that, it becomes more difficult to pursue longer-term policy objectives, which merely adds further uncertainty about the precise path of European economic and financial integration.
In the US, the disruption took the form of yet another fiscal mini-drama.
With a dysfunctional Congress again letting down the American people, the country is now on the receiving end of a budgetary sequester – another self-manufactured headwind to economic growth, job creation, and progress on reducing income and wealth inequalities.
Put the two together and you get a barrier to EU-US trade negotiations – one that renders ambitious (though not entirely unrealistic) the two-year timeline that has been set for completing the deal.
The third reason concerns the poor state of global policy dialogue, notwithstanding all the happy talk about global challenges and shared responsibilities.
Last month’s G-20 meeting ended up as yet another expensive summit lacking sufficient content and follow through.
Rather than catalyzing constructive policy coordination, it has inadvertently encouraged complacency.
All three reasons are highly regrettable.
They underscore the West’s seeming inability to break out of a short-term mindset in order to respond to the risks and opportunities related to historic national and global re-alignments.
The real promise of freer transatlantic trade consists in its potential to transform global trade, production networks, and multilateral organizations to the benefit of all.
At the most general level, it would act to rationalize the current system of four poorly functioning blocs – centered on China, Europe, the US, and the rest – to three, and eventually (and perhaps quite quickly) to two better-functioning blocs that would have little choice but to work well together: one dominated by China, and the other by the EU/US.
Such a global structure has the potential to encourage better medium-term alignments to reduce trade barriers, set proper standards, and enhance mutually beneficial cooperation.
It would facilitate coordination on stronger global rules and principles, including those pertaining to intellectual-property rights and trade in services.
And it would force multilateral organizations to reform if they wish to retain even the limited relevance that they have now.
The proposal for freer transatlantic trade is potentially transformational.
It comes at a time when the West is increasingly being dragged down by short-term disruptions and continued policy inertia.
Yet the implementation prospects are far from promising.
The proposal has the capacity to act as a catalyst for adapting policy approaches to current realities; but it is subject to the dulling forces of twentieth-century mindsets and institutions that are too slow to adapt to twenty-first-century challenges and opportunities.
Occupy the Classroom?
CAMBRIDGE – Early last month, a group of students staged a walkout in Harvard’s popular introductory economics course, Economics 10, taught by my colleague Greg Mankiw.
Their complaint: the course propagates conservative ideology in the guise of economic science and helps perpetuate social inequality.
The students were part of a growing chorus of protest against modern economics as it is taught in the world’s leading academic institutions.
Economics has always had its critics, of course, but the financial crisis and its aftermath have given them fresh ammunition, seeming to validate long-standing charges against the profession’s unrealistic assumptions, reification of markets, and disregard for social concerns.
Mankiw, for his part, found the protesting students “poorly informed.”
Economics does not have an ideology, he retorted.
Quoting John Maynard Keynes, he pointed out that economics is a method that helps people to think straight and reach the correct answers, with no foreordained policy conclusions.
Indeed, though you may be excused for skepticism if you have not immersed yourself in years of advanced study in economics, coursework in a typical economics doctoral program produces a bewildering variety of policy prescriptions depending on the specific context.
Some of the frameworks economists use to analyze the world favor free markets, while others don’t.
In fact, much economic research is devoted to understanding how government intervention can improve economic performance.
And non-economic motives and socially cooperative behavior are increasingly part of what economists study.
As the late great international economist Carlos Diaz-Alejandro once put it, “by now any bright graduate student, by choosing his assumptions….carefully, can produce a consistent model yielding just about any policy recommendation he favored at the start.”
And that was in the 1970’s!
An apprentice economist no longer needs to be particularly bright to produce unorthodox policy conclusions.
Nevertheless, economists get stuck with the charge of being narrowly ideological, because they are their own worst enemy when it comes to applying their theories to the real world.
Instead of communicating the full panoply of perspectives that their discipline offers, they display excessive confidence in particular remedies – often those that best accord with their own personal ideologies.
Consider the global financial crisis.
Macroeconomics and finance did not lack the tools needed to understand how the crisis arose and unfolded.
Indeed, the academic literature was chock-full of models of financial bubbles, asymmetric information, incentive distortions, self-fulfilling crises, and systemic risk.
But, in the years leading up to the crisis, many economists downplayed these models’ lessons in favor of models of efficient and self-correcting markets, which, in policy terms, resulted in inadequate governmental oversight over financial markets.
In my book The Globalization Paradox, I contemplate the following thought experiment.
Let a journalist call an economics professor for his view on whether free trade with country X or Y is a good idea.
We can be fairly certain that the economist, like the vast majority of the profession, will be enthusiastic in his support of free trade.
Now let the reporter go undercover as a student in the professor’s advanced graduate seminar on international trade theory. Let him pose the same question: Is free trade good?
I doubt that the answer will come as quickly and be as succinct this time around.
In fact, the professor is likely to be stymied by the question.
“What do you mean by ‘good?’” he will ask.
“And good for whom?”&#160;
The professor would then launch into a long and tortured exegesis that will ultimately culminate in a heavily hedged statement: “So if the long list of conditions I have just described are satisfied, and assuming we can tax the beneficiaries to compensate the losers, freer trade has the potential to increase everyone’s well-being.”
If he were in an expansive mood, the professor might add that the effect of free trade on an economy’s growth rate is not clear, either, and depends on an altogether different set of requirements.
A direct, unqualified assertion about the benefits of free trade has now been transformed into a statement adorned by all kinds of ifs and buts.
Oddly, the knowledge that the professor willingly imparts with great pride to his advanced students is deemed to be inappropriate (or dangerous) for the general public.&#160;
Economics instruction at the undergraduate level suffers from the same problem.
In our zeal to display the profession’s crown jewels in untarnished form – market efficiency, the invisible hand, comparative advantage – we skip over the real-world complications and nuances, well recognized as they are in the discipline.
It is as if introductory physics courses assumed a world without gravity, because everything becomes so much simpler that way.
Applied appropriately and with a healthy dose of common sense, economics would have prepared us for the financial crisis and pointed us in the right direction to fix what caused it.
But the economics we need is of the “seminar room” variety, not the “rule-of-thumb” kind.
It is an economics that recognizes its limitations and knows that the right message depends on the context.
Downplaying the diversity of intellectual frameworks within their own discipline does not make economists better analysts of the real world.
Nor does it make them more popular.
Occupy the Government
NEW YORK – Too much of the talk nowadays about how social media has affected politics focuses on awareness: People adopt social media, discover they are not alone, start to protest, and eventually their “Facebook revolution” overwhelms those in power.
But, even if such a revolution succeeds, that is only the beginning.
What happens next?
As an angel investor in start-up companies and a sometime philanthropist, I have the luxury of traveling the world and talking with articulate people who give me an unofficial, clear-eyed view of how most countries actually work.
It is a depressing picture.
I have been to roughly 70 countries, and have discovered roughly 70 different ways to run things badly.
Many of these countries have elections; but, as has been said of Russia, while the candidates may surprise, the outcome is predictable.
Often a single individual or a small group has almost absolute power.
Seemingly independent businesses are mostly beholden to government supporters, who typically take a cut of the proceeds.
Even in real democracies, where people vote freely, things are going badly, as in Greece.
Elsewhere, as in Egypt, democratization incites further protests, or even violence.
Yes, things seem to be improving in Burma, and Zimbabwe appears quiet; but Hungary – and, more recently, South Africa – has enacted laws to suppress information that might prove damaging not to government in general, but to those in power.
Riots and protests are erupting around the world.
In the United States and elsewhere, elected governments used to take care of the people, but now, like companies colluding against their customers to keep out disruptive newcomers, they have become a separate interest group.
Political parties exchange benefits and ignore those who elected them.
The power to tax, for example, is often used more to employ civil servants or workers in favored companies than to provide services the people want.
Lacking competition, inefficient bureaucracies focus more on maintaining jobs than on serving putative customers.
One part of the problem is how money stacks the deck, not just for dictatorships that wield de facto control over the economy, but also in democratic countries, where business is free to use its resources to “influence” government.
Political parties claim to embody ideas and worldviews, but in many ways they are simply self-perpetuating money machines.
Recent rebellions worldwide show that some citizens recognize that they are being offered false choices, often no more meaningful than the choice between brands of toothpaste.
Social networking has given them new tools of protest to topple governments, but what is also needed are new ways to make government operate effectively and accountably.
I don't know what should be done, but I am supporting one effort, called Americans Elect, to push for radical change in the US. Perhaps it can be a model elsewhere.
The group’s first task is simply to win the right to put a candidate on the ballot in all 50 US states to run against the conventional slate of one Democrat and one Republican.
That has not been easy, and the fight continues state by state.
Rules and regulations in most states protect the two parties that have held sway in US politics for more than a century.
It turns out that most state bureaucracies, theoretically accountable to the public, in fact are accountable to the parties, and do everything they can to keep Americans Elect from claiming its right to a spot on the ballot next fall.
Many commentators claim that Americans Elect will simply take votes from the incumbents but have no lasting impact.
But I am hoping that widespread frustration will leverage the group’s ability to to encourage a genuine shift towards a new approach.
Americans Elect will use a long series of competitions and online and offline convocations to select a candidate who will be beholden to millions of people at large, rather than to a smaller group of big donors whose interests the candidate must serve.
Its plan is cunning: the original funders are being asked for loans, not donations; that way, they will have no further claim on Americans Elect after they are repaid. (Obviously, they will be a natural source of money for the next round, so the group has to become self-sustaining on the basis of small donations, or it will become beholden as well.)
That money is supposed to go toward reaching a broad public who will respond via the Internet, making small donations and joining in a national effort to suggest and choose a third candidate for president.
This candidate will not try to divide and polarize the country, but rather will unite it around common-sense approaches to fiscal policy, education, health care, and other long-term issues.
In the end, people do not want to be sold the same old toothpaste when what they really need is serious dental work.
Americans Elect is not the only organization with this vision, but it is the only one with the necessary scale.
I recently saw a presentation by a company called 5ivePoints, which helps people running campaigns, often volunteers, reach out to their Facebook, Twitter, Google+, and other friends.
Of course, 5ivePoints will be going after the established parties as customers, but my hope is that groups like Americans Elect, and eventually protesters in other countries, will start to use it (or something similar).
If the point is to replace our current governments with more accountable models, we need to use new online tools not only to throw out the old, but also to bring in the new.
Occupy the Mortgage Lenders
WASHINGTON, DC – Participants in the Occupy Wall Street movement are right to argue that the big banks have never properly been investigated for the mortgage origination, aggregation, and securitization behavior that was central to the financial crisis – and to the loss of more than eight million jobs.
But, thanks to the efforts of New York’s attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, and others, serious discussion has started in the United States about an out-of court mortgage settlement between state attorney generals and prominent financial-sector firms.
Talks among state officials, the Obama administration, and the banks are currently focused on reported abuses in servicing mortgages, foreclosing on homes, and evicting their residents.
But leading banks are also accused of illegal behavior – inducing people to borrow, for example, by deceiving them about the interest rate that would actually be paid, while misrepresenting the resulting mortgage-backed securities to investors.
If these charges are true, the bank executives involved may fear that civil lawsuits would uncover evidence that could be used in criminal prosecutions.
In that case, their interest would naturally lie in seeking – as they now are – to keep that evidence from ever seeing the inside of a courtroom.
The scale and structure of any out-of-court mortgage settlement should address the damage inflicted by the alleged pattern of behavior.
Many Americans now have too much debt.
About 10 million mortgages are estimated to be “underwater” (the house is worth less than the loan).
And, in key markets around the US, four years into the housing slump, home prices continue to fall.
If these were commercial loans, creditors would consider restructuring them – extending the payment schedule and typically writing down principal.
But, in America’s home mortgage market, this is much less common.
Banks want neither millions of negotiations nor, most importantly, the need to face the losses implied on their loan portfolio.
As a result, households want to spend less and pay down their debts.
To some extent, this is the natural aftermath of any credit boom.
And household deleveraging in the US will take a long time.
Policymakers can respond in three ways.
First, they could do nothing – apparently the preference of the Republican congressional leadership, which recently wrote to Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke to demand that he not try to stimulate the economy further.
Second, they could continue to rely on conventional monetary and fiscal policy to pull the economy out of the doldrums.
This is the approach still preferred by the Obama administration, despite its poor performance.
Third, we could adopt an alternative approach that directly reduces the value of underwater mortgages.
At this point, any improvement in consumer balance sheets would directly stimulate the economy and create jobs.
Start with the proposal made by Martin Feldstein, who recommends a trade: the government should reduce the value of mortgages when they are sufficiently underwater, with the government and the banks splitting the losses; in exchange, the borrower must agree that the new loan becomes “full recourse.”
That means that lenders could pursue borrowers’ other assets – not just the house – in case of default.
The key to this proposal is that banks must agree; it is a voluntary debt restructuring, compelled by no legal authority.
In principle, banks should be attracted to the proposal, because restructured loans are less likely to default.
In practice, the banks have consistently dragged their feet on mortgage restructuring – and are laying off staff, rather than hiring people who could help them deal with an initiative of the required scale.
Feldstein calculates that the one-time cost of principal reduction would be around $350 billion.
Of course, in our current fiscal environment, it will be hard to find additional resources from the budget.
But $350 billion is roughly what the financial sector as a whole earned in an average quarter during the credit boom – and profit levels in recent quarters have reached or exceeded those levels.
So, if the entire write-down cost were covered by banks, most of them would lose the equivalent of no more than one year’s profits – spread over several years.
Those boom-time profits were in any case overstated, because they were not adjusted for risk.
And when the downside risks materialized, the losses were largely socialized – the primary reason why US public debt has soared in recent years.
Asking shareholders and management to pay a relatively small amount is entirely fair and appropriate under these circumstances.
Some in the financial sector would, of course, threaten dire consequences.
In fact, bank stock prices might drop, and it is entirely possible that compensation and bonuses would be curtailed, at least in the short term.
On the other hand, a large-scale settlement that legitimately and finally removed the threat of future legal action would lift an enormous cloud that hangs over some of the largest lenders, including Bank of America, and creates significant risks for the rest of the financial system.
If the banks were ever really held accountable for the social costs of their behavior, the bill would far exceed $300-400 billion.
Realistically assessed, the full downside legal risks to financial institutions are in excess of $1 trillion – particularly if it can be demonstrated that the “mortgage-backed securities” sold to investors were not backed by mortgages at all, because the proper legal paperwork was never done.
Any settlement should also include the banks’ explicit agreement that they will support modifying America’s bankruptcy law to enable inclusion of mortgages in the usual court-run processes.
If the Occupy Wall Street movement tells us anything, it is that the last thing the US economy needs is more households overwhelmed by debt.
Satu Bumi, Satu Samudera
NEW YORK – Samudera dan atmosfir terhubung dalam cara yang baru sedikit kita pahami.
Layaknya saudara kandung, langit yang berada di atas serta air di sekitar kita memiliki banyak karakteristik yang sama – khususnya yang relevan akhir-akhir ini adalah perlunya perlindungan atas keduanya.
Kita semua bersaudara dan berupaya mewujudkan agenda bersama untuk melindungi samudera dan atmosfir – suatu agenda yang menentukan masa depan bagi jutaan saudara kita, ayah, ibu, teman, dan tetangga serta seluruh life-form yang ada di daratan dan lautan, bagi generasi sekarang dan masa depan.
Patut disyukuri bahwa kini pemerintah negara-negara di dunia mulai paham akan tantangan yang ada dan diharapkan mampu mencapai – atau setidaknya mengalami kemajuan – penetapan dua perjanjian penting di tahun ini: traktat internasional baru mengenai perlindungan kehidupan laut di perairan internasional dan kesepakatan tentang perubahan iklim untuk melindungi atmosfir.
Selaras dengan serangkaian Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals), perjanjian-perjanjian tersebut akan menjadi rambu-rambu yang mengarahkan jalur yang harus diikuti perekonomian negara-negara dunia selama 15 tahun ke depan dan seterusnya.
Rumusan perjanjian-perjanjian ini muncul di tengah-tengah upaya luar biasa yang dilakukan negara, pemerintah daerah, perusahaan, dan penduduk  demi melindungi iklim dan lautan.
Investasi pada energi terbarukan berjalan dengan sangat baik dan bahkan melebihi $250 miliar per tahun dan banyak negara mengeluarkan dana lebih besar untuk menghasilkan energi dari sumber-sumber energi hijau dibandingkan dengan bahan bakar fosil.
Sebagai contoh, negara asal kami, Kosta Rika, kini menghasilkan 80% energinya dari sumber-sumber energi terbarukan.
Di Tiongkok energi terbarukan berkembang pesat dan penggunaan batubara berkurang 2.9% secara year on year pada tahun 2014.
Sementara itu di daratan, pentingnya perlindungan terhadap kawasan konservasi laut dan penangkapan ikan secara berkelanjutan sudah diakui dan bahkan di beberapa tempat upaya perlindungan sudah dilengkapi dengan terobosan teknologi yang mampu menguatkan kemampuan petugas untuk mengawasi dan melacak penangkapan ikan tidak sah.
Para ilmuwan yang mempelajari perubahan iklim sudah menunjukkan cara mengatasi permasalahan ini dengan menerapkan arahan yang jelas serta target pencapaian yang progresif.
Kita harus menjadikan emisi global mencapai titik puncaknya dalam waktu satu dekade ke depan, setelah itu menurunkannya secara cepat dan mewujudkan keseimbangan antara emisi dan kapasitas serapan alami planet bumi pada pertengahan abad.
Samudera secara historis memainkan peran penting dalam mewujudkan keseimbangan tersebut.
Sebagai carbon sinks alami, lautan mampu menyerap sekitar 25% dari keseluruhan karbon dioksida yang dihasilkan dari aktivitas manusia setiap tahunnya.
Namun kita terlalu memaksakan hingga melampaui kapasitas serapan yang ada.
Karbon yang larut dalam laut mengubah struktur kimia sehingga menaikkan keasaman sebesar 30% dibandingkan dengan awal masa Revolusi Industri.
Laju perubahan ini, sejauh yang kita pahami, terjadi jauh lebih cepat dibandingkan perubahan selama 65 juta tahun terakhir dan bahkan selama 300 juta tahun terakhir.
Jika emisi karbon dioksida tidak mampu dikendalikan, maka tingkat pengasamanan akan terus bertambah dan berdampak fatal bagi spesies laut.
Sebagai akibat dari masuknya karbon dioksida di atmosfir ke dalam perairan dan membuat lautan bergejolak, hal ini mengurangi jumlah ion-ion karbonat yang diperlukan bagi tumbuhan dan satwa di laut untuk membuat tempurung dan tulang rangka mereka.
Jika tingkat karbon dioksida terus bertambah sesuai laju sekarang maka para ilmuwan memperkirakan bahwa 10% perairan di Samudera Arktik akan bersifat korosif sehingga dapat menghancurkan tempurung spesies laut pada tahun 2018.
Banyak wilayah perairan lain mungkin bernasib sama.
Perjanjian internasional akan berhasil jika trend politik, ekonomi, dan sosial yang ada sekarang dapat selaras dan mampu membangkitkan visi baru tentang masa depan dan hubungan baru antar kemanusiaan dan planet yang kita huni.
Upaya mewujudkan visi akan melibatkan beberapa generasi.
Samudera dan iklim keduanya membutuhkan rencana dengan cakupan global, rencana yang dapat dipercaya, dapat diukur dan dapat diterapkan guna mencapai perlindungan.
Kawasan konservasi laut yang saat ini mendapat perlindungan penuh namun masih tersebar perlu diperluas dari cakupan perlindungan yang ada pada 1% wilayah perairan agar mampu membentuk jaringan global yang sesungguhnya.
Bulan lalu, 13 kepala negara dan pemerintah dari negara-negara di kawasaan Karibia menyerukan perumusan perjanjian internasional yang efektif dan mengakui dampak terkini dan masa mendatang.
Kondisi  ini sangat mengkhawatirkan: bertambahnya frekuensi kejadian ekstrim, curah hujan yang tinggi dan berubah-ubah, tingginya pengasaman dan pemanasan laut, pemutihan terumbu karang, naiknya permukaan laut, erosi pantai, salinitas pada akuifer, tingginya laju penyebaran penyakit menular baru, berkurangnya produktivitas pertanian, dan gangguan pada tradisi penangkapan ikan.”
Ancaman-ancaman tersebut menjadi buktinya adanya kebutuhan mendesak untuk memperluas aturan-aturan internasional tentang konservasi dan pengelolaan iklim dan kehidupan laut yang berkelanjutan.
Perjanjian tentang perubahan iklim yang diharapkan dapat ditetapkan di Paris bulan Desember ini tidak akan menyelesaikan permasalahan dengan seketika, sama halnya dengan perjanjian apapun jika menjadi satu-satunya instrumen perlindungan  tidak akan mampu mewujudkan kondisi laut yang lebih baik.
Namun sangat penting bagi kita untuk menetapkan arah kebijakan yang diperlukan guna memastikan semua negara akan berperan dalam upaya perlindungan planet bumi, sembari membantu negara atau populasi yang rentan untuk beradaptasi terhadap dampak-dampak degradasi lingkungan hidup yang sedang berlangsung.
Britain’s Gas Chance
PRAGUE – In late June, the British Geological Survey announced the world’s largest shale-gas field.
The Bowland Shale, which lies beneath Lancashire and Yorkshire, contains 50% more gas than the combined reserves of two of the largest fields in the United States, the Barnett Shale and the Marcellus Shale.
The United Kingdom has been reluctant to join the hydraulic-fracturing (or fracking) revolution.
Yet tapping the Bowland Shale could reignite the UK economy and deliver huge cuts in CO2 emissions.
At the same time, the UK Parliament has approved stringent new measures to reduce carbon emissions by 2020, with the biggest CO2 cuts by far to come from an increase of more than 800% in offshore wind power over the next seven years.
But offshore wind power is so expensive that it will receive at least three times the traded cost of regular electricity in subsidies – more than even solar power, which was never at an advantage in the UK.
For minimal CO2 reduction, the UK economy will pay dearly.
This is just one example of current climate policy’s utter remove from reality – and not just in the UK.
We are focusing on insignificant – but very costly – green policies that make us feel good, while ignoring or actively discouraging policies that would dramatically reduce emissions and make economic sense.
Consider the three standard arguments for a green economy: climate change, energy security, and jobs.
As it turns out, fracking does better on all three.
Assuming complete success for the UK’s scheme, offshore wind power could produce more than 10% of the country’s electricity in 2020 and reduce its CO2 emissions by up to 22Mt, or 5%, per year.
But the cost would also be phenomenal.
The UK would pay at least $8 billion annually in subsidies to support this inherently inefficient technology.
Compare this to the opportunity of the Bowland Shale.
If, by 2020, the UK could exploit its reserves there at just one-third the intensity of the exploitation of the Barnett and Marcellus Shales today, the outcome would be phenomenal.
Natural gas is much more environmentally friendly than coal, which continues to be the mainstay of electricity production around the world and in the UK.
Gas emits less than half the CO2 per kWh produced, and it emits much lower amounts of other pollutants like NOx, SO2, black carbon, CO, mercury, and particulates.
If the UK sold its shale gas both domestically and abroad to replace coal, it could reduce local air pollution significantly and reduce global carbon emissions by 170Mt, or more than a third of UK carbon emissions.
At the same time, instead of costing $8 billion per year, shale-gas production would add about $10 billion per year to the UK economy.
Likewise, it is often argued that the green economy will increase energy security, as green resources will leave countries less dependent on fossil-fuel imports.
But even much higher supplies of wind power would improve security only marginally, because the UK would still have to import just as much oil (wind replaces mostly coal, rarely oil) and much of its gas, leaving it dependent on Russia.
For countries closer to Russia’s sphere of influence, like Poland and Ukraine, this dependence becomes palpable.
And yet the UK could improve its energy security dramatically, because it has enough gas reserves to cover roughly the entirety of its gas consumption for a half-century or more.
Moreover, increased UK production would lower world prices, making countries with fewer or no shale-gas resources safer.
And, of course, any country that is $10 billion richer, rather than $8 billion poorer, will have a better chance to handle future problems.
Finally, green-economy advocates promise a surfeit of green jobs.
But economic research convincingly shows that while subsidies can buy extra jobs, they eventually have to be financed with increased taxes, costing an equal number of jobs elsewhere.
In comparison, shale gas in the US has created an estimated 600,000 jobs that are generating about $100 billion in added GDP and almost $20 billion in public revenue.
Current global climate policy is unsustainable; the UK’s commitment to boosting offshore wind power is only the latest example.
Distressed economies cannot afford to pay more than $350 to avoid each ton of CO2, which could be cut on the European market for about 50 times less.
Shale gas could cut the cost of reducing CO2 seven times more while actually helping Europe’s ailing economy.
Though it is not the ultimate solution, shale gas is greener.
With good regulation, during the coming decade it can do the most good worldwide in terms of cutting CO2 emissions and improving living conditions.
Mindless subsidies that we cannot afford will not create a green economy; what will is investment in research and development to bring down costs, so that green energy eventually can outcompete gas.
Off With Their Heads.
WASHINGTON, DC – At last the Obama administration seems to be contemplating a decisive move against America’s banking elite. Following the recent electoral setback in Massachusetts the proposals laid down by former Federal Reserve chairman, Paul Volcker, to reduce the market power of the banks, are being dusted off.
Until now it has been a very different story – essentially a victory for the big bankers since spring 2009, when some of the healthier ones were allowed to start paying back any funds they had drawn from the US treasury’s Troubled Asset Relief Program.
That, in turn, allowed them to escape even the very weak special conditions that had been laid down by the government relating to bonuses and remuneration.
At the critical moment of crisis and rescue – from September 2008 to early 2009 – the Bush and Obama administrations blinked.
There was no serious thought of deposing the bankers, who had helped to cause the crisis, or of breaking up their banks.
Ordinarily, if an industry plunges into crisis, you expect a serious shake-up. Even if there was some bad luck mixed in with manifest incompetence, the presumption generally is: if your company requires a government rescue, top management needs to be replaced.
The US treasury has for many years consistently advocated such principles – both directly and through its influence with the IMF – when other countries have got into trouble.
But in the case of the US banking industry, nothing, at least until now, has happened at all. Most of the pre-crisis executives in big banks have remained in place, and very little has changed in terms of risk-control practices, or remuneration.
Why was the administration so conservative?
Fear of a complete collapse of the banking system must have played some role – along with an unhealthy degree of intermingling between the political and financial elite, which meant that there was real affection for firms such as Goldman Sachs and Citigroup at the top of government.
In any case, the window of opportunity appeared to have been missed.
This encourages excessive risk and threatens repeated cycles of boom-bust-bailout. Indeed, Andrew Haldane, head of financial stability at the Bank of England, calls this our “doom loop.”