The coming years or even months are likely to see new forms of these domino effects.
As in 1848, the struggle for affordable food is producing discontent that transcends national frontiers, threatens established regimes, and fuels popular demand for a more just political order.
Food for Thought in North Korea
DENVER – Meet any Korean of a certain age, and you will learn about barley season, which begins in February and stretches through the cold months of early spring until the first of the winter barley crop is harvested.
Few South Koreans remember those straitened months anymore, but for North Koreans, hunger in the countryside during this time of year is very real.
In past years, South Korea has been the primary external source of food, through either direct food assistance (for the immediate problem) or deliveries of fertilizer.
But this year, with rising impatience and anger in South Korea toward the North Korean regime, the food and fertilizer is in doubt.
And some analysts in Seoul believe that a dicey political succession in Pyongyang, combined with food shortages in the countryside, could prove too much for the North Korean regime to handle.
The past 12 months have seen some of the most outrageous North Korean behavior in decades.
In March 2010, a North Korean submarine torpedoed a South Korean ship on the high seas, killing 46 sailors – and sinking any prospect of an early resumption of negotiations to implement the North Korea’s 2005 commitment to eliminate all its nuclear programs.
North Korean invective and provocation against the South continued, and in November its military shelled a South Korean-held island along the northern limit line, which has served as the North-South border since the 1953 armistice.
More recently, the regime proudly unveiled a modern, high-tech uranium-enrichment facility.
According to the American scientist who was invited to see it, the facility, in contrast to the regime’s aging plutonium technology, appeared to be state-of-the-art, thus reinforcing the suspicion that North Korea has no genuine interest whatsoever in fulfilling its nuclear-disarmament responsibilities.
When asked why they failed to include this facility in their declaration of nuclear programs, North Korean officials responded cheerfully – and absurdly – that it had been built from scratch only after the collapse of the nuclear negotiations in 2008.
The North Koreans lied in writing not only to the United States, which it has done repeatedly in the past, but also to China, Russia, Japan, and South Korea.
The Chinese have urged the US and others to restart the nuclear talks, but they know that it is North Korean perfidy that has jeopardized the process.
Meanwhile, in the stark North Korean countryside, the regime has invested almost nothing.
Unmanaged rivers regularly overflow their banks and inundate villages during typhoon season, much as they did a thousand years ago.
Irrigation systems remain crude and inadequate to confronting the vicissitudes of rainfall on the often parched and barren Korean peninsula.
This neglect has left North Koreans perpetually on the edge of survival – and often with their palms extended to the international community, especially the South.
For South Koreans, whether to care for hungry North Koreans, who are kith and kin, will be a much tougher decision than for others who see only a distant security problem.
Many North Koreans are already malnourished, their body weight and height substantially lower than that of South Koreans.
According to non-government groups and other humanitarian workers, many North Korean children are showing signs of mental impairment as the lack of essential vitamins takes its toll.
South Koreans increasingly are coming to believe that North Korea will not be in the family of nations for long –&nbsp;that sooner or later (perhaps even in this decade), the North will collapse and its malnourished people will become future citizens of a reunified Republic of Korea.
For this reason, the issues facing South Korean public opinion as it decides whether to help with food assistance are not easy; indeed, they could be quite wrenching.
The division of the Korean Peninsula 65 years ago was one of the greatest – and now most enduring – tragedies of the Second World War.
No one dreamed that a line drawn on the 38th parallel for the tactical purpose of organizing the surrender of Japanese units to Soviet and American forces would become a scar across the Korean peninsula that would create two separate states.
But it did, and, in the wake of the Korean War, that line would become – and remain – one of the most heavily fortified borders on earth.
The Korean people have a historical right to determine their peninsula’s future arrangements, including unification should they so choose.
How this increasingly likely process unfolds will have enormous political and security consequences for the region.
Will China accept a unified peninsula under a US ally?
Will the US take measures to reassure China?
How would a unified Korea affect attitudes in Japan?
But the real decisions – and their consequences – will fall on the government in Seoul.
Would food aid help to ensure the survival of a state whose treatment of its own citizens is among the most abysmal in the world?
If so, and if denying food aid would result in a famine that the North Korean regime could not withstand, what could such a decision mean for eventual relations among Korean peoples living in the northern and southern parts of a unified country?
In the coming weeks, South Korea’s government will confront one of the toughest choices that any government can face: whether the short-term cost in human lives is worth the potential long-term benefits (also in terms of human lives) that a famine-induced collapse of North Korea could bring.
One reason is that such crops rely on research tools used in molecular biology, including genetic engineering.
African governments have been told that genetic engineering is dangerous, with many Europeans and their national governments – as well as transnational NGOs such as Greenpeace – determined to stay away from it.
Unfortunately, Kenya’s government listened and did not permit their farmers to grow genetically modified (GM) maize, even though it has been approved, sown, harvested, and eaten by both humans and animals in South Africa, Argentina, Brazil, the United States, and other countries for many years.
There is no evidence of even a single case of illness or death as a result – in the US or anywhere else where GM foods are consumed.
Similarly, GM feed has not resulted in any illness or death in animals. And no environmental damage has been detected.
It is unusual that a new technology has no negative side effects.
Just think of all the deaths that the wheel has caused, not to mention the side effects of much of the medicine we take.
What, then, is the danger of GM foods?
Opponents of genetic engineering in food and agriculture have several arguments, none of which appears to be valid.
First, “genetic engineering cannot solve the hunger and food insecurity problem.”
This is correct: GM foods cannot singlehandedly solve the problem, but they can be an important part of the solution.
Fourth, pollen from GM crops may “contaminate” organically produced food.
This, of course, would be an issue only with open pollinating plants, and only if the definition of “organically produced” excludes GM, something that is difficult to justify, since genes are as organic as anything.
Lastly, some argue that if farmers are permitted to sow GM varieties, they become dependent on large seed producers such as Monsanto, which have patent protection – and thus a monopoly – on the seed.
But private corporations undertake only about half of all agricultural research, whether or not it involves genetic engineering. The other half is done by public research systems using public funds.
Results from such research would not be subject to private-sector monopoly power. The fact that virtually all US maize and soybean farmers, and all papaya farmers, use GM seed indicates that it is good business for them.
Similarly, a large share of farmers – most of them smallholders – in Argentina, Brazil, South Africa, China, India, and other countries, prefer GM seed because they make more money from the resulting crops.
Large reductions in the use of insecticides cut costs for growers of GM varieties, while providing an important health and ecological benefit.
But maybe those who oppose private seed corporations are really against capitalism and the market economy rather than GM seed.
If so, they should choose an issue for their campaign that would be less damaging to the poor and hungry in developing countries.
The global food crisis of 2007-2008 was a warning of what the future may hold in store if we continue with business as usual, including misplaced opposition to the use of modern science in food and agriculture.
European and developing-country governments urgently need to reverse their current adverse position on GM organisms in order to help ensure sustainable food security for all.
Such a reversal would reduce hunger, poverty, and malnutrition; help protect our planet’s natural resources; and slow the emission of greenhouse gases from agriculture.
All that is needed is political will.
Food or Fuel?
When United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon recently visited Antarctica, he was impressed by the melting ice he saw there.
Then he was in Brazil, where he was impressed by the country’s use of bio-fuel to power a quarter of its automotive traffic.
Oil pressed from rapeseed can be used as diesel fuel, and maize or sugar beets can yield ethanol to replace gasoline.
The UN and many countries officially share the view that bio-fuel is one option in fighting climate change.
The United States generously subsidizes production of ethanol from maize, with output there currently growing 12% annually and almost 10% worldwide.
EU countries subsidized bio-fuels production with €3.7 billion in 2006, and intend to cover 8% of their motor fuels from biological sources by 2015 and 20% by 2020.
The Kyoto Protocol allows countries to meet their target reductions of CO2 emissions by substituting bio-fuels for fossil fuels.
But is it really a wise and ethically acceptable strategy to burn food rather than eat it?
If we allow food to be used to produce bio-fuels, food prices will be linked to the oil price, as the head of the German farmers association happily announced.
Indeed, food prices are currently increasing in Europe, because more and more farmland is being used for bio-fuels instead of for food production.
This is not sustainable.
The so-called tortilla crisis, which led to protests in Mexico City in January, foreshadows what we can expect.
The price of maize, half of which is imported from the US, more than doubled in a year, primarily because of production of bio-ethanol.
Mexico tried to solve the problem by imposing a state-administered price ceiling for maize tortillas, combined with duty-free maize imports.
The problem is that advocates of reducing the greenhouse effect by promoting bio-fuels production have not made clear where the land will come from.
In principle, there are only three ways to procure it: by withdrawing it from food or fodder production, from the production of natural materials – particularly wood – or from nature.
The perversity of the first alternative is obvious: there is no surplus food production in the world.
Whoever wishes to grow bio-fuels on land that was previously used for food production must recognize that this would increase food prices, harming the poorest of the poor.
Similarly, to cultivate bio-fuels on land that would otherwise be used to produce sustainable construction materials would drive up the prices of these materials and encourage their substitution by non-sustainable materials like concrete and steel.
This may be unobjectionable on ethical and social-policy grounds, but it certainly would not help the environment.
Wood stores carbon, owing to photosynthesis.
The larger the stocks of wood on earth, in the form of living trees or wooden construction material in buildings, the less CO2 there is in the atmosphere and the cooler the earth remains.
So, taking land for the production of bio-fuels from forests means speeding up global warming, because bio-fuel crops store much less carbon than trees.
To be sure, in addition to the negative storage effect, there might be a positive effect on the world climate insofar as bio-fuels may replace fossil fuels for combustion processes.
But this assumes that the oil sheikhs will extract less oil because there is more bio-fuel.
If they don’t, the positive effect will vanish.
World market prices of fossil fuels will simply be lower than they otherwise would be such that total consumption of fossil and bio-fuels rises by the extra production of bio-fuel.
The remaining alternative is to use land that has not previously been used commercially.
But such land is usually wooded.
The substitution of forests by maize, rape, and other oilseed cultivation reduces the stock of biomass and likewise leads to an increase in the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere.
Brazil has cleared huge areas of its jungle in order to produce the bio-ethanol that impressed the Secretary General.
By doing so, the country has done a great disservice to the cause of fighting climate change.
Indeed, every year, the world loses forest area the size of Ireland.
The effect on the atmosphere is equivalent to 18% of annual CO2 emissions, more than from the world’s entire transport sector.
Deforestation must be reversed, not accelerated.
It makes no sense to use land in whatever form to produce bio fuels.
Only producing bio-fuels without the use of additional land is justifiable in terms of environmental and social policy.
This would mean using agricultural and other waste, which would otherwise rot and produce nearly equal amounts of CO2 and methane, an even more dangerous greenhouse gas.
That option should be supported.
But official encouragement of production of bio-fuels on land that would have been used for other purposes must stop.
Penyediaan Pangan kepada Masyarakat yang Berkekurangan
STANFORD/BERKELEY – Hampir semua orang di komunitas ilmiah setuju bahwa memastikan persediaan pangan yang memadai untuk menghadapi lonjakan pertumbuhan penduduk, diperkirakan meningkat hingga 2,5 miliar pada pertengahan abad, akan memerlukan kerja keras.
Memang benar, kita bahkan belum berhasil memberikan makanan yang cukup untuk penduduk dunia yang saat ini mencapai 7,3 miliar: hampir 800 juta orang menderita kelaparan atau kekurangan pangan, sementara dua miliar orang lainnya kekurangan zat gizi mikro.
Namun belum ada kesepakatan tentang cara menangani masalah keamanan pangan.
Komunitas ilmiah terbagi atas dua pendekatan utama: “tinker with agricultural details” (TAD) dan “mend societal fundamentals” (MSF).
Walaupun mayoritas mendukung pendekatan pertama, pendekatan kedua lebih meyakinkan.
Tentunya pendukung TAD telah mengidentifikasi banyak permasalahan penting dalam produksi pangan dan sistem distribusi saat ini, sehingga pemecahan masalah-masalah tersebut dapat meningkatkan keamanan pangan.
Hasil panen dapat ditingkatkan dengan mengembangkan varietas tanaman yang lebih baik.
Air, pupuk, dan pestisida harus digunakan secara lebih efisien.
Pemeliharaan hujan tropis dan ekosistem alami lainnya akan melestarikan jasa ekosistem penting, khususnya kesuburan tanah, penyerbukan, pengendalian hama, dan ameliorasi iklim.
Kecenderungan menuju kenaikan konsumsi daging pun harus diputarbalikkan.
Peraturan yang lebih ketat tentang penangkapan ikan dan pencemaran di laut dapat menjaga pasokan protein laut yang penting untuk banyak orang.
Limbah dalam produksi dan distribusi pangan harus dikurangi.
Masyarakat pun harus dididik untuk memilih makanan lestari dan lebih bergizi.
Guna mencapai tujuan ini, pendukung TAD menyadari bahwa pembuat kebijakan harus menjadikan isu keamanan pangan sebagai prioritas politik dan fiskal yang utama, dalam rangka menunjang penelitian dan tindakan yang diperlukan.
Tanggung jawab untuk menetapkan program-program pendistribusian pangan secara merata juga berada di tangan pemerintah.
Tetapi pendekatan TAD tidak lengkap.
Tidak hanya tujuan-tujuan jangka pendeknya akan sangat sulit dicapai tanpa perubahan sosial yang lebih mendasar; meskipun tujuan-tujuan ini berhasil diwujudkan, mereka akan terbukti tidak memadai dalam jangka menengah, dan pastinya tidak dalam jangka panjang.
Mengapa demikian?
Anggap saja di tahun 2050 semua tujuan TAD tercapai.
Jumlah persediaan pangan meningkat, berkat hasil panen yang lebih tinggi dan sejumlah perbaikan dalam hal pengurangan limbah pada penyimpanan dan distribusi.
Penyempurnaan kebijakan lingkungan hidup berarti sebagian besar hutan saat ini masih bertahan dan zona dilarang memancing ditetapkan secara luas dan ditegakkan.
Ekosistem semakin kuat dengan banyaknya karang dan plankton berubah untuk bertahan hidup di air hangat dan bertambah asam.
Ditambah dengan meningkatnya vegetarianisme, nampaknya kenaikan suhu global bisa dibatasi pada 3º Celcius.
Akibatnya, dunia bisa menghindari kelaparan di pertengahan abad.
Tetapi pada saat itu, dengan populasi penduduk 9,7 miliar jiwa, kelaparan dan kekurangan gizi akan sama dengan kondisi sekarang dengan populasi dunia 7,3 miliar.
Dengan kata lain, meskipun terdapat gabungan yang luar biasa atas pencapaian dan keberuntungan, kondisi keamanan pangan yang sulit akan tetap kita alami.
Alasannya sederhana: masyarakat dan perekonomian kita didasarkan pada asumsi yang salah bahwa pertumbuhan yang terus-menerus dapat dipikul oleh planet yang terbatas.
Untuk menjamin keamanan pangan – belum lagi hak asasi manusia lainnya – bagi seluruh penduduk dunia, kita harus mengenali keterbatasan kita, baik dari segi faktor sosial dan biofisik, dan melakukan segala tindakan untuk memastikan kita tidak melampauinya.
Berdasarkan keyakinan ini, pendekatan MSF menuntut pemerintah mengambil langkah-langkah untuk memberdayakan perempuan di semua bidang kemasyarakatan, dan memastikan bahwa semua orang yang aktif secara seksual mendapatkan akses kepada alat kontrasepsi modern, termasuk hak melakukan aborsi bagi perempuan, jika dikehendaki.
Pada saat yang sama, pemerintah harus mengatasi kesenjangan kekayaan, sehingga terkait dengan pangan, terutama dengan membatasi dominasi korporasi.
Walaupun kurang bisa menurunkan jumlah penduduk ke tingkat yang berkelanjutan, pembaruan-pembaruan MSF adalah satu-satunya harapan dunia.
Tetapi, dalam kondisi sekarang, penerapannya terkesan tidak dimungkinkan.
Amerika Serikat, negara dengan jumlah konsumsi tertinggi, kini bergerak dalam arah yang berlawanan: kaum perempuan tengah berjuang untuk mempertahankan hak-hak reproduksi mereka, distribusi kekayaan semakin timpang, dan korporasi pun bertambah kuat.
Jika tren ini berlanjut, pada tahun 2050, sistem tata kelola pemerintah akan semakin tidak mampu menangani masalah-masalah fundamental akibat pertumbuhan penduduk dan kenaikan konsumsi yang terus-menerus atau ketidaksetaraan kekayaan.
Ketika kondisi lingkungan hidup memburuk akibat perubahan iklim, toxification, dan hilangnya keanekaragaman hayati dan jasa ekosistem, orang akan memiliki sedikit waktu dan tenaga untuk menerapkan reformasi tata kelola pemerintah yang bertujuan untuk mengurangi ketimpangan atau melestarikan lingkungan.
Akibatnya, tekanan terhadap pihak-pihak yang berkuasa untuk menyediakan makanan bagi warga yang paling membutuhkan akan lebih rendah
Sistem sosial-biofisik dipenuhi dengan subsistem ayam-dan-telur.
Football is War
NEW YORK – The flags are already flying, from Holland to Argentina, from Cameroon to Japan.
Soon the drums will be beating, the trumpets blowing.
Colors will be unfurled, and battle cries will sound.
It’s that time again: the World Cup is upon us.
The late Rinus Michels, also known as “the General,” coach of the Dutch team that narrowly lost to Germany in the 1974 final, famously said, “Football is war.”
When the Dutch had their revenge in 1988 and beat Germany to go on to become European champions, more people danced in the streets in Holland than on the day that the real war ended in May 1945.
On one occasion, in 1969, a football match between Honduras and El Salvador actually led to military conflict, known as the Soccer War.
Tensions between the two countries were already high.
But then fans of the Honduras team were set upon, and even worse, the Honduran national anthem was insulted, and the country’s white and blue flag defiled.
Of course, soccer wars are rare (indeed, I can’t think of another example), but the notion that international sporting competitions inevitably inspire warm fraternity – an idea advanced by Baron de Coubertin, founder of the modern Olympic games – is a romantic fiction.
The violence of British football hooligans, for example, reflects a peculiar nostalgia for war.
Life in peaceful times can be dull, and British glory seems a long way in the past.
Football is an opportunity to experience the thrill of combat, without risking much more than a few broken bones.
Even when football doesn’t lead to actual bloodshed, it inspires strong emotions – primitive and tribal – evoking the days when warriors donned facial paint and jumped up and down in war dances, hollering like apes.
The nature of the game encourages this: the speed, the collective aggression.
Tennis does not create frenzy on a national scale.
Not even boxing does, except on very rare occasions, such as when Joe Louis, the “Brown Bomber,” beat Max Schmeling, the Nazi favorite, in 1938.
After all, these forms of combat are between two individuals, not two tribes.
Arthur Koestler was right when he said that there is nationalism, and there is football nationalism – and that the latter is the more deeply felt.
Koestler himself, born in Budapest but a proud British citizen, remained a Hungarian football nationalist all his life.
It helps to have traditional enemies, old hurts, and humiliations that need to be redressed, if only symbolically.
It would be hard for Americans, who are neither very good at soccer, nor cursed by great historical hatreds, to share the joy of the Dutch, say, when the Germans were defeated in 1988, or that of the Koreans when they defeat Japan.
Perhaps the best example of this type of sporting nationalism was not a football game, but the world ice hockey final in 1969, when Czechoslovakia beat the Soviet Union just one year after Soviet tanks rolled into Prague.
The Czech players pointed their hockey sticks at the Russians like guns, and their victory provoked anti-Soviet riots back home.
Clearly, then, whatever de Coubertin might have hoped, cosmopolitanism and cross-cultural brotherhood comes less naturally to human beings than the raw emotions of the tribe.
The tribe can be a club, a clan, or a nation.
Before World War II, football clubs often had an ethnic or religious component: Tottenham Hotspur in London was “Jewish,” while Arsenal was “Irish.”
Vestiges of these markings remain: Ajax of Amsterdam is still taunted by provincial opponents as the “Jew club.”
And the Glasgow clubs, Celtic and Rangers, are still divided by religious affiliation, Celtic being Catholic and Rangers Protestant.
But a common race or religion is not essential.
The French football heroes who won the World Cup in 1998 included men of African and Arab origin, and they were proud of it.
Most successful modern football clubs are as mixed as Benetton advertisements, with coaches and players from all over the globe, but this seems to have done nothing to diminish the enthusiasm of local supporters.
In some countries, football is the only thing that knits together disparate people, Shia and Sunnis in Iraq, or Muslims and Christians in Sudan.
Of course, most right-thinking people are a bit like de Coubertin.
Tribal emotions are embarrassing, and dangerous when given free reign.
After World War II, for obvious reasons, the expression of nationalist emotions was virtually taboo in Europe (not least in Germany).
We had all become good Europeans, and nationalism was for racists.
And yet, since Koestler was right, these emotions could not simply be crushed.
They had to find some outlet, and football provided it.
The football stadium became a kind of reservation where taboos on tribal frenzy and even racial antagonism could be relaxed, but only up to a point: when the taunting of Ajax supporters as rotten Jews degenerated into actual violence, sometimes accompanied by a collective hiss, mimicking escaping gas, the city authorities decided to step in.
Some games have had to be played without the presence of rival supporters.
Not all football games are fraught with negative feeling and violence.
This year’s World Cup might well be a festival of brotherhood and peace.
Few people even care anymore when Germany wins.
But the fact that sport can unleash primitive emotions is not a reason to condemn it.
Since such feelings cannot simply be wished away, it is better to allow for their ritual expression, just as fears of death, violence, and decay find expression in religion or bull fighting.
Even though some football games have provoked violence, and in one case even a war, they might have served the positive purpose of containing our more savage impulses by deflecting them onto a mere sport.
So let the games begin, and may the best team win.
Which is Holland, of course, the country of my birth.
Football Nationalism
AMSTERDAM &#45;&#45; The late Arthur Koestler, born in Budapest, resident of many countries, and writer in several languages, once said that there is nationalism, and there is football nationalism.
The feelings inspired by the latter are by far the stronger.
Koestler himself, a proud and loyal British citizen, remained a lifelong Hungarian soccer nationalist.
It is hard for Americans, whose “world series” are essentially domestic affairs, to understand the emotions engendered in European citizens when their nations compete for the European soccer championship every four years.
For several weeks this summer, the stadiums in Austria and Switzerland, not to mention the streets of European capitals, from Madrid to Moscow, were given to an orgy of flag-waving, anthem-singing, drum-beating patriotism.
Spain’s victory was one of the rare occasions that Catalonians, Castillians, Basques, and Andalusians erupted together in an explosion of patriotic delight.
Football, more than most sports, lends itself to tribal feelings: the collective effort, the team colors, the speed, the physical aggression. As a famous Dutch soccer coach once said, not in jest: “Soccer is war.”
It was not supposed to be like this.
After two world wars, displays of national fervor became more or less taboo in Europe.
Nationalism was blamed for almost destroying the old continent twice in the 20th century.
The kind of exalted patriotism, especially when combined with warrior pride, that is still entirely normal in the United States, was for a long time associated with mass slaughter.
The English, who escaped occupation by a hostile power, and still believe they won World War II alone (well, with a little help from the Yanks), still have a militaristic streak.
They are exceptional.
Hence, perhaps, the notorious belligerence of English soccer fans.
And yet, even as nationalistic emotions were suppressed in polite society all over Europe, the soccer stadiums remained stubbornly in the pre-WWII world.
Just as killing continues to be celebrated in ritualized form in Spanish bull rings, illicit tribal feelings are given full vent in the soccer arenas.
These feelings can be festive, even carnival-like, as they were in Euro 2008.
But they can contain something darker, more aggressive, too, especially when sporting combat is loaded with historical memory.
Games between Holland and Germany, for example, or Germany and Poland, tended, until very recently, to be reenactments of the war; either – and most commonly – as melancholy replays of wartime defeat, or as sweet revenge.
When Holland beat Germany in the semi-finals of the 1988 European Championship, it was as though justice finally had been done.
Older Germans can still remember their famous victory over a superb Hungarian team in 1954.
It was the first time since their ruinous wartime defeat that Germans were able to feel proud of themselves.
Here was a victory they could celebrate. After years of guilt and deprivation, the Germans were back, as it were.
Like everything else, forms of patriotism change over time. Reasons for national pride are varied.
When France won the World Cup in 1998, the French liked to point out the ethnic diversity of their team.
Their main star, Zinédine Zidane, was of Algerian stock. Others had ancestral roots in various parts of Africa.
The multi-ethnic nature of the 1998 champion was widely touted as a mark, not of a long and often bloody colonial past, but of national superiority born from the tolerance of the French Enlightenment and the fraternity of the French Revolution.
In fact, the French were harbingers of a kind. For something profound is changing in Europe, slowly, painfully, but surely.
If ethnic diversity is more and more common in national sides, it is even more marked in clubs.
Clubs, too, often used to command tribal loyalty along ethnic or religious lines, depending on their location in large industrial cities: Irish clubs versus Jewish clubs in London, for example, or Protestants versus Catholics in Glasgow.
Who would have predicted thirty years ago that British soccer fans would have cheered for a London team full of Africans, Latin Americans, and Spaniards, coached by a Frenchman? Or that the national English team would be managed by an Italian?
But ethnic and cultural diversity is not all that has changed the face of European football.
I have never seen such harmony between the supporters of different nations as in this year’s championship.
Perhaps it was due to the absence of England, whose fans include the last bands of amateur warriors.
But the peaceful, carnival spirit that prevailed, the flying of Turkish and German flags side by side in German streets, when the two nations met in the semi-finals, the joint Spanish-German celebrations after the final, all this suggests something fresh.
Not that national feeling is dying, even as a new European spirit is being born.
But at the very least national identities in Europe are no longer quite so colored by memories of war.
No one much minds any more when Germany wins, as it so often does.
The Germans are now much too nice for that.
Yet I have to admit that I still could not suppress a tiny, keenly felt pleasure when Germany lost to Spain.
Perhaps because Spain played more beautiful football. Or perhaps it just shows my age.
The Nuclear Illusion
GENEVA – As delegates from 189 countries gather to prepare for the next Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference, due in 2015, I am reminded of my first official briefing, as a young Australian minister back in the early 1980’s, on United States nuclear strategy.
It was given to me, in the bowels of the Pentagon, by a man with a white dust jacket and a pointer who looked uncannily like Woody Allen.
He did not have much to say about the countless real human beings who would be vaporized, crushed, baked, boiled, or irradiated to death if a nuclear war ever erupted.
The language was disengaged and technical – all about throw-weights, survivability, counterforce, and countervalue targets.
But it was a dazzling account of the logic of nuclear deterrence and the mechanics of mutually assured destruction, which both the US and Soviet Union applied throughout the Cold War.
Thirty years later, our world is not one in which the governments in Moscow or Washington are likely to hurl swarms of nuclear missiles at each other (if it ever was).
Nor is it a world in which China or the US would conceivably ever intentionally start a nuclear war against the other.
Even for India and Pakistan, the risk of misjudgment or miscalculation is much greater than that of deliberate nuclear warmongering.
And, for North Korea – or Iran, should it ever build nuclear weapons – the risk of the regime initiating a nuclear attack is negligible, given that doing so would result in its certain (non-nuclear) incineration.
Not many delegates here in Geneva, even from the nuclear-armed states, would disagree with any of these assessments.
But it is extraordinary how much of the disembodied calculus of my Woody Allen-lookalike still prevails in today’s nuclear policymaking.
Russia worries that its nuclear-tipped missiles, based largely in static locations, might be destroyed on the ground by a preemptive strike by long-range US missiles, and its retaliatory punch weakened by US ballistic missile defense.
Though it can paint no scenario in which this would ever occur, it not only drags its heels on further arms-reduction talks, but insists on keeping a thousand or so of its strategic nuclear weapons on launch-within-minutes alert status.
Not surprisingly, the US refuses to de-alert its own nuclear missiles if Russia will not.
So nearly 2,000 weapons of mass destruction still face each other on high alert, maximizing the prospect of a catastrophe through human or system error or cyber sabotage.
This deterrence logic produces a snowball effect.
With Russia and the US holding 18,000 of the world’s current stockpile of 19,000 nuclear weapons, it is proving impossible to persuade any of the other nuclear-armed states to reduce their own (much smaller) arsenals until the Big Two make further drastic cuts to theirs.
China shares Russia’s concerns about US conventional and missile-defense superiority, and is increasing and modernizing its estimated 240-weapon stockpile.
With China taking that course, India – outside the NPT but with 100 weapons of its own – feels the need to add to its own arsenal.
And Pakistan then becomes even more determined to try to keep ahead of India.
The truth is that none of the nuclear-armed states, inside or outside the NPT, pays anything more than lip service to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons.
The continued seductive power of the Cold War logic and language of nuclear deterrence is the primary reason, though for some states it is clear that the testosterone factor – perceived status and prestige – also plays a role.
The uplifting pro-disarmament rhetoric of US President Barack Obama remains just that.
No nuclear-armed state will set a timetable for a major reduction in the number of nuclear weapons, let alone their abolition.
The size of their arsenals, their fissile material stocks, their force-modernization plans, their stated doctrine, and their known deployment practices all point in the same direction.
All foresee indefinite retention of their nuclear weapons, and a continuing role for them in their security policies.
The implications of this stance are profoundly troubling.
Concern about states in the Middle East and Northeast Asia joining the nuclear club is as high as it has ever been.
But the foot-dragging by the nuclear states on disarmament is making it increasingly difficult to add necessary new muscle to the global non-proliferation regime.
This was obvious at the last NPT Review Conference in 2010, when efforts to mandate stronger safeguards, strengthen compliance and enforcement mechanisms, and inject new life into the control of fissile-material production all went nowhere.
And that sentiment is alive and well in Geneva this week.
Of course, it is irrational for those whose ultimate objective is a nuclear-weapons-free world to support anything but the strongest non-proliferation measures.
But bloody-mindedness is a natural and inevitable reaction when leaders see double standards – “my security concerns justify nuclear weapons, but yours do not” – at work on this scale.
Progress toward achieving a safer and saner world requires all of the nuclear-armed states to break out of their Cold War mindset, rethink the strategic utility of nuclear deterrence in current conditions, and recalibrate the huge risks implied by retaining their arsenals.
It is time for them to recognize that in today’s world, nuclear weapons are the problem, not the solution.
Whose QE Was it, Anyway?
CAMBRIDGE – Between 1913 (when the United States Federal Reserve was founded) and the latter part of the 1980s, it would be fair to say that the Fed was the only game in town when it came to purchases of US Treasury securities by central banks.
During that era, the Fed owned anywhere between 12% and 30% of US marketable Treasury securities outstanding (see figure), with the post-World War II peak coming as the Fed tried to prop up the sagging US economy following the first spike in oil prices in 1973.
We no longer live in that US-centric world, where the Fed was the only game in town and changes in its monetary policy powerfully influenced liquidity conditions at home and to a large extent globally.
Years before the global financial crisis – and before the term “QE” (quantitative easing) became an established fixture of the financial lexicon – foreign central banks’ ownership of US Treasuries began to catch up with, and then overtake, the Fed’s share.
The purchase of US Treasuries by foreign central banks really took off in 2003, years before the first round of quantitative easing, or “QE1,” was launched in late 2008.
The charge of the foreign central banks – let’s call it “QE0” – was led by the People’s Bank of China.
By 2006 (the peak of the US housing bubble), foreign official institutions held about one-third of the stock of US Treasuries outstanding, approximately twice the amount held by the Fed.
On the eve of the Fed’s QE1, that share stood at around 40%.
Spanning a decade (2003-2013), QE0 was the most sustained and uninterrupted surge in central banks’ purchases of Treasuries on record.
It is difficult to determine the extent to which the Fed’s QE1 during the crisis owed its success in bringing interest rates down to the fact that it was being reinforced by what foreign central banks worldwide – notably in Asia – were doing simultaneously.
It is instructive, however, that the Fed’s next two policy installments, QE2 and QE3, were not matched by large foreign purchases and appeared to have only modest effects in financial markets.
After the turmoil of the 2008 crisis subsided, a variety of indices of financial conditions displayed comparatively low levels of volatility (by historic standards) through the spring of 2013.
But that spring bloom of stability soon faded.
A combination of falling oil and primary commodity prices, an over-ripe business cycle, and the Fed’s announcement of its intent to start “tapering” its asset purchases brought the decade-long boom in many emerging markets to an end.
Since then, growth in these economies has slowed markedly, their stock markets have slumped, capital outflows have escalated, and many of their currencies have crashed.
In tandem with this grim turn of events, numerous emerging-market central banks reversed course and began selling US Treasuries.
We would not know about these sales, however, from the Fed’s quarterly report of the Financial Accounts of the US: Around the time official sales commenced, the Fed stopped reporting US Treasuries held by foreign official institutions (a series of data that had been available since 1945).
The report now shows only the aggregate figure, which combines central bank holdings with those of the private sector.
Fortunately, the US Treasury still publishes the information.
As of the end of 2015, the share of Treasuries held by foreign central banks is more than 1.5 times what the Fed holds.
But this figure is significantly down from its peak and, with capital outflows from China and elsewhere showing little signs of abating, is now trending lower.
The fitful and disorderly unwinding of QE0 is most likely overwhelming the effects of reassurances by Fed officials that they will maintain a large balance sheet.
Indeed, tighter liquidity conditions and increased volatility in financial markets are the byproduct of the reversal in the long cycle of foreign purchases.
The unwinding of QE0 does not necessarily imply a decline in the rest of the world’s appetite for US Treasuries.
In times of financial turbulence, US Treasuries have historically been a safe haven for private flight capital.
But the change in ownership taking place now does carry implications for financial stability.
The change from the steady (and often predictable) purchases of the foreign central banks of the 2003-2013 era to the less predictable hands of private investors, who are more sensitive to changes in rates of return, is likely to be the signature of this stage of the global cycle.
Expecting the Unexpected in America
DENVER – When the United States’ new president gets down to work in January 2017, some obvious foreign-policy issues will already be waiting – some more patiently than others.
Some of these will be perennial problems in need of no introduction: North Korea and its nuclear ambitions, China and its global ambitions, Russia and its spiteful ambitions, and of course, the Middle East and its dysfunctional ambitions.
Often, however, the crises that greet a new president are not the ones anyone expects.
When George W. Bush took office in 2001, he expected to increase defense spending, deploy an anti-missile system, and dismantle several longstanding multilateral arms-control obligations.
Instead, the administration faced issues that were completely unforeseen, including Afghanistan and Iraq, and that consumed it for the next eight years.
The same thing could happen again when the next administration takes office.
A few possibilities stand out.
Start with Saudi Arabia.
To anyone paying close attention to the ongoing turmoil in the Middle East, especially the weakening of many of its key nation-states and the rise of extremist violence, a severe crisis in the Kingdom is no dark-horse candidate.
Saudi Arabia has shown remarkable resilience in overcoming political weakness, often by using its considerable oil revenues to buy itself out of trouble and maintain a large royal family that has been an essential source of stability.
That stability may continue, but it is becoming less of a sure bet.
With oil prices experiencing a prolonged slump, and new sources (for example, Iran) coming onstream, the Saudis will not find dipping into financial reserves quite as effortless a proposition as it has been in the past.
To be sure, by the standards of most countries, Saudi financial reserves are enormous; but so are the aspirations of its disgruntled public, not to mention the growing regional problems and the regime’s sense that it must step up its efforts – often financial – to counter Iran’s growing regional influence.
With another aging monarch in King Salman, the Saudis’ day of reckoning in today’s polarized and radicalized Middle East could be approaching.
Then there is Turkey.
In the past, this key regional actor suffered perennial economic crises, bouts of hyperinflation, and occasional military coups that, brutal as some were, seemed to many Turks a welcome respite from weak center-left and center-right governments.
And, despite its economic and political dysfunction, Turkey managed to maintain a positive image, owing in part to its ambition to join the European Union.
Hope always seemed to outweigh the country’s accomplishments, but it was always viewed in Western circles as a reliable partner and ally.
Today, whether owing to “neo-Ottomanism” or just old-fashioned nasty governance under a thin-skinned autocrat (President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan) with Islamist tendencies, Turkey is on many watch lists.
Its intervention in Middle East politics has been furtive and lacking in consistency or clarity.
At first, Turkey seemed to support Syria’s Alawite leadership under President Bashar al-Assad, then switched sides, joining a coalition of Sunni Arab states in the so-far disastrous effort to remove Assad.
In the meantime, Turkey’s longstanding problems with its restive Kurdish minority have returned with a vengeance as Erdoğan has resorted to strong-arming the Kurds into submission, an approach that he has applied to his many domestic opponents, as well the media and civil-society groups.
Turkey’s internal politics have worsened by the day, and the country’s deep divisions, which reflect entrenched historical and sociological fault lines, show no signs of narrowing under a president who seems temperamentally incapable of winning over anyone who is not already a follower.
A resolution of the crisis in Syria would certainly help Turkey, especially given its role as the prime destination for refugees from the chaos there; but the governance shortcomings with which Turks must reckon are profound.
Turkey may muddle through its current predicament (as it has many times before), and maintain its unity and its purpose.
Or not.
Those hardy perennials may return as well.
But the crises they cause may be different in degree and substance.
North Korea is one such case.
Its current leader, Kim Jong-un, seems far more dangerous than his father, Kim Jong-il, or grandfather, Kim Il-sung.
The regime’s proclivity to threaten war against its neighbors did not start with Kim 3.0, of course.
After all, his grandfather actually started the Korean War in 1950.
But Kim’s recklessness, combined with his relentless effort to build deliverable nuclear weapons, may push the North Korean problem to the top of the new president’s agenda.
Finally, there is China.
For many Americans, the risks posed by China lie in its strength.
In fact, the real cause for concern is not China’s strength, but rather incipient weakness, which could plunge the country – and the many others that depend on its economic performance – into crisis.
One hopes that all of the current candidates vying for the US presidency will be up to the challenges – both perennial and unanticipated – that they will face.
In some cases, to be frank, those hopes may be monumentally unrealistic.
In any case, there will be little room for error.
Forget Inflation
MUNICH – To paraphrase Winston Churchill, never have so many billions of dollars been pumped out by so many governments and central banks.
The United States government is pumping $789 billion into its economy, Europe $255 billion, and China $587 billion.
The US Federal Reserve increased its stock of base money in 2008 by 97%, the European Central Bank by 37%.
The Federal funds rate in the US is practically zero, and the European Central Bank’s main refinancing rate, already at an all-time low of 2%, will likely fall further in the coming months.
The Fed has given ordinary banks direct access to its credit facilities, and the ECB no longer rations the supply of base money, instead providing as much liquidity as banks demand.
Since last October, Western countries’ rescue packages for banks have reached about $4.3 trillion.
Many now fear that these huge infusions of cash will make inflation inevitable.
In Germany, which suffered from hyper-inflation in 1923, there is widespread fear that people will again lose their savings and need to start from scratch.
Other countries share this concern, if to a lesser extent.
But these fears are not well founded.
True, the stock of liquidity is rising rapidly. But it is rising because the private sector is hoarding money rather than spending it.
By providing extra liquidity, central banks merely reduce the amount of money withdrawn from expenditure on goods and services, which mitigates, but does not reverse, the negative demand shock that hit the world economy.
This is a trivial but important point that follows from the theory of supply and demand.
Think of the oil market, for example. It is impossible to infer solely from an increase in the volume of transactions how the price of oil will change.
The price will fall if the increase resulted from growth in supply, and it will rise if the increase resulted from growth in demand.
With the increase in the aggregate stock of money balances, things are basically the same.
If this increase resulted from an increase in supply, the value of money will go down, which means inflation.
But if it resulted from an increase in demand, the value of money will increase, which means deflation.
At the moment, no country is truly suffering deflation, but that may change as the crisis deepens.
Germany, with its notoriously low inflation rate, may be among the first countries to experience declining prices.
The most recent data show that the price index in January was up by only 0.9% year on year.
This deflationary tendency will create serious economic problems, which do not necessarily result from deflation as such, but may stem from a natural resistance to deflation.
In each country, a number of prices are rigid, because sellers resist selling cheaper, as low productivity gains and wage defense by unions leave no margin for lower prices.
Thus, deflationary pressure will to some extent result in downward quantity adjustments, which will deepen the real crisis.
Moreover, even if prices on average exhibit some downward flexibility, deflation necessarily increases the real rate of interest, given that nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero.
The result is an increase in the cost of capital to firms, which lowers investment and exacerbates the crisis.
This would be a particular problem for the US, where the Fed allowed the Federal funds rate to approach zero in January 2009.
The only plausible inflationary scenario presupposes that when economies recover, central banks do not raise interest rates sufficiently in the coming boom, keeping too much of the current liquidity in the market.
Such a scenario is not impossible.
This is the policy Italians pursued for decades in the pre-euro days, and the Fed might one day feel that it should adopt such a stance.
But the ECB, whose only mandate is to maintain price stability, cannot pursue this policy without fundamental changes in legislation.
Moreover, this scenario cannot take place before the slump has turned into a boom.
So, for the time being, the risk of inflation simply does not exist.
Japan provides good lessons about where the true risks are, as it has been suffering from deflation or near-deflation for 14 years.
Since 1991, Japan has been mired in what Harvard economist Alvin Hansen, a contemporary of Keynes, once described as “secular stagnation.”
Ever since Japan’s banking crisis began in 1990, the country has been in a liquidity trap, with central bank rates close to zero, and from 1998 to 2005 the price level declined by more than 4%.
Japanese governments have tried to overcome the slump with Hansen’s recipes, issuing one Keynesian program of deficit spending after the other and pushing the debt-to-GDP ratio from 64% in 1991 to 171% in 2008.
But all of that helped only a little.
Japan is still stagnating.
Not inflation, but a Japanese-type period of deflationary pressure with ever increasing public debt is the real risk that the world will be facing for years to come.
Forging a European Worldview
WARSAW – Some complain that the European Union lacks a “worldview.” In fact, the EU’s problem is that it has too many of them.
Europeans’ common experiences and interests mean that they should have a shared view on global issues.
But the sad reality is that political, social, and economic pressures tend to push EU members and citizens in opposing directions; shared histories, it seems, are an insufficient basis for shared policies.
Nevertheless, the more pragmatic Europe’s policies are, the greater the chances of success, not least when it comes to global issues.
Europeans have a shared appraisal of many of the world’s problems, and often put forward common methods and strategies for coping with them.
For example, on climate change, immigration, and development aid, there is growing consensus, as there is on energy policy and the further development of the European Security Strategy.
Agreement in these areas is not merely a reflection of some lowest common denominators; in each area, Europe has contributed important added value at a global level.
Indeed, Europe’s community of attitudes is becoming synonymous with solutions to world problems.
After all, climate change, energy security, and demographic challenges have been part of the European discourse for many years; now that discourse is starting to be shared by other parts of the world.
The global financial and economic crisis may also be a catalyst for promoting Europe’s vision of a new world order.
The EU vision of a capitalist economy harnessed to social progress and subject to regulation, rather than laissez-faire, is growing in influence.
New economic powers like China, India, and Brazil must find their own ways of addressing social injustice and encouraging equal opportunity for all, and the European model looks increasingly attractive to them.
Yet many differences still separate societies within the EU. There are divergent views on many vital global problems.
And although these differences may grow smaller with time, they occasionally take on an alarmingly clear-cut form, as in the case of the United States-led invasion of Iraq.
It is nevertheless comforting that Europe’s differences on global issues have not had an excessive impact on the EU’s internal dynamics.
The war in Iraq did not delay the Union’s “big bang” enlargement, and was not the reason for the failure of referenda in France and the Netherlands on the Constitutional and Lisbon treaties.
And Europe does need to develop structures and decision-making processes that limit conflicts of interest by offering compromise solutions.
This is the crux of the Lisbon Treaty, which is designed to usher in new institutions and mechanisms aimed at creating more politically cohesive EU external policies.
Transferring more areas of responsibility, such as foreign aid and development policies, to EU institutions helps the Union to adapt to new international realities by underpinning its growing importance as Europe’s decision-making center.
Shaping a shared vision of the world should start with Europe’s immediate neighborhood.
The enlargement of NATO and the EU has embraced a dozen or so states in Central and Eastern Europe and in the western Balkans.
But, despite these achievements, European integration is far from complete, and it will remain so until all European countries can follow the same development path.
This failing was the key reason for the Balkan tragedy of the 1990’s.
Fortunately, the time for armed conflict in that region appears to have come to a definitive end, now that the Balkan states are on the path to NATO and EU membership.
But Eastern Europe, especially Ukraine and Moldova, also must be treated as a region of special importance.
Ukraine’s population of 46 million means it is far too big and important to be left out of any vision of Europe’s future.
Yet the EU’s strategy towards Ukraine has been ambiguous and obscure.
The Orange Revolution’s reform drive has been slowed or even halted by domestic political and economic crises, but also by the Union’s perceived indifference to Ukraine’s fate.
EU leaders lament Ukraine’s political divisions and slow pace of reform, and the country’s leaders need to address these criticisms.
But lack of progress also reflects the EU’s failure to embrace Ukraine.
Reform of a country’s political and economic institutions and its accession to the EU and NATO usually go hand in hand, because the prospect of membership makes painful decisions electorally acceptable.
In short, it is unrealistic of the EU to expect European outcomes from countries like Ukraine and Moldova without making a full commitment to them.
Fortunately, that approach is changing.
The Gas Memorandum signed earlier this year between the EU and Ukraine on the extension and exploitation of Ukrainian gas pipelines is a perfect example; in return for political support and for funding of the extension of its pipelines, Ukraine has agreed to adopt EU rules governing management and access to the gas transmission line.
Ukraine also agreed to implement the relevant EU energy directives as part of its membership of the European Energy Community.
It is a first step towards Ukraine’s eventual full integration into the EU Single Market.
The EU’s current lack of unanimity on many world issues, as well as continental issues such as Ukraine, is no reason for despair.
The trick for the Union is to develop shared solutions and to take joint foreign-policy actions, even when various EU governments see things differently.
Forging Asia’s Missing Links
MANILA – China’s government has just announced that Premier Wen Jiabao will be the main speaker at the 2009 Boao Forum for Asia, where the roster of leaders expected to participate is a virtual Who’s Who of the continent: President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan, President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, President Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, Prime Minister S. Bayar of Mongolia, Prime Minister Thein Sein of Myanmar, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung of Vietnam, Prime Minister John Key of New Zealand, and Kopsak Saphawasu, Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand.
Such meetings are vital for Asia, because the continent lacks the dense institutional infrastructure that Europe has built up over the past five decades.
This year’s Boao Forum has become even more important because of the cancellation of the East Asia summit due to the action of violent protestors. 
Multinational companies increasingly treat Asia as a single economic space, at least as far as production is concerned.
This, of course, does not mean that Asia is, or is becoming, a single market, but rather that is now something of a tight-knit pan-national supply chain.
But, although Asia is becoming more like Europe in terms of economic integration, political and diplomatic integration lags behind.
So, because Asia lacks such institutional arrangements, personal diplomacy of the type that the Boao Forum represents, like the annual global winter gathering at Davos, remains vitally important.
Indeed, it was at last year’s Boao Forum that Chinese President Hu Jintao began to express public optimism about the positive trends in Mainland China-Taiwan relations.
That rapprochement was possible because Taiwan’s then newly elected vice president was given permission by China to attend the forum, where he was able to meet informally with President Hu.
Last February, I headed a 40-member trade delegation to Taipei.
That mission’s highlight was my dialogue with Taiwanese President Ma Ying-jeou, who stressed the importance of connecting Taiwan to the China-ASEAN Free Trade Area (CAFTA) in the light of warmer relations developing between the Mainland and Taiwan.
At this time of economic turmoil around the world, increasing Taiwan’s formal economic links with China and its regional partners can only benefit everyone involved, because an inevitable side-effect will be a lessening of tension.
Unfortunately, some analysts suggest that a Taiwan-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement of the likes of CAFTA may not yet be possible, so, in the interim, President Ma’s administration is striving to achieve separate free-trade agreements with various ASEAN members.
Understandably, the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) has taken the stand that Taiwan should seek closer ties with ASEAN countries rather than depend too much on Mainland China, but Ma does not see the two efforts as being mutually exclusive.
From a wider perspective, Ma and I exchanged views on the synergy of an emerging “Central East Asia Growth Polygon” (CEAGPOL) consisting of the Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, and the Mainland Chinese provinces of Guangdong and Fujian – plus, eventually, Hainan, Okinawa, and Guam/Marianas.
With goodwill on all sides, real advantages can materialize from building up this informal grouping, as it is a gateway to the huge markets of Southeast and Northeast Asia.
An economic bonus of such an effort for the entire region would come from the opening of direct flights and sea transport across the Taiwan Strait.
CEAGPOL could even become a building block for a Northeast Asian version of ASEAN – an “Association of Northeast Asian Nations.”
As a result of historical suspicion between China, Japan, and Korea, Northeast Asia’s economic heavyweights are the world’s last remaining regional bloc that still lacks an inter-governmental organization of the likes of ASEAN.
The European Union is even more instructive, because centuries of war, culminating in the two World Wars of the twentieth century, inspired, rather than deterred, European economic, political and security integration.
At this time of worldwide uncertainty, Asia-Pacific leaders must redouble their efforts to exploit their partnerships and strategic combinations in order to foster stability and growth. The easing of tensions between China and Taiwan can, perhaps, set a tone for all of Northeast Asia.
At the 30th anniversary of the “Message to Compatriots in Taiwan” last January, President Hu offered six proposals to improve relations:
1.
Abandon the Taiwan independence movement;
2.
Stop confrontation and reach peaceful agreements;
3.
Increase military contacts/exchanges;
4.
Discuss Taiwan’s participation in international organizations under the “One China” umbrella;
5.
Establish a Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA); and
6.
Promote China’s traditional civilization with strengthened spiritual ties.
There is now real hope that talks along these lines can succeed.
But there is a major obstacle to easing tensions: the proposed $6.5 billion sale by the United States to Taiwan of 30 Apache attack helicopters and 330 Patriot missiles.
China-US talks on defense cooperation had earlier stalled because of such arms negotiations.
They have since been restarted, an olive branch sent to the Obama administration by China’s government.
All three parties involved will need to tread with care to make certain that the thaw in China-Taiwan relations is not set back by this proposed arms deal.
For, if Asia is to begin to build the type of dense institutional infrastructure that has brought Europe peace and prosperity, the flashpoint between China and Taiwan will need to be transformed into a foundation stone of regional cooperation.
Forging Syria’s Opposition
TEL AVIV – Syria’s crisis is now a year old, with close to 10,000 people, mostly civilians, dead and no end in sight.
The country is at a stalemate: the opposition is unable to topple President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, and Assad’s forces are unable to quash the resistance.
Both sides are adamant: the opposition is determined to bring down a regime that it views as illegitimate, sectarian, corrupt, tyrannical, and stained with blood, while the regime’s hard-line core believes that by persevering it will ultimately silence the opposition, whereas any concession would jeopardize its very existence.
Its downfall, they believe, would mean dispossession and death for the regime’s leadership and for a large part of the minority Alawite community from which it is drawn.
Assad and his cohorts are encouraged by the world’s failure to respond effectively to their brutal suppression of the revolt in Homs, and have proceeded to inflict vicious punishment on its survivors as a warning to opponents elsewhere.
This may cow some of Syria’s civilian population in the short term, but it will serve only to exacerbate popular rage, and thus to increase the prospect of a bloody reckoning with Assad and his cronies down the line.
Today’s brutal stalemate is likely to continue for some time.
Diplomatic and humanitarian missions led by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and current UN Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos seem as ineffective as earlier efforts by the international community and the Arab League to mitigate the conflict or to facilitate a political solution.
To be sure, the authorities have suffered some defections, with the most significant coming soon after the violence in Homs reached its peak, when the deputy energy minister resigned and joined the opposition.
But, while defections have occurred among the officer corps as well, the regime has maintained its basic cohesiveness.
The army, the security apparatus, and the Alawite community are still solidly supportive.
A large part of the Syrian population – the middle class in Damascus and Aleppo, the Christians, and other minorities – are passive or sitting on the fence, worried that the alternative to the status quo is chaos, civil war, and possibly a radical Islamist takeover.
And Russia and China continue to provide diplomatic cover, with Iran sending material support.
Life in Damascus, despite increasing shortages, seems almost normal.
The regime’s foes, on the other hand, seem undeterred by the killings, continuing to stage protests across Syria.
Armed opposition is spreading, albeit slowly.
The Western countries, Turkey, and most of the Arab world are incensed by the brutal killing and destruction, and pressure to intervene and stiffen international sanctions is building.
But regional and international pressure on Assad has been ineffective.
While the Arab League seemed to act decisively last November when it suspended Syria’s membership, the military-observer mission that it sent to Syria was a farce.
Turkey’s initiatives have lost steam, and the United States and its European allies are merely going through the diplomatic motions; in practice, their efforts imply little serious impact on the regime.
America and the West claim that they cannot act significantly without a UN mandate, which Russia and China are denying them by vetoing anti-Syrian resolutions in the Security Council.
But the truth is that governments in Washington, London, Paris, and elsewhere could do much more without a Security Council resolution.
Perhaps most strikingly, while some governments have closed their embassies in Damascus (citing safety considerations), there has been no systematic severing of diplomatic relations with Syria.
Indeed, there has been no stoppage of flights to and from the country, or any other measures that could tilt the population of Damascus and Aleppo against the regime and bring the crisis to an end.
This ambivalence can largely be explained by Western and Arab concern with the weakness and opacity of the Syrian opposition’s political leadership.
There is a dramatic discrepancy between the courage and tenacity of the demonstrators and fighters in Homs, Idlib, and Deraa, and the Syrian National Front, whose people and factions have failed to formulate a coherent political program, build an identity, and obtain name and face recognition.
Western policymakers and those in the Gulf ask themselves what Syria would look like the day after Assad is toppled.
This was starkly illustrated in the second week of March, when US defense officials vented their frustration with the Syrian opposition in several press briefings.
The regime has been effective in exploiting that uncertainty by spreading the fear of an Egyptian scenario, in which the weakness of secular activists leads to a takeover by the Muslim Brothers and jihadis.
In fact, it is difficult to separate cause from effect.
Recognizing the opposition as the legitimate government of Syria, as was done in Libya, would give Assad’s foes a boost, but, so far, they lack the gravitas that such a bold measure would require.
The opposition must build itself as a credible and attractive alternative to the Assad regime, and the regime’s international and regional critics must assist in that process.
Assad’s regime is doomed.
It has no legitimacy, and it is bound to fall.
But that could take a long time – and come at an alarming cost.
The alternative is an effective opposition that enjoys unambiguous support by the key regional and international actors.
For Turkey, For Europe
Turkey is now, finally, negotiating with the European Commission the terms of its possible membership in the European Union.
But whether “possible” becomes “eventual” remains very much an open question.
Indeed, completing the negotiations is likely to prove as difficult as the decision to start them.
Recall that Turkey made its first application to join in 1959, and that since 1963, the European Economic Community, the forerunner to today’s EU, responded with a delaying tactic: a request for a customs agreement.
At the same time, having never had to take “no” for an answer – and after receiving a series of nods and winks that hinted that membership might one day come – Turkey’s expectation of eventual EU integration became increasingly palpable.